Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

ETHER

ETHER

The title and the superscription to the book of Ether

The present title of the book of Ether and the superscription to the book were apparently not included by Moroni on the plates of Mormon. Both of these were first included in the Book of Mormon in the edition of 1879, as is indicated in the following statement by Sidney B. Sperry:

The title of the book is now "The Book of Ether"; in the early editions of the Book of Mormon the title was simply "Book of Ether." The article seems to have been first added by Elder Orson Pratt in the 1879 edition. Immediately beneath the title of the book there now occurs an explanatory note in italics which reads: The record of the Jaredites, taken from the twenty-four plates found by the people of Limhi in the days of king Mosiah. This is wanting in all but the current editions of the Book of Mormon and is not to be regarded as part of the original text. The note seems to have been inserted by the committee appointed to edit the text now in common use. (The Book of Mormon Testifies [Bookcraft, 1952], p. 347.)

ETHER 1:1-2

Moroni's abridgment of the record of Ether

It is not made absolutely clear in the Book of Mormon whether Moroni made his abridgment of the record of Ether from Mosiah's earlier translation (see Mosiah 28:1-20) or whether Moroni took his account directly from the plates of Ether—in which case he would have needed to translate the record as well as abridge it. Sidney B. Sperry has suggested the following concerning this question:

From Ether 1:2 one naturally assumes that Moroni made his abridgment directly from the plates themselves. If he did so, we are driven to the conclusion that it was necessary for him to find his way into the hill Cumorah, where his father had hidden them. Inasmuch as the language of the plates was that of the Jaredite people, it would have been incumbent upon Moroni to translate them by means of the holy "interpreters" or Urim and Thummim before he could abridge them. This would have been a tremendous task, because Moroni says (Ether 15:33) that he had not written the hundredth part of the record, and as it is we have fifteen chapters or about thirty-one and one-half printed pages in our current edition. It seems much more reasonable—for the writer at least—to believe that Moroni abridged the translation of the Book of Ether which had been made many hundreds of years before by king Mosiah. (Mosiah 28:1-20) This translation would also have been available to Moroni in the hill. (Ibid., pp. 346-47.)

ETHER 1:6-33

The genealogies of the Jaredite leaders

It is not clear from the record whether or not the genealogies listed in Ether 1:6-33 are complete. Thirty names are listed, but in three instances the word descendant is used in place of the word son, which might indicate a gap of several generations. It may be that the original word could be translated as both son and descendant; thus, the translator would have to know the exact sense in which the word was originally used.

Verse 6 states that Ether was a descendant of Coriantor. However, Ether 11:23 reads "Coriantor begat Ether." Therefore, Ether is Coriantor's son. Also, verse 16 states that Aaron was a "descendant of Heth," but Ether 10:31 says that Heth "begat" Aaron. However, verse 23 mentions that Morianton was a "descendant of Riplakish," and Ether 10:9 also uses the same word descendant. This is the one place where the list of genealogies may not be complete.

ETHER 1:33-37

Did the Jaredites speak and write the "Adamic" language?

The key word in the verses that pertain directly to the problem (Ether 1:34-37) is confound. What does it mean when the record states that the Lord "did not confound the language of Jared"? Does it mean the same as saying that the Lord did not change the language of Jared? If so, Jared and his people apparently spoke and wrote the language of Adam, because so far as we know there was only one language before the "great tower" of Babel. However, another possible interpretation is that the language of Jared and his brother (and their friends and families) was changed, but it was changed the same for all of them so that they continued to understand each other and thus they were not "confounded."

In his book The Way to Perfection Joseph Fielding Smith indicates he believes Jared and his people did speak and write the Adamic language even after they arrived in the promised land, which was "choice above all the earth." (Ether 1:38.) (The Way to Perfection [Genealogical Society of Utah, 1931], p. 60.)

ETHER 1:34

The name of the brother of Jared

It is not clear why the name of the brother of Jared does not appear in the Book of Mormon. However, the following are possible reasons: (1) He may have omitted his name out of modesty (John the Beloved did essentially this same thing in the Gospel of John, which he wrote). (2) The book of Ether is clearly a family record of Jared, not of the brother of Jared; Ether—the final writer and perhaps the abridger of the record—was a descendant of Jared and might naturally have emphasized the achievements of his direct ancestor rather than the brother of his ancestor. (3) Moroni may have omitted the name in his abridgment because of difficulty in translating (or transliterating) the name into the Nephite language.

Although the actual name of the brother of Jared is not mentioned in the scriptures, many Latter-day Saints quote the following story related by George Reynolds to indicate that his name was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith after the translation of the Book of Mormon:

While residing in Kirtland Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day when President Joseph Smith was passing his door he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the boy the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing he laid the child on the bed, and turning to Elder Cahoon he said, the name I have given your son is the name of the brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown (or revealed) it to me. Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing near, heard the Prophet make this statement to his father; and this was the first time the name of the brother of Jared was known in the Church in this dispensation. ("The Jaredites," Juvenile Instructor, 27:282. Also Improvement Era, 8:705.)

In connection with this name, it is interesting to note that the major encampment of the Jaredites on the shore of "that great sea which divideth the lands" was called "Moriancumer." (Ether 2:13.)

ETHER 2:3

Meaning of the Jaredite term "deseret"

The word deseret is evidently transliterated from the original record, but fortunately the interpretation is included in Moroni's abridgment: "a honey bee." (Ether 2:3.) This is one of the few Jaredite words transliterated in our present Book of Mormon; therefore it is of special significance to the scholars.

Dr. Hugh Nibley has written extensively on the background of this word, including the following ideas:

By all odds the most interesting and attractive passenger in Jared's company is deseret, the honeybee. We cannot pass this creature by without a glance at its name and possible significance, for our text betrays an interest in deseret that goes far beyond respect for the feat of transporting insects, remarkable though that is. The word deseret we are told (Ether 2:3), "by interpretation is a honeybee," the word plainly coming from the Jaredite language, since Ether (or Moroni) must interpret it. Now it is a remarkable coincidence that the word deseret, or something very close to it, enjoyed a position of ritual prominence among the founders of the classical Egyptian civilization, who associated it very closely with the symbol of the bee. The people, the authors of the so-called Second Civilization, seem to have entered Egypt from the northeast as part of the same great outward expansion of peoples that sent the makers of the classical Babylonian civilization into Mesopotamia. Thus we have the founders of the two main parent civilizations of antiquity entering their new homelands at approximately the same time from some common center—apparently the same center from which the Jaredites also took their departure, . . . the Egyptian pioneers carried with them a fully developed cult and symbolism from their Asiatic home. Chief among their cult objects would seem to be the bee, for the land they first settled in Egypt was forever after known as "the land of the bee," and was designated in hieroglyphic by the picture of a bee, while every king of Egypt "in his capacity of 'King of Upper and Lower Egypt' " bore the title, "he who belongs to the sedge and the bee."

From the first, students of hieroglyphic were puzzled as to what sound value should be given to the bee-picture. . . . We know that the bee sign was not always written down, but in its place the picture of the Red Crown, the majesty of Lower Egypt was sometimes "substituted for superstitious reasons." If we do not know the original name of the bee, we do know the name of this Red Crown—the name it bore when it was substituted for the bee. The name was dsrt (the vowels are not known, but we can be sure they were all short). . . . (Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites, pp. 184-85.)

ETHER 2:8-12

The people on the promised land to serve Jesus Christ or be destroyed

Before the Jaredites ever arrive in the promised land, they are warned by the Lord "that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them." (Ether 2:8.) This promise is particularly significant because the Book of Mormon literally documents the fulfillment of the promise and warning in the case of both the Jaredites and the Nephites. Moroni inserts this promise and later records its tragic fulfillment for the benefit of this generation. He says:

And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written. (Ether 2:11-12.)

ETHER 2:12

The "choice land"

Although America has been identified as a choice land, yet, as Elder Mark E. Petersen has indicated, the people in America must serve Jesus Christ if they are to receive the promised blessings.

Another ancient prophet spoke directly to modern America, foretelling the assistance God will give us if we serve him. Said he: ". . . this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ . . ." (Ether 2:12.)

And that prophet also said, even as did Lincoln, that if we in America fail to serve Jesus Christ, we will face certain destruction. This is a divine warning, first from the prophet of old and then from the inspired President of Civil War days.

Oh, America, turn to God. But do not give him mere lip service. Obey him with all your hearts, might, mind, and strength.

Let us save ourselves from the present crisis in the only certain way, remembering that "man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:4.) (Conference Report, April 1968, pp. 62-63.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith also indicated that the people in America must keep the commandments if they are to be protected:

These passages of scripture from the Book of Mormon are true; (Ether 2:7-12) this nation is not exempt, and the people, if they continue to pursue the course of evil and ungodliness that they are now treading, shall eventually be punished. If they continue to disregard the warning voice of the Lord, deny their Redeemer, turn from his gospel unto fables and false theories, and rebel against all that he has through his servants in this day declared for the salvation of man; and if they increase in the practice of iniquity, I want to say to you, that if they do these things, the judgments of the Lord will come upon this land, and this nation will not be saved; we will not be spared from war, from famine, from pestilence and finally from destruction, as a nation.

Therefore, I call upon the people not only Latter-day Saints, but to all throughout the whole land to repent of their sins and to accept the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Redeemer and the God of this land. Turn from your evil ways, repent of your sins and receive the fulness of the gospel through the waters of baptism and obedience, that the judgments which shall be poured out upon the ungodly may pass you by. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:321-22.)

ETHER 2:19-20

The Jaredite barges

The record of Ether provides only a brief description of the barges built by the Jaredites to cross the great sea. Evidently the directions for building the barges had been given by the Lord. (See Ether 2:16.) The only additional information provided is: (1) "they were exceeding tight, even that they would hold water like unto a dish" (Ether 2:17); (2) "the sides thereof were tight like unto a dish; and the ends thereof were peaked; and the top thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the length thereof was the length of a tree; and the door thereof, when it was shut, was tight like unto a dish" (Ether 2:17); and (3) because of the tightness of the barge, evidently it was difficult to obtain either light or air.

The difficulty of obtaining light was met by the sixteen molten stones that were made to shine when they were touched by the finger of the Lord. (See Ether 3:1-6 and 6:2-3.)

In providing a solution for the difficulty of obtaining air, the Lord informed Jared: "Behold, thou shall make a hole in the top thereof and also in the bottom thereof; and when thou shalt suffer for air, thou shalt unstop the hole thereof, and receive air. And if it so be that the water come in upon thee, behold, ye shall stop the hole thereof, that ye may not perish in the flood." (Page 542 of the first edition. Italics added.) This quotation is taken from the first edition of the Book of Mormon because the four thereofs underlined above appear in the early editions, but for some unexplainable reasons were deleted from the 1920 edition and all subsequent editions (perhaps the revising committee thought they were superfluous). A careful reading of this verse in the first edition seems to indicate that the terms "in the top" and "in the bottom" do not refer to the barge itself. Rather, they refer to the top and bottom of something else such as a chamber or cylinder (designated here as "thereof") which could be used to admit air.

Dr. Hugh Nibley has explained the possible significance of the "thereofs" and the possibility of an air chamber as follows:

An exacting editor by removing those very significant "thereof's" has made it appear that when Jared wanted air he was to open the top window of the boat and admit fresh air from the outside. But that is not what the original edition of the Book of Mormon says. For one thing, the ships had no windows communicating with the outside—"ye cannot have windows . . . " (2:23); each ship had an airtight door (2:17), and that was all. Air was received not by opening and closing doors and windows, but by unplugging air holes ("thou shalt unstop the hole thereof, and receive air . . . "), this being done only when the ship was not on the surface—"when thou shalt suffer for air" i.e., when they were not able to open the hatches, the ships being submerged. (2:20.)

This can refer only to a reserve supply of air, and indeed the brother of Jared recognizes that the people cannot possibly survive on the air contained within the ships at normal pressure: ". . . we shall perish, for in them we cannot breathe, save it is the air which is in them; therefore we shall perish." (2:19.) So the Lord recommended a device for trapping (compressing) air, with a "hole in the top thereof and also in the bottom thereof," not referring to the ship but to the air chamber itself. Note the peculiar language: "unstop" does not mean to open a door or window but to unplug a vent, here called a "hole" in contrast to the door mentioned in verse 17; it is specifically an air hole—"when thou shalt suffer for air, thou shalt unstop the hole thereof, and receive air." (1st Ed.) When the crew find it impossible to remain on the surface—"and if it so be that the water come in upon thee" (2:20), they are to plug up the air chamber: "ye shall stop up the hole thereof, that ye may not perish in the flood." This, I believe, refers to replenishing the air supply on the surface, lest the party suffocate when submerged—"that ye may not perish in the flood." (A Book of Mormon Treasury [Bookcraft, 1959], pp. 136-37.)

It is entirely feasible that such an air chamber could have been constructed in each boat. Some of the advantages of such an air chamber have been suggested by A. L. Zobell, Sr., as follows:

A tube is built from the bottom to the top of the barge, housing in both holes completely. Now we have a funnel right through the boat. Water can come into the tube as high as the water line of the vessel.

The model of the barge we have built has a stop hole both in front and in back of the tube. . . . These stop holes can easily be opened or closed as needed.

The purpose of the bottom hole is at least two-fold: First, it acted as a stabilizer to keep the barge at an even keel; second, it could be used to get rid of refuse. ("Jaredite Barges," Improvement Era, April 1941, pp. 211, 252.)

ETHER 2:22-24; 3:3-6

How the brother of Jared received a blessing

President Harold B. Lee has discussed some of the principles utilized by the Lord in helping the brother of Jared build the barges:

The Lord gave to the brother of Jared, that great prophet, a blueprint of the ships that he was to construct, by which he was to take his people across large bodies of water to a promised land. As he surveyed these and began to build, he faced two problems: (1) no provision was made for ventilation and (2) there was no light. The ventilation problem was solved rather simply by having holes at proper places that could be opened and closed; but the matter of light was one that he could not quite solve. So the brother of Jared cried to the Lord, saying, ". . . Behold, I have done even as thou hast commanded me; and I have prepared the vessels for my people, and behold there is no light in them. Behold, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that we shall cross this great water in darkness?" (Eth. 2:22.)

Notice how the Lord dealt with this question. He said to the brother of Jared, "What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels?" (Eth. 2:23.)—as much as to say, "Well, have you any good ideas? What would you suggest that we should do in order to have light?" And then the Lord said, "For behold, ye cannot have windows, for they will be dashed to pieces; neither shall ye take fire with you, for ye shall not go by the light of fire.

" For behold, you shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea; for the mountain waves shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will bring you up again out of the depths of the sea; for the winds have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the floods have I sent forth." (Eth. 2:23-24.)

Then the Lord went away and left him alone. It was as though the Lord were saying to him, "Look, I gave you a mind to think with, and I gave you agency to use it. Now you do all you can to help yourself with this problem; and then, after you've done all you can, I'll step in to help you."

The brother of Jared did some thinking. Then he gathered up sixteen stones, molten out of rock, and carried them in his hands to the top of the mount called Shelem, where he cried unto the Lord, "O Lord, thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by the floods. Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have been evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires." (Eth. 3:2.)

Now, what is he doing? He is confessing his sins before he asks again. He has come to the conclusion that before he is worthy to seek a blessing he must keep the basic laws upon which the blessings he seeks are predicated.

Then he says, "Behold, O Lord, [I know that] thou hast smitten us because of our iniquity, and hast driven us forth, and for these many years we have been in the wilderness; nevertheless, thou hast been merciful to us. O Lord, look upon me in pity, and turn away thine anger from this thy people . . ." (Eth. 3:3.) The brother of Jared is confessing the sins of the people, because the blessing he wants is not just for himself, it is for his whole people. Having done all that he knew how to do, he came again with a specific request and said:

"And I know, O Lord, thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man; therefore touch these stones, O Lord, with thy finger, and prepare them that they may shine forth in darkness; and they shall shine forth unto us in the vessels which we have prepared, that we may have light while we shall cross the sea.

"Behold, O Lord, thou canst do this. We know that thou art able to show forth great power, which looks small unto the understanding of men. "And it came to pass that when the brother of Jared had said these words, behold, the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger. And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood; and the brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he was struck with fear." (Eth. 3:4-6.)

This is the principle in action. If you want the blessing, don't just kneel down and pray about it. Prepare yourselves in every conceivable way you can in order to make yourselves worthy to receive the blessing you seek. ("How to Receive a Blessing from God," Improvement Era, October 1966, pp. 862-63, 896.)

ETHER 3:5-16

The appearance of the pre-earthly Jesus Christ to the brother of Jared

One of the spiritual highlights of the entire Book of Mormon is the appearance of the pre-earthly Jesus Christ to the brother of Jared. The conversation of the Savior with the brother of Jared sheds tremendous light on the pre-earthly role of Jesus Christ as well as the later role he is to play as the Savior and Redeemer of the world. It is significant to note, for example, that even in the pre-earthly existence Jesus Christ referred to himself as both the Father and the Son. Even before his birth on the earth the Savior indicates how all members of the human race can become his sons and daughters. (For further information on these topics, see the materials following Mosiah 15:1-14 and following 3 Nephi 9:17.)

Another significant part of the Savior's statement is the reference to his pre-earthly spirit body. He says to the brother of Jared: "Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men are created in the beginning after mine own image." (Ether 3:15.) This statement seems to indicate that in the scripture that says "God created man in his own image" (Genesis 1:27), the word God refers not to Elohim but to Jesus Christ, and the word image refers not to the physical resurrected body of Elohim but to the pre-earthly spiritual body of Jesus Christ.

ETHER 3:15

How is it possible to reconcile Ether 3:15 with Moses 7:4 and Doctrine and Covenants 107:54?

In Ether 3:15 the pre-earthly Jesus Christ told the brother of Jared: "And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast." This statement introduces something of a problem inasmuch as we read in Moses 7:4 that the Lord talked with Enoch "even as a man talketh one with another, face to face"—and Enoch lived on the earth before the time of the brother of Jared! Also, in the Doctrine and Covenants 107:54 it states that the "Lord appeared" unto Adam and his descendants.

Some people explain this problem by stating that the Lord referred to in Moses and the Doctrine and Covenants is God the Father (Elohim) rather than Jesus Christ. However, another possible interpretation is that Jesus Christ is the Lord mentioned on each of these occasions, but that he is essentially saying in Ether 3:15 that he has never had to show himself unto man before. This interpretation gains additional weight when considered in connection with the following verses: Ether 3:9, 19-20, 26. In these verses the Lord makes it very clear that the brother of Jared came before him with greater faith than any other man (Ether 3:9), that the brother of Jared "could not be kept from within the veil" (Ether 3:20), and that the Lord "could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things" (Ether 3:26).

Concerning the possible contradiction between Ether 3:15 and Moses 7:4, Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

There is no contradiction. When Adam was in the Garden of Eden and before the Fall, he was in the presence of God the Father. He walked with God, for he was free from sin and in possession of an eternal body that could have endured forever. When he and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit, they were cast out of the presence of the Father and became subject to death, or mortal. From that time forth Jesus Christ became the Advocate and Mediator between the Father and mankind. This fall brought the first, or spiritual death, as well as mortality on Adam. Now there are several references in the Old Testament which declare that the Lord appeared to Enoch and talked with him. Enoch wrote that the Lord commanded him to get on the mount Simeon, and there said Enoch:

"I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face." [Moses 7:4.]

In the Bible all that is written is the following:

"And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

"And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:

"And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him." [Genesis 5:22-24.]

It is true that the Savior appeared to the prophets before the flood, but it is evident that he did not reveal himself in the fulness as he did to the Brother of Jared. Talking "face to face," as stated in this revelation, does not mean that the Lord did not appear in a cloud; or, that his body was partially hidden from the view of the prophet. All of this could occur and yet the Lord still be partially, if not completely, hidden from the prophet's view. The great difference rests in this, which the conversation of the Lord with the Brother of Jared clearly indicates: The Savior was conversing with the Brother of Jared in person. . . .

So the Savior showed to the Brother of Jared his entire body just as it would appear when he dwelt among men in the flesh.

It is a reasonable conclusion for us to reach, and fully in accordance with the facts, that the Lord had never before revealed himself so completely and in such a manner. We may truly believe that very few of the ancient prophets at any time actually beheld the full person of the Lord. (Answers to Gospel Questions, 2:123-25.)

ETHER 3:23-24

The two stones given by the Lord to the brother of Jared

Reynolds and Sjodahl have written the following concerning the two stones given to the brother of Jared by the Lord:

These Two Stones, which are also known as the Interpreters (Ether 4:5; Mosiah 28:20) and Urim and Thummim (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:52; Doctrine and Covenants 17:1) were, as we read here, entrusted into the care of Moriancumer, before he descended from the ever memorable scene of his vision and revelations. They were delivered to him with the admonition that they were to be sealed up, together with the sacred records that were to be kept, and thus be hidden from the eyes of the world, until they, in the due time of the Lord, were to come forth. The purpose of the Stones is stated to be to magnify, that is to say, to make clear "the things which ye shall write."

According to the Doctrine and Covenants (17:1), the Sacred Instruments deposited in the Hill Cumorah and delivered to the Prophet Joseph, [were] the Urim and Thummim received by the Brother of Jared on the Mount. When the Prophet Joseph received the Stones, September 22, 1827, they were framed in silver bows and fastened to a breastplate (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:35). From the Doctrine and Covenants, 130:8-9, where God is said to dwell on a globe which is a Urim and Thummim, and that the Earth is to be sanctified and made immortal—made like unto a crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants thereon—we conclude that that was the nature of the Stones. They were crystals. The Prophet Joseph Smith further adds to our information that the white stone mentioned in the Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each who receives one, and that a white stone will be given to everyone who is privileged to come into the Celestial Kingdom. On the stone a new name is written. By this means things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms, even all kingdoms, will be made known. (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 6:87.)

ETHER 4:4-5; 5:1

The sealed portion of the plates of Mormon

Moroni wrote his account of the vision of the brother of Jared on the plates of Mormon, but he was commanded by the Lord to "seal up" this account. (Ether 4:4-5.) Joseph Smith was commanded not to translate this sealed portion. It is not absolutely clear what portion of the plates of Mormon was sealed. Joseph Smith simply said: "The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed." (History of the Church, 4:537.) George Q. Cannon said that "about one-third" was sealed (Young Peoples' History of Joseph Smith, p. 25), whereas Orson Pratt maintained that the sealed portion comprised "about two-thirds" of the plates. (Journal of Discourses, 3:347.) Neither of these two brethren indicate where they obtained their information.

ETHER 4:4-8

The sealed portion yet to be revealed

Moroni wrote on the plates of Mormon an account of "the very things which the brother of Jared saw" in his great vision of the pre-earthly Jesus Christ. (Ether 4:4.) Concerning the importance of this vision, Moroni adds "there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the brother of Jared." (Ether 4:4.)

The Lord has indicated that the contents of the vision of the brother of Jared should not be revealed in a day when the people are wicked. Thus Moroni was commanded to write the account of the vision, but he was also commanded to "seal up the interpretation thereof . . . For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord." (Ether 4:5, 6.)

It is not clear in the Book of Mormon exactly when the sealed record is to be revealed. However, some of the prior conditions that must exist are enumerated. For example, the Lord said that before the record is revealed the people must exercise faith in him "even as the brother of Jared did." (Ether 4:7.) Also, the Savior indicated that the people must "become sanctified" in him. (Ether 4:7.) Only then will the sealed portion of the records be revealed.

ETHER 4:16

The revelation of John the Revelator to come forth

An additional record that is yet to come forth is an account of the writings of John the Revelator. After the house of Israel returns to the Savior and keeps his commandments, the Savior has promised that the record of John will be revealed to them. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read the following concerning the record of John that is yet to come forth:

And I, John, bear record that he [the Son of God] received a fulness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him.

And it shall come to pass, that if you are faithful you shall receive the fulness of the record of John. (D&C 93:16-18.)

ETHER 5:2-4

For information on the promised three special witnesses of the book of Mormon, read the material following 2 Nephi 27:12-13 and the chapter in this book on the special witnesses.

ETHER 7:6

The Jaredite land of Moron

Moroni, the abridger of the Jaredite record and the last historian of the Nephites, is in an ideal position to indicate some of the geographical relationships between the lands of the Jaredites and the lands of the Nephites. Unfortunately, Moroni does not give us very much information concerning this matter. However, he does indicate that the "land of Moron" of the Jaredites "was near the land which is called Desolation by the Nephites." (Ether 7:6.) Inasmuch as the land of Moron was the capital land of the Jaredites and the Nephite land of Desolation was north of the narrow neck of land, it is assumed that the major portion of the Jaredite civilization lived north of the narrow neck of land.

ETHER 8:9-26

The origin of the secret combinations among the Jaredites

Ether 8:9 indicates that the Jaredites brought a record with them when they came to the promised land. Later in this same chapter Moroni suggests that this record contained the secret oaths and covenants that had been handed down from the time of Cain. (Verse 15.)

ETHER 8:18-26

Moroni's warning against secret combinations

Moroni says that one of the major reasons he abridged the record of the Jaredites was to warn the gentiles that they should not allow "murderous combinations" to get power over them. (Ether 8:23.) Concerning the destructive influences of such secret oaths and combinations, Moroni states: ". . . they have caused the destruction of this people of whom I am now speaking, and also the destruction of the people of Nephi. And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed." (Ether 8:21-22.)

In commenting on these verses Elder Ezra Taft Benson has said:

One of the most urgent, heart-stirring appeals made by Moroni as he closed the Book of Mormon was addressed to the gentile nations of the last days. He foresaw the rise of a great world-wide secret combination among the gentiles which ". . . seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; . . . " (Ether 8:25. Italics added.) He warned each gentile nation of the last days to purge itself of this gigantic criminal conspiracy which would seek to rule the world. . . .

The Prophet Moroni described how the secret combination would take over a country and then fight the work of God, persecute the righteous, and murder those who resisted. Moroni therefore proceeded to describe the workings of the ancient "secret combinations" so that modern man could recognize this great political conspiracy in the last days: "Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain—and the work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, . . .

"Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; . . .

"For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is built up by the devil, who is the father of all lies; . . ." (Ether 8:23-25. Italics added.)

The Prophet Moroni seemed greatly exercised lest in our day we might not be able to recognize the startling fact that the same secret societies which destroyed the Jaredites and decimated numerous kingdoms of both Nephites and Lamanites would be precisely the same form of criminal conspiracy which would rise up among the gentile nations in this day.

The stratagems of the leaders of these societies are amazingly familiar to anyone who has studied the tactics of modern communist leaders.

The Lord has declared that before the second coming of Christ it will be necessary to ". . . destroy the secret works of darkness, . . . " in order to preserve the land of Zion—the Americas. (2 Nephi 10:11-16.)

The world-wide secret conspiracy which has risen up in our day to fulfill these prophecies is easily identified. President [David O.] McKay has left no room for doubt as to what attitude Latter-day Saints should take toward the modern "secret combinations" of conspiratorial communism. In a lengthy statement on communism, he said:

". . . Latter-day Saints should have nothing to do with the secret combinations and groups antagonistic to the constitutional law of the land, which the Lord 'suffered to be established,' and which 'should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh according to just and holy principles."' (Gospel Ideals, by David O. McKay, p. 306. Italics added.) (Conference Report, October 1961, pp. 71-72.)

ETHER 10:23-26

The high state of civilization among the Jaredites

It is possible that approximately one-third of the time period of the Jaredite civilization is covered in the brief account in chapter 10. Although the record is scanty, the few details presented indicate these people had a high state of civilization. For example, the historian mentions that the people:

(1) "were exceedingly industrious, and they did buy and sell and traffic one with another, that they might get gain" (Ether 10:22);

(2) did work in "all manner of ore, and they did make gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and all manner of metals; . . . And they did work all manner of fine work" (Ether 10:23);

(3) had "silks, and fine-twined linen; and they did work all manner of cloth" (Ether 10:24);

(4) "did make all manner of tools to till the earth, both to plow and to sow, to reap and to hoe, and also to thrash. And they did make all manner of tools with which they did work their beasts" (Ether 10:25-26);

(5) "did make all manner of weapons of war. And they did work all manner of work of exceedingly curious workmanship" (Ether 10:27).

Interestingly enough, recent archaeological discoveries also indicate that a populous people with a high state of civilization once lived on the American continents during the exact period indicated in the Book of Mormon.

ETHER 12:6

Moroni's definition of faith

The Book of Mormon contains at least two classic definitions of faith. Alma the younger defined faith as follows: ". . . faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.) Moroni's definition is ". . . faith is things which are hoped for and not seen." (Ether 12:6.) These definitions of faith are somewhat similar to the definition of Paul: ". . . faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.)

ETHER 12:26-27

Men have weaknesses that they might be humble

As Moroni is about ready to complete his record, he fears lest the people will mock at his writings because of his own weaknesses and imperfections. Therefore, he prays to the Lord concerning this matter. The Lord answers his petition in these words:

Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness;

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:26-27.)

Even though we might have weaknesses, if we have faith in the Lord as he indicated, then our weaknesses may be turned into strengths.

ETHER 12:30

The moving of a mountain through faith

In the New Testament the Savior said that "if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove." (Matthew 17:20.) Many people have assumed that the Savior was simply giving a dramatic illustration to portray the great power of faith. However, he may have been referring to an actual incident, for Ether 12:30 says that the brother of Jared "said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed."

ETHER 12:38-39

Moroni's personal witness of the Savior

One major purpose for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is to witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ. It therefore seems fitting and proper that many of the writers in this book should be personal witnesses of the Savior. Most of our present Book of Mormon was written by four men: Nephi, Jacob, Mormon, and Moroni, and all four of these men personally saw the Savior and visited with him. We have read earlier concerning the appearance of the Lord to Nephi (2 Nephi 11:2), Jacob (2 Nephi 11:3), and Mormon (Mormon 1:15), and now Moroni says: "I have seen Jesus . . . he hath talked with me face to face" (Ether 12:39).

ETHER 13:2-11

The "new Jerusalem" on this continent

In the book of Revelation in the New Testament, John also mentions a "new Jerusalem" of the last days: "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband." (Revelation 21:1-2.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote the following concerning this holy city referred to by John:

The prevailing notion in the world is that this is the city of Jerusalem, the ancient city of the Jews which in the day of regeneration will be renewed, but this is not the case. We read in the Book of Ether that the Lord revealed to him many of the same things which were seen by John. . . . In his vision, in many respects similar to that given to John, Enoch saw the old city of Jerusalem and also the new city which has not yet been built, and he wrote of them as follows . . . [see Ether 13:2-11].

In the day of regeneration, when all things are made new, there will be three great cities that will be holy. One will be the Jerusalem of old which shall be rebuilt according to the prophecy of Ezekiel. One will be the city of Zion, or of Enoch, which was taken from the earth when Enoch was translated and which will be restored; and the city Zion, or New Jerusalem, which is to be built by the seed of Joseph on this the American continent.

"And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

"And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all the city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

"And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest." [Moses 7:62-64.]

After the close of the millennial reign we are informed that Satan, who was bound during the millennium, shall be loosed and go forth to deceive the nations. Then will come the end. The earth will die and be purified and receive its resurrection. During this cleansing period the City Zion, or New Jerusalem, will be taken from the earth; and when the earth is prepared for the celestial glory, the city will come down according to the prediction in the Book of Revelation. (Answers to Gospel Questions 2:103, 105, 106.)

ETHER 13:20-21

The prophet Ether warns Coriantumr

Before the final days of destruction came upon the Jaredites, the Lord commanded Ether "that he should go and prophesy unto Coriantumr that, if he would repent, and all his household, the Lord would give unto him his kingdom and spare the people—Otherwise they should be destroyed, and all his household save it were himself." (Ether 13:20-21.) Unfortunately, the subsequent record indicates that Coriantumr and his people did not repent, and the prophesied destruction came upon them.

ETHER 14:2

Did the Jaredites practice polygamy?

The early Nephite records indicate quite clearly that the Nephites were not to practice polygamy. The prophet Jacob was commanded by the Lord to say to his people: ". . . there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife." (Jacob 2:27.) However, Jacob later makes it clear that if the Lord wants his people to "raise up seed" unto him, then he might command them to practice polygamy. (Jacob 2:30.) It is not clear, however, whether or not the Jaredites were commanded by the Lord to practice polygamy. The following evidences have been cited which might indicate that they did practice polygamy: (1) Many of the men had large numbers of sons and daughters. For example, the brother of Jared had 22 sons and daughters (Ether 6:20) and Orihah had 31 sons and daughters (Ether 7:2).

(2) Riplakish had "many wives and concubines" (Ether 10:5). He was condemned by the Lord for his wickedness, but it is not clear whether or not this condemnation was because of his "many wives."

(3) Ether 14:2 states that "every man kept the hilt of his sword in his right hand, in the defense of his property and his own life and of his wives and children." This verse seems to indicate that the people practiced polygamy, but whether or not it was sanctioned by the Lord is not made clear in the record.

ETHER 15:2

The war casualties among the Jaredites

The great civil war among the Jaredites may have been the bloodiest war ever fought on the American continents. Even before the last great battle, the historian records that "two millions of mighty men, and also their wives and their children" had been killed. (Ether 15:2.) And these casualties were for only one of the armies involved! In order to compare the extent of these casualties with those suffered by the Nephites during the battle of Cumorah, re-read Mormon 6:10-15. Also, to compare the extent of these casualties with those suffered by the United States, see the table and materials listed following Mormon 6:11-15.

ETHER 15:11

The Jaredite hill Ramah

The hill Ramah was one of the major hills in the lands of the Jaredites. Later when the Nephites moved into this area, they evidently called this same hill by the name of Cumorah. Moroni says that the hill Ramah "was that same hill where my father Mormon did hide up the records unto the Lord, which were sacred." (Ether 15:11.) In Mormon 6:6 this hill is identified as the hill Cumorah.

ETHER 15:29-30

The final battle between Coriantumr and Shiz

Many people have raised questions concerning the plausibility of Coriantumr and Shiz being the last survivors of the great Jaredite armies numbering millions of men. Hugh Nibley has written the following concerning this problem:

The insane wars of the Jaredite chiefs ended in the complete annihilation of both sides, with the kings the last to go. The same thing had almost happened earlier in the days of Akish, when a civil war between him and his sons reduced the population to thirty. (Ether 9:12) This all seems improbable to us, but two circumstances peculiar to Asiatic warfare explain why the phenomenon is by no means without parallel: (1) Since every war is strictly a personal contest between kings, the battle must continue until one of the kings falls or is taken. (2) And yet things are so arranged that the king must be very last to fall, the whole army existing for the sole purpose of defending his person. This is clearly seen in the game of chess, in which all pieces are expendable except the king, who can never be taken. "The shah in chess," writes M. E. Moghadem, "is not killed and does not die. The game is terminated when the shah is pressed into a position from which he cannot escape. This is in line with all good traditions of chess playing, and back of it the tradition of capturing the king in war rather than slaying him whenever that could be accomplished." You will recall the many instances in the book of Ether in which kings were kept in prison for many years but not killed. In the code of medieval chivalry, taken over from central Asia, the person of the king is sacred, and all others must perish in his defense. After the battle the victor may do what he will with his rival—and infinitely ingenious tortures were sometimes devised for the final reckoning—but as long as the war went on, the king could not die, for whenever he did die, the war was over, no matter how strong his surviving forces. Even so, Shiz was willing to spare all of Coriantumr's subjects if he could only behead Coriantumr with his own sword. In that case, of course, the subjects would become his own. The circle of warriors, "large and mighty men as to the strength of men" (Ether 15:26) that fought around their kings to the last man, represent that same ancient institution, the sacred "shield wall," which our own Norse ancestors took over from Asia and which meets us again and again in the wars of the tribes, in which on more than one occasion the king actually was the last to perish. So let no one think the final chapter of Ether is at all fanciful or overdrawn. Wars of extermination are a standard institution in the history of Asia. (The World of the Jaredites, pp. 235-36.)
