Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

MORONI

MORONI chapters 1-10

The writings of Moroni

The contributions of Moroni in our present Book of Mormon consist of the following writings: Mormon 8 and 9; Ether 1-15; Moroni 1-10. However, not all of these were written completely by Moroni, as is indicated in the following statement by J. N. Washburn:

There is no more convincing evidence of the variety of material and structure in the Book of Mormon than the difference between the records of Ether and Moroni. Just turn the page, and the change hits the eye forcefully. And yet both come to us from the same writer, Moroni, son of Mormon.

The Book of Ether is narrative almost throughout. That is, it is narrative with rich commentary in pertinent places. The Book of Moroni contains no narrative at all. The nearest thing to it is in Chapter 9.

This book which bears the name of Moroni is not without its variable aspects, its unexpected elements, though by now the reader of the Book of Mormon has come to expect the unexpected. Chapters 1-6 are clearly the work of Moroni. Chapter 7 is from Mormon by way of Moroni; in it the son presents the teachings of the father on various topics.

Chapters 8-9 were actually written by Mormon and attached by Moroni to his book. It is a fair exchange for the two chapters which Moroni added to the book begun by his father. . . .

Chapter 10, the last addition of Moroni to the writings, is in some ways unsurpassed. It is very choice, containing in its short compass a number of elements that are brought together only by virtue of the fact that they are timely and good. They appear like oddments, like "fillers," but extremely valuable ones. They lack something in connection or continuity. They are obviously end materials. (The Contents, Structure and Authorship of the Book of Mormon [Bookcraft, 1954], pp. 70-71.)

Another interesting difference between the actual writings of Moroni and his abridgments was pointed out by E. Cecil McGavin in a series of radio talks over KSL radio in 1941. According to Brother McGavin, the term "and it came to pass" is used by Moroni 117 times in forty pages of his abridgment of the records of the Jaredites. Yet in thirteen pages of his own writing, consisting of over 7,000 words, he does not use the expression a single time. (Quoted in ibid., pp. 160-61.)

MORONI 1:1-4

Some "Nephites" survived the battle of Cumorah

Moroni's book that bears his own name was evidently written sometime between A.D. 400 and 421. Thus it was written at least fifteen years after the beginning of the battle of Cumorah. Yet Moroni indicates that some Nephites are still alive, for he says the Lamanites are putting to death every Nephite "that will not deny the Christ." (Moroni 1:2.) (For further information concerning this question see the material listed after Mormon 8:2-5.)

MORONI 2:1-3

The ordination prayer by the Savior

In 3 Nephi 18:39,Mormon tells of the departure of the resurrected Jesus Christ from his chosen twelve disciples at the end of his first visit to them. Before departing, the Savior "touched with his hand the disciples whom he had chosen, . . . even until he had touched them all, and spake unto them as he touched them. . . . the disciples bear record that he gave them power to give the Holy Ghost. And I will show unto you hereafter that this record is true." ( 3 Nephi 18:36-37.) Here in chapter 2 of his own book, consisting primarily of a series of small "appendices," Moroni includes the exact words of the Savior in this prayer. In speaking to his disciples, the Savior said: ". . . in my name shall ye give it [the Holy Ghost], for thus do mine apostles." (Moroni 2:2.) This is the only time the word apostles is used in the Book of Mormon in such a way that it might refer to the twelve Nephite disciples. (For further information as to the use of the words apostle and disciple, see the material following 3 Nephi 28.)

MORONI 3:1-4

The ordaining of priests and teachers

Moroni includes in this short appendix a prayer used in ordaining priests and teachers. Note that in this prayer they (1) prayed unto the father, (2) prayed in the name of Christ, (3) stated the office to which the person was to be ordained, (4) included a brief blessing and admonition, and (5) closed with the word amen.

MORONI 4:1-3

The sacramental prayer on the bread

The third brief appendix listed by Moroni is the prayer used on the sacramental bread. This prayer is identical to the prayer in the Doctrine and Covenants 20:77. In the prayer the partakers of the sacrament covenant to do three things: (1) remember the body of Jesus Christ; (2) witness unto the Father that they are willing to take upon them the name of Christ; (3) witness unto the Father that they will always remember Christ and will keep his commandments. The Lord's promise in the covenant is that if we do these things, he will bless us that we might always have his spirit to be with us.

Some readers of the Book of Mormon have wondered about Moroni's statement that the elder or priest administering to the sacrament "did kneel down with the church." (Moroni 4:2.) Some have assumed the meaning that everyone in the congregation knelt down. Although this interpretation is possible, at least one other possibility exists. The statement may mean that the elder or priest did kneel down "in the presence of the members of the church." (See also D&C 20:76.)

Elder Delbert L. Stapley has indicated the importance of keeping the covenants we make with the Lord when we partake of the sacramental emblems:

Now my brothers and sisters—there are only three prayers that the Lord has revealed to the Church, and two of them have to do with the ordinance of the sacrament, the blessing of the bread and the blessing of the water. These prayers are found in the fourth and fifth chapters of Moroni in the Book of Mormon and also in the 20th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants. While I will not attempt to repeat the sacramental prayers for you, I should like to point out, five important considerations to remember in the revealed sacramental prayers. First, we partake of the sacrament in remembrance of the broken body and spilled blood of Christ. Then we witness unto the Father, and I think we should take note of that, first, that we will take upon us the name of his Son. . . .

If we take upon us the name of Christ, even as we pledge to do—when we partake of the emblems of his body and blood, we agree to keep all the commandments until the end of our days.

Second, we witness or pledge that we will always remember him. As President McKay said, "Always remember him in the home, in business, in society," and I would assume wherever else we might be.

Third, we pledge to keep the commandments which he has given unto us, and last, we have a promise that if we do these things, and it is assumed that we do so worthily, that we shall always have his spirit to be with us. . . .

In partaking of the sacramental emblems, we should always call to mind Christ's suffering and sacrifice, the death upon the cross, with faithful obedience to his appointed mission. The sacrament is so sacred that it is recommended during the sacramental services, that no music be played, nor should there be any distractions whatsoever during the service. It is a time for meditation, a time for resolve, not a time for visiting, nor the chewing of gum, as so many people do, nor permitting our minds to dwell upon other things foreign to the sacred ordinance of the sacrament itself.

We know that no one but a God could suffer or go through what Christ experienced to redeem men from the effects of the fall. His sacrifice was an infinite sacrifice and that sacrifice was required of a God to satisfy broken law. In the 19th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants the Savior said: [Quotes D&C 19:16-19.]

The Lord makes it very plain that if we keep the commandments that we shall not suffer as he suffered, because he assumed the burden of people's sins, if they would repent, and also atoned for the fall of our first parents in Eden. When the Lord loves us enough to die for us, we should be willing to show our love for him by serving him and keeping all his commandments.

Another important purpose of the sacrament is to renew and keep in force the covenants and obligations which we have entered into with our God. . . . ("The Sacrament," BYU Speeches of the Year, 1956.)

MORONI 5:1-2

The sacramental prayer on the wine (or water)

In his next brief appendix, Moroni includes the prayer on the sacramental wine or water. Again, the prayer is identical with the one in the Doctrine and Covenants 20:78-79, except for the use of the word wine instead of water. The authority to use water rather than wine in the sacrament was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith by the Savior in August 1830. In this revelation the Savior states:

. . . it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins.

Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, that you shall not purchase wine neither strong drink of your enemies;

Wherefore, you shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth.

Behold, this is wisdom in me; wherefore, marvel not, for the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth. . . . (D&C 27:2-5.)

This statement by the Savior indicates that the "wine" used in the sacrament is really a fruit juice, as he mentions that in the future he will drink of the "fruit of the vine" with his disciples.

MORONI 6:1-9

Being cleansed "by the power of the Holy Ghost"

In his farewell address to the Nephites during his last appearance to them, the resurrected Jesus Christ listed the major purposes of the gospel as follows: "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; . . . " (3 Nephi 27:20-21.) Here in chapter 6, Moroni indicates that the baptism of the water is not complete until the baptism of the Holy Ghost follows. Also, only when the people were "wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ." (Moroni 6:4.)

MORONI 7:1-14

"A man being evil cannot do that which is good"

The seventh chapter of Moroni is a brief resumÃ© of Mormon's teachings on faith, hope, and charity. Mormon indicates here that the spirit of the law is extremely important. In fact, he says that if a person keeps a commandment but does it with the wrong spirit or for the wrong purpose, it would not be a blessing to him:

God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing.

For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness.

For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God.

And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such.

Wherefore, a man being evil cannot do that which is good. . . . (Moroni 7:6-10.)

Essentially this same teaching is contained in the Doctrine and Covenants: ". . . he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:29.) Here again the person keeps the commandment, but he does it "with slothfulness"; therefore it is not accounted unto him for righteousness.

MORONI 7:15-17

How to know good from evil

The "Spirit of Christ," which Mormon tells us "is given to every man, that he may know good from evil" (Moroni 7:16), is not the same as the Holy Ghost. The difference between the Spirit of Christ and the Holy Ghost has been explained by Joseph F. Smith as follows:

The question is often asked, is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? . . . The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that comes into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost. (Improvement Era 11:381-82. Also Latter-day Prophets Speak, p. 287.)

If a person is obedient to the commandments of God, however, it is possible for the Holy Ghost also to be with him as a "comforter within." This idea has been expressed as follows by President Wilford Woodruff:

The Holy Ghost . . . is different from the common Spirit of God, which we are told lighteth every man that cometh into the world. The Holy Ghost is only given to men through their obedience to the Gospel of Christ; and every man who receives that Spirit has a comforter within—a leader to dictate and guide him. This Spirit reveals, day by day, to every man who has faith, those things which are for his benefit. As Job said, "There is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding." It is this inspiration of God to His children in every age of the world that is one of the necessary gifts to sustain man and enable him to walk by faith, and to go forth and obey all the dictations and commandments and revelations which God gives to His children to guide and direct them in life. (Journal of Discourses 13:157. Also Latter-day Prophets Speak, pp. 287-88.)

MORONI 7:40-43

The relationship between faith and hope

Faith is frequently listed as the first principle of revealed religion. However, Mormon raises the question as to whether or not hope does not precede faith: "How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope?" (Moroni 7:40.) He next lists what we must have hope for—the atonement of Jesus Christ, the power of his resurrection, a hope in life eternal, etc. Then he continues: "Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope." (Moroni 7:42.) Evidently Moroni, who records this sermon given by his father, learns these teachings very well, for in his later writings when he discusses faith and hope, Moroni also concludes: ". . . if there must be faith there must also be hope." (Moroni 10:20.)

MORONI 7:44-48

Mormon's teachings on faith, hope, and charity

Some students of the Book of Mormon have asked the question how the teachings of Mormon on faith, hope, and charity (found in Moroni 7) could be so similar to the teachings of Paul on this same subject (1 Corinthians 13:4-8). Although the Book of Mormon does not provide the exact answer to this question, at least two possibilities exist: (1) The statement on faith, hope, and charity may not have been original with either Mormon or Paul; it may have been contained in an ancient record available to both of them, or it may have been included in the teachings of the Savior that are not recorded either in the New Testament or in the Book of Mormon. (2) All revelation is received through the power of the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost may have revealed this idea in essentially the same way to both Mormon and Paul.

MORONI 8:5-24

Infants should not be baptized!

Baptism is perhaps the most basic ordinance in Christianity, and the question of the baptism of infants is certainly one of the most fundamental questions related to this ordinance. The largest Christian church in the world today, as well as many other churches, teaches that because of the original sin of Adam and Eve no person can enter heaven without baptism. Thus these churches deny that Jesus Christ atoned for original sin, and they say that little infants and others who die without baptism cannot be saved in heaven.

The Book of Mormon definitely teaches that Jesus Christ did atone for the original transgression of Adam and Eve, and little children do not need to be baptized until they arrive at the age of accountability and are responsible for their own acts.

The teachings of Mormon are clear and definite on this subject, and he says he obtained his information "by the power of the Holy Ghost" (Moroni 8:7) in a direct revelation from the Savior. In his letter to Moroni, Mormon mentions the following fundamental principles:

Mormon also indicates why he is so definite and strong in his teachings on this subject: "I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me." (Moroni 8:21.)

(For further information on topics related to this subject, read the material following: 2 Nephi 2:22-25; Mosiah 3:11, 16-18; 3 Nephi 27:13-18.)

MORONI 8:25-26

Receiving a remission of sins

Baptism of water in and of itself does not bring about the remission of sins that comes only through "the fulfilling the commandments; . . . And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost." (Moroni 8:25-26.) Concerning the fact that baptism of water must be followed by the baptism of the Holy Ghost in order to be efficacious, Dr. William E. Berrett has written:

All that man can do is to perform the physical act of baptism which, when performed by one having authority, binds the recipient in a covenant with God, a witness that he will keep God's commandments. But this baptism, in and of itself is valueless if the commandments are not kept and the baptism of the Holy Ghost does not follow. (Teachings of the Book of Mormon [Deseret News Press, 1952], p. 93.)

MORONI 9:1-23

The Nephites "delight in everything save that which is good"

After listing several of the depraved practices of the Nephites and the Lamanites during their last great struggles, Moroni includes one sentence from his father's letter which seems to epitomize the sad fate of the Nephites: "they delight in everything save that which is good." (Moroni 9:19.)

MORONI 9:20

Definition of "past feeling"

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has indicated some of the characteristics of the term "past feeling":

President Harold B. Lee has called our attention to the phrase "past feeling" which is used several places in the scriptures. In Ephesians, Paul links it to lasciviousness that apparently so sated its victims that they sought "uncleanness with greediness." Moroni used the same two words to describe a decaying society which was "without civilization," "without order and without mercy," and in which people had "lost their love, one towards another." Insensate, this society saw violence, gross immorality, brutality and all kinds of "kamikaze" behavior. Nephi used the same concept in his earlier lamentation about his brothers' inability to heed the urgings of the Spirit because they were "past feeling." The common thread is obvious: the inevitable dulling of our capacity to feel renders us impervious to conscience, to the needs of others, and to insights both intellectual and spiritual. Such imperceptivity, like alcoholism, apparently reaches a stage where the will can no longer enforce itself upon our impulses. (For the Power Is in Them [Deseret Book Co., 1970], p. 22.)

MORONI 10:4-5

How to obtain a testimony of the Book of Mormon

God has made it very clear in his scriptures that he is a God of law. Among other statements he has said: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

The blessing of a testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon is thus based on law. According to Moroni, the following steps fulfill the law by which one can gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon: (1) read the book and "ponder it in your hearts" (Moroni 10:3), and (2) "ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moroni 10:4-5.)

MORONI 10:8-18

The gifts of the Spirit

In the concluding chapter of his record, Moroni exhorted the future readers to accept the gifts of God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has indicated the importance of the gifts of the Spirit:

By the grace of God—following devotion, faith, and obedience on man's part—certain special spiritual blessings called gifts of the Spirit are bestowed upon men. Their receipt is always predicated upon obedience to law, but because they are freely available to all the obedient, they are called gifts. They are signs and miracles reserved for the faithful and for none else. . . .

Their purpose is to enlighten, encourage, and edify the faithful so that they will inherit peace in this life and be guided toward eternal life in the world to come. Their presence is proof of the divinity of the Lord's work; where they are not found, there the Church and kingdom of God is not. . . .

Faithful persons are expected to seek the gifts of the Spirit with all their hearts. They are to "covet earnestly the best gifts" (1 Cor. 12:31; D. & C. 46:8), to "desire spiritual gifts" (1 Cor. 14:1), "to ask of God, who giveth liberally." (D. & C. 46:7; Matt. 7:7-8.) To some will be given one gift; to others, another; and "unto some it may be given to have all those gifts, that there may be a head, in order that every member may be profited thereby." (D. & C. 46:29.)

From the writings of Paul (1 Cor. 12; 13; 14), and of Moroni (Moro. 10), and from the revelations received by Joseph Smith (D. & C. 46), we gain a clear knowledge of spiritual gifts and how they operate. Among others, we find the following gifts named either in these three places or elsewhere in the scriptures: the gift of knowing by revelation "that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world" (D. & C. 46:13), and also the gift of believing the testimony of those who have gained this revelation; the gifts of testimony, of knowing that the Book of Mormon is true, and of receiving revelations; the gifts of judgment, knowledge, and wisdom; of teaching, exhortation, and preaching; of teaching the word of wisdom and the word of knowledge; of declaring the gospel and of ministry; the gift of faith, including power both to heal and to be healed; the gifts of healing, working of miracles, and prophecy; the viewing of visions, beholding of angels and ministering spirits, and the discerning of spirits; speaking with tongues, the interpretation of tongues, the interpretation of languages, and the gift of translation; the differences of administration in the Church and the diversities of operation of the Spirit; the gift of seership, "and a gift which is greater can no man have." (Mosiah 8:16; Alma 9:21; D. & C. 5:4; 43:3-4; Rom. 12:6-8.) And these are by no means all of the gifts. In the fullest sense, they are infinite in number and endless in their manifestations. (Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 314-15.)

MORONI 10:9-17

What is a possible explanation of the striking similarity between Moroni 10:9-17 and 1 Corinthians 12:8-11?

Some people have been bothered by the similarity between the two scriptures listed above inasmuch as the reference in the New Testament was written on the eastern continent in the first century A.D. and the reference in the Book of Mormon was written several hundred years later and without any known access to the New Testament account. Several plausible explanations of this similarity could be given; however, the following possibility seems to be most reasonable: The Savior could have given a great sermon on the manifestations or gifts of the Spirit on both the eastern and western continents. Thus both Paul and Moroni would have been acquainted with the teachings of this sermon, just as they were both acquainted with the teachings of the Sermon on the Mount. Neither the New Testament nor the Book of Mormon claims to contain all the teachings of Jesus Christ. In fact, the Book of Mormon specifically states the "more part" of the teachings of the resurrected Christ were not included on the plates of Mormon (3 Nephi 26:6-11), and John indicates that not all of the teachings of the Savior were contained in the New Testament (John 21:25).

Two other possible explanations of this similarity are as follows: (1) These teachings on the gifts of the Spirit could have been recorded by a prophet in Old Testament times, and thus could have been available to Moroni through the brass plates of Laban and to Paul through one of the manuscripts that has not been included in our Old Testament; (2) the truths of the gospel are revealed to man through the power of the Holy Ghost, and the teachings concerning the gifts of the Spirit could have been revealed to both Moroni and Paul in essentially the same order.
