Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

APPENDIX B: Background Information Related to the Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith was not the author or writer of the Book of Mormon; he was the translator of this record.

However, in the first edition of the Book of Mormon the following statement appears on the same page as the preface: "By Joseph Smith, Junior, Author and Proprietor." Enemies of the Church have adversely criticized the use of the expression "Author and Proprietor"; they maintain this clearly indicates that Joseph Smith was the real author or writer of the book. However, in using this expression, Joseph Smith was merely employing the terminology of the copyright law then in use. This copyright law was printed in the first edition of the Book of Mormon; note the wording of part of this law: "In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled 'An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts, and Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned.'—R. R. Lansing, Clerk of the Northern District of New York." In subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon, the following appeared on the page with the preface: "Translated by Joseph Smith, Jun."

The "Pronouncing Vocabulary" section of the Book of Mormon (pp. 531-34 of the present edition) came into being as a result of a Book of Mormon convention held at Brigham Young University in May 1903. Some of the arbitrary rules of pronunciation that were formulated at this convention are as follows:

Words of two syllables to be accented on the first syllable.

Words of three syllables to be accented on the second syllable, with these exceptions, which are to be accented on the first syllable; namely: Amlici (c soft); Amulon; Antipas; Antipus; Corihor; Cumeni; Curelom; Deseret; Gazelam; Helaman; Joneam; Korihor; Tubaloth.

Words of four syllables to be accented on the third syllable with the following exceptions, which are to be accented on the second syllable; namely: Abinadi; Abinadom; Amalickiah; Aminadi; Aminadab.

Ch is always to be pronounced as K.

G at the beginning of a name to be always pronounced "hard."

"I" final, always to take the long sound of the vowel. (B. H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God, 2:13-14.)

December 23, 1805: the birthdate of the Prophet Joseph Smith

Spring of 1820: the "First Vision"

September 21, 1823: the first appearance of the angel Moroni

September 22, 1827: Joseph Smith obtains the Plates of Mormon

February 1828: Martin Harris visits Professor Charles Anthon

April 5, 1829: Joseph Smith meets Oliver Cowdery for the first time

May 15, 1829: the Aaronic Priesthood is restored by John the Baptist to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery

June 11, 1829: Joseph Smith applies for the copyright to the Book of Mormon

June-July 1829: the special manifestations to the eleven special witnesses of the Book of Mormon

March 1830: the Book of Mormon comes off the press

In the current edition of the Book of Mormon, the descriptive or explanatory writings (superscriptions) that appear in italics immediately after the titles of most of the books were on the original plates from which this record was translated. The only exception to this rule is the two-line superscription that appears immediately after the book of Ether; these two lines did not appear on the plates of Mormon.

The following descriptive writings in the current edition also appeared on the plates: (1) the words that appear in italics immediately before Mosiah 9 and 23, Alma 9, 17, 21, 36, 39 and 45, Helaman 7 and 13, and 3 Nephi 11; and (2) the first four lines after Alma 5, the first three lines after Alma 7, and the first two lines after Alma 38, the title of 4 Nephi, and Moroni 9. All other explanatory writings that appear in italics immediately after the chapter headings did not appear on the original plates; they were added in later editions, primarily the edition of 1920.
