Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

APPENDIX D: The Lamanite and the Gospel, by President Spencer W. Kimball

The history of the American Indian over the past 400 years is one of oppression and exploitation. In the eastern United States the Indians were "used" by the colonists as pawns, as guides, and they were induced to fight on one side or the other of numerous conflicts between colonial powers.

They were pushed and driven and evicted and exiled. They fought the "Battle of America," a continuing battle with some conquests and temporary wins but with infinitely more losses, each one resulting in a further move westward reminiscent of the continuing flight northward by their Nephite victims more than a thousand years earlier. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the retreat was across the length of the land.

They fought back. Of course, they fought back. This was their homeland—these, their forests; these, their mountains; these, their plains; these, their buffalo and deer and wild turkey; these, their burial grounds. They did not have cannons or guns at first, and they learned to defend themselves and to fight their battles with bows and arrows and spears and fire, their own weapons.

The history of the Indians has been a checkered one, and disturbing and unpleasant, but it has been said "the darkest hour is just before the dawn." And, the dawn has come and the full day approaches.

The greatest and choicest land of all the world had been given by the Lord to the descendants of Lehi as their inheritance forever. Never would they have lost it had they lived the commandments of the Lord, carried forward their culture, and grown and developed as they could and as they did in certain times in their ancient history. But they forgot their benefactor, lost their written language and culture, and degenerated until they were no match for the wily and subtle Europeans. Not long ago, I clipped an advertisement from a magazine. On it is a picture of a sad-faced Indian woman with her blanket wrapped around herself and her little child whom she hugs close to her. The title is "Bad Deal at the Trading Post":

More than 50% of America's farm products today consists of plants used by the Indians before Columbus planted his flag. They include beans, chocolate, corn, cotton, peanuts, potatoes, pumpkins, tobacco and tomatoes. To combat illness, the Indian has given us arnica, cascara, cocaine, ipecac, oil of wintergreen, petroleum jelly, quinine and witch hazel. Botanists have yet to discover, in 400 years, any medicinal herb that was not used by the Indian.

That's what they gave us. Here's what we have given them: High infant mortality rate, short life expectancy. Dependency on handouts. Loss of pride. Much illness. Unemployment as high as 80% in some tribes. The 600,000 remaining American Indians are struggling to hang on to the lowest health, education and economic rungs in American life. Somebody better do something before those rungs collapse. Remember, you're up there somewhere on that ladder yourself.

This was not the kind of a deal where two peoples jockey back and forth and finally arrive at an amicable arrangement wherein each benefits about equally. This was a deal where power ruled; where the white party of the first part took nearly everything of value—the lands, the water, the mountains, the rivers, the buffalo and the fish, and the homeland and security. The red party of the second part received nearly nothing—limited reservations of stark and barren "badlands," which had been theirs from the first. The white conquerors even took much of that. It was a bad deal.

That bad deal began soon after the pivotal year of 1492 and has never yet ended. It was an unfair one, an unequal one, a treacherous one. Why didn't the Indians rise and demand fair treatment? The answer is, they did. But unorganized, with limited war material and uncountable defeats behind them, they could not cope with the situation.

Perhaps of all prophecies ever made, none have been fulfilled more literally and more intensely and more devastatingly than this one from Mormon: "But behold, it shall come to pass that they shall be driven and scattered by the Gentiles . . ." (Mormon 5:20.)

And what a tragic, literal fulfillment those scriptures had. Go to the rounded hill standing above the Big Horn and Little Big Horn rivers in Montana. Ride up the hill on a paved road to a government building constructed to memorialize Custer's last fight. Look about you and see the monuments—small marble monuments.

The encyclopedia says:

Custer rode for the heart of the Indian line. A rise across the stream masked the enemy and as Custer swept down, the savages rode against him and swarmed around to his rear. Outnumbered twenty to one, the heroic band [that was the white man] still fought their way up to the ridge and a small number with their general reached it. Then a fresh band of one thousand Cheyennes rose up under Rain-in-the-face and not a soul was left. . . . The bodies of the slain division were left as they lay. . . . Forty-two Indians were killed; the battle field has been marked with a small marble monument where each white man fell. (Encyclopedia Americana 8:336-337; italics added.)

The account reads "not a soul was left alive" from the battle, again fulfilling the scriptures, "They shall be considered as naught." The thousands of Redmen who rode away—this time triumphantly—were not considered souls by the historians.

Another instance: The story of the Cherokees would melt the stoniest heart—driven at the point of a bayonet from their homes and lands, evicted from their country and sent to the swampy, mosquito-ridden area of Indian Territory. The prejudiced historian again said that the Indians were the culprits. Their suffering and death means little; their homes and gardens and farms were expropriated. The "white heroes" evicted and expropriated for their own use (at the point of bayonets) the lands of the "red demons."

We follow the Navajos from their exquisitely beautiful red sandstone lands of northeastern Arizona in their long, pitiful, painful march to central New Mexico, to Bosque Redondo on the Pecos River. We suffer and starve and freeze with them in the lonely four years, and then walk with them back to their homeland after signing their treaties.

In recent times our attention was arrested by a double-page picture in Life magazine. It is the dead of winter. Plodding across the thousands of square miles of deep snow and the wind-scoured stubbly plain, two Indian women on their horses make a new deep trail through the snow. It is good that their horses can break trail; it is good that their warm skirts are long to their ankles; it is good that their blankets cover them well and their scarves cover their heads and faces, for the wind is bitter and the cold intense, and the way is long. Thank goodness they have a sense of direction, for if the horses failed, never would they be found alive. They have left in their hogans their children, so they might find food for their families. Their wagon is under a tree, a solitary tree; frozen sheep are here and there half covered in the snow. That frozen one that the boy is dragging is one of over half a million sheep, goats, and cattle that were stranded with no food save that from a lucky drop. They will have food for a few days but soon the carcasses will be spoiled beyond eating.

Why do I return to a rehearsal of the indignities against the Indian? The answer is that we have debt to pay. We are deeply indebted and we shall never have liquidated that debt until we shall have done all in our power to rebuild the Indian and give him back the opportunities that are possible for us to give him.

The glider without an engine lies helpless on the ground until a motorized plane tows it high into the air with a tow line. When the glider is aloft, it is on its own and flies about at the will of its pilot, hundreds of miles in either direction—up and down, even to high altitudes. The pilot finds the updrafts and increases his altitude. He sails from updraft to updraft like a great bird in the air. He remains aloft until he chooses to descend.

Remember that the glider would remain on the ground until it rotted unless some power lifted it. The sailplane is the Indian. The tow line is the Indian program and the gospel of Christ. The members of the Church are the power plane and must do the lifting and the towing. The updrafts are the gospel principles.

And this, of course, reminds us to Paul's statement to Rome:

For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? (Romans 10:13-14.)

We must be the preachers.

As we see the Indians pushed from pillar to post; from the eastern seaboard to the west; from their free, open country to their narrow, limited reservations; from their carefree, open world to their limited lands supposed worthless, we remember Jacob's lament:

. . . the time passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream, we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days. (Jacob 7:26.)

In our own dispensation, the Indian was vanishing. In the Cherokees' "Trail of Tears," 4,600 died within a very short time on that merciless march from Georgia to Indian Territory. There were no marked graves. Herded like cattle, they traveled ten miles a day.

We were told that 450 years ago, nearly a million American Indians inhabited what is now the United States. By the close of the nineteenth century, sometimes referred to as a "Century of Shame," only 235,000 remained.

I have seen changes myself. On October 23, 1927, the Arizona Temple at Mesa, Arizona, was dedicated by President Heber J. Grant. At that time, I was stake clerk of the St. Joseph Stake and was secretary of the temple fund and collected the tens of thousands of dollars that the people of our stake contributed for the erection of this temple.

In the dedication services, President Grant made reference to the part which the Lamanites would play in this particular temple.

We beseech thee, O Lord, that thou wilt stay the hand of the destroyer among the descendants of Lehi who reside in this land and give unto them increasing virility and more abundant health, that they may not perish as a people but that from this time forth they may increase in numbers and in strength and in influence, that all the great and glorious promises made concerning the descendants of Lehi may be fulfilled in them; that they may grow in vigor of body and of mind, and above all love for thee and thy son, and increase in diligence and in faithfulness in keeping the commandments which have come to them with the gospel of Jesus Christ, and that many of them may have the privilege of entering this holy house and receiving ordinances for themselves and their departed ancestors. (Temples of the Most High, p. 173.)

It is remembered that the Indian was called, for long years, "the Vanishing American," and disease and hardships and hunger and war had, through the years, taken their heavy toll.

Wilford Woodruff, the President of the Church, in an oft-quoted statement said:

I am looking for the fulfillment of all things that the Lord has spoken, and they will come to pass as the Lord God lives. Zion is bound to rise and flourish. The Lamanites will blossom as the rose on the mountains. I am willing to say here that, although I believe this, when I see the power of the nation destroying them from the face of the earth, the fulfillment of that prophecy is perhaps harder for me to believe than any revelation of God that I ever read. It looks as though there would not be enough [Indians] left to receive the Gospel; but notwithstanding this dark picture, every word that God has ever said of them will have its fulfillment, and they, by and by, will receive the Gospel. It will be a day of God's power among them, and a nation will be born in a day. Their chiefs will be filled with the power of God and receive the Gospel, and they will go forth and build the new Jerusalem, and we shall help them. They are branches of the house of Israel. . . . (Journal of Discourses 15:282.)

The Lamanite population of the Americas, at the greatest number, must have run into many millions, for in certain periods of Book of Mormon history, wars continued almost unabated and the soil was covered with the bodies of the slain. Mormon says:

. . . and there had been thousands slain on both sides, both the Nephites and the Lamanites. (Mormon 4:9.)

And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage. . . . (Mormon 4:11.)

There were the peoples of the Mulekites, all of whom were slain. There were the people of the Jaredites who inhabited the land for centuries and who must have grown to great numbers. Coriantumr, you remember, saw—

that there had been slain by the sword already nearly two millions of his people [Was it ever heard of before or since, two million in a battle?] . . . yea, there had been slain two millions of mighty men, and also their wives and their children. (Ether 15:2.)

As Mormon tells of the last great battle, he tells of his own ten thousand who were hewn down and the ten thousand of Moroni. Then twenty-one other men with their ten thousand each "and their flesh, and bones, and blood lay upon the face of the earth . . . to molder upon the land, and to crumble and to return to their mother earth." (Mormon 6:15.)

The remnants of Israel broke up into numerous tribes and families and the civil war battles continued. It is estimated by some that when Columbus came, there were only about 233,000 of the scores of millions who had been on this continent. They were almost gone and were still vanishing by war and pestilence.

In 1927, when President Grant offered this prayer, they were losing their children, as Mormon said. "They were considered as naught" before the oncoming settlers, and when the smoke of battles dissipated, the dead white men were lauded, numbered, buried, but the Indians were, in fact, uncounted. They had been dying by war and now, after their subjugation in 1868, they were dying from germs and viruses, starvation and freezing. Their health level was at perhaps an all-time low. The infant mortality was terrifyingly high. How could little babes survive? The incidence of tuberculosis and other diseases was unbelievable. The Indians' water supply was contaminated generally, and potentially dangerous; and without waste disposal facilities, viral infections and pneumonia and malnutrition were common and devastating.

Since 1900, the American Indians have climbed back to over 600,000 in number. By 1975, they will have reached their original force; in fact today, Indians comprise the fastest growing ethnic group in America. There is now a significant number of them in every state of the Union. (Gordon H. Fraser, Moody, p. 23.)

There are probably nearly as many actual members of the Church today who are Lamanites and Mestizos (people of mixed blood partly Lamanite) as there were total Indians in the United States when the tide turned and the vanishing American began to increase, in line with the prayers and prophecies of the leaders of the Church.

Today they are coming into the Church in large numbers. There are several stakes largely Lamanite, with ward, quorum, and auxiliary leadership from the Lamanites. There are many missions devoted to teaching Lehi's children.

There are some many thousands of youngsters in the Indian seminary program, thousands of Indians in United States universities and a larger number in the Pacific schools and BYU. There are many thousands in schools in Mexico and Chile and in the Pacific and in the Indian placement program.

Many young people have filled missions and thousands are now preparing for them. Numerous Lamanites are receiving their endowments and sealings.

Some of my most happy moments have been when I have been performing marriage ceremonies in the holy temple with two wonderful Indians across the altar.

The Twelve Apostles in their "Proclamation to the World" in 1845 stated:

Thy sons and daughters of Zion will soon be required to devote a portion of their time in instructing the children of the forest, for they must be educated and instructed in all the arts of civil life, as well as in the gospel.

They must be clothed, fed, and instructed in the principles and practice of virtue, modesty, temperance, cleanliness, industry, mechanical arts, manners, customs, dress, music and all other things which are calculated in their nature to REFINE, PURIFY, EXALT, and GLORIFY them as sons and daughters of the royal house of Israel and of Joseph, who are making ready for the coming of the bridegroom.

And so as the sons and daughters of Zion we will soon be required to give a portion of our time, the Lord says through his prophets, to the training and teaching of these Lamanites, who have been deprived so long and who now are beginning to stretch and yawn and awaken from their sleep and come into their own.

As Elder Boyd K. Packer returned from Peru, he told me of his experience in a branch sacrament meeting in Cuzco in the lofty Andes. The chapel was still, the opening exercises finished, and the sacrament in preparation.

A little Lamanite ragamuffin entered from the street. Calloused and chappy were the little feet that brought him in the open door, up the aisle, and to the sacrament table. Here was dark and dirty testimony of deprivation, want, unsatisfied hungers—spiritual as well as physical. Almost unobserved, he slyly came to the sacrament table and, with a seeming spiritual hunger, leaned against the table and lovingly rubbed his unwashed face against the cool, smooth-white linen.

A woman in the front seat, seemingly outraged by the intrusion, caught his eye, and with motion and frown, sent the little ragamuffin scampering down the aisle out into his world, the street.

A bit later the little urchin, seemingly compelled by some inner urge, overcame his timidity and came stealthily, cautiously down the aisle again, fearful, ready to escape if necessary, but impelled as though directed by inaudible voices with "a familiar spirit" and as though memories long and faded were reviving, as though some intangible force were crowding him on to seek something for which he yearned but could not identify.

From his seat on the stand, Elder Packer caught his eye, beckoned to him, and stretched out big welcoming arms. After a moment's hesitation, the little Lamanite ragamuffin was nestled comfortably on his lap, in his arms, the tousled head against the great warm heart—a heart sympathetic to waifs, and especially to little Lamanite ones.

Later, Elder Packer with a subdued voice recalled this incident to me. As he sat forward on his chair, his eyes glistening, emotion in his voice, he said: "As this little one relaxed in my arms, it seemed it was not a single little Lamanite I held. It was a nation, indeed a multitude of nations of deprived, hungering souls, wanting something deep, good and warm they could not explain—a humble people yearning to revive memories all but faded out, of ancestors standing wide-eyed, open-mouthed, expectant and excited. A people reaching for truths they seemed to remember only vaguely; for prophecies which surely would some day be fulfilled; looking up and seeing a holy glorified Being descend from celestial areas and hearing a voice say: 'Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God . . . and in me, hath the Father glorified his name . . . I am the light and the life of the world.' "

The day of the Lamanite is surely here and we are God's instrument in helping to bring to pass the prophecies of renewed vitality, acceptance of the gospel, and resumption of a favored place as part of God's chosen people. The promises of the Lord will all come to pass; we could not thwart them if we would. But we do have it in our power to hasten or delay the process by our energetic or neglectful fulfillment of our responsibilities. (Faith Precedes the Miracle, Deseret Book, 1973, pp. 339-49.)
