Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1976)

APPENDIX E: A Pure Heart and Clean Hands, by President Marion G. Romney

My text, "A Pure Heart and Clean Hands," is taken from an impassioned interrogation addressed by Alma, in the year 83 B.C., to backsliding members of the church in the city of Zarahemla. To put it in context I quote the following:

And now . . . I ask . . . you, my brethren . . . have ye spiritually been born of God? . . . Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?

Do ye exercise faith in the redemption of him who created you? Do you look forward with an eye of faith, and view this mortal body raised in immortality, . . . to stand before God to be judged according to the deeds which have been done in the mortal body?

I say unto you, can you imagine to yourselves that ye hear the voice of the Lord, saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me ye blessed, for behold, your works have been the works of righteousness upon the face of the earth?

Or . . . can ye imagine yourselves brought before the tribunal of God with your souls filled with guilt and remorse, having . . . a remembrance that ye have set at defiance the commandments of God? I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? (Alma 5:14-16, 18, 19.)

Alma is here implying that the "exercise of faith in the redemption" of Christ, sufficient to bring about the mighty change in one's heart, to which he refers, is prerequisite to obtaining "a pure heart and clean hands." He is also implying that if on the great judgment day one can look up to God with a "pure heart and clean hands," he will hear the voice of the Lord saying unto him, "come unto me ye blessed," and that if he cannot do so, his soul will be filled with guilt and remorse.

He uses the phrase "a pure heart and clean hands" to indicate a state of purity—the condition one attains unto, when, through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion, and baptism by fire and the Holy Ghost, he receives forgiveness of sins which works in him a spiritual rebirth, a birth through which he comes back into harmony with, and is sensitive and alive to, the things of the Spirit. Healed is the term frequently used in the scriptures to denote the state of such an one.

On that great day, according to Alma, those who have "a pure heart and clean hands" will receive "an inheritance at the right hand" of God, while those who do not will wail and mourn, for they at long last will recognize that they cannot be saved but must await "an everlasting destruction."

We may well ponder Alma's question: "Can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands?" for there can scarcely be another question upon the answer to which so much depends. To me it suggests the same consideration as does the following statement found in the 21st section of the Doctrine and Covenants: "Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God" (v. 45).

Realizing that it will not be long now until I shall be summoned to appear before the judgment bar, these scriptures are becoming more and more meaningful to me. Adding to my concern is the fact that if I appear there without "a pure heart and clean hands," I will have no justifiable excuse, because by the power of the Holy Spirit I have been given a knowledge of that "law, irrevocably decreed in heaven" upon which the possession of such a pure heart and clean hands is predicated (D&C 130:20). This law is, of course, of the celestial and not of this world, but its provisions are as fixed and certain as are the laws of the physical universe. If we cannot obey them, we cannot obtain the blessings which obedience to them brings, for the Lord himself has said that "he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory" (D&C 88:22).

The provisions of this celestial law, as already indicated, are "faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion and baptism by fire and the Holy Ghost." Because to abide by these principles and ordinances is prerequisite to obtaining, and a guarantee that one will obtain "a pure heart and clean hands," let us take a little closer look at them.

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ requires belief in him. That is, acceptance as truth of all that has been revealed concerning him and his mission. For example: That he is the firstborn spirit son of God; that he was chosen and ordained in the great heavenly council to be our Redeemer; that he came to earth in the meridian of time as the Only Begotten of God in the flesh, lived a sinless life, taught the gospel, suffered in Gethsemane, died on the cross, was buried, rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; that through his victory over death he brought about universal resurrection; and that through his atonement he implemented the merciful plan of salvation whereby men may be forgiven of their sins, which forgiveness creates in them pure hearts and clean hands.

This belief must, however, be more than mental assent. James emphasized this when he said, "Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble" (James 2:19). It must also be more than the knowledge referred to by Mark in his account of a man with an unclean spirit who, when he saw Jesus, cried out: "What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? . . . I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God" (Mark 1:23, 24).

A saving belief or faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is accompanied by some of its fruits. "The ancients quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, women received their dead, etc. By faith the worlds were made. A man who has none of the gifts has no faith" (History of the Church, 5:218). Paul says that by faith the elders obtained a good report.

By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained a witness that he was righteous. . . .

By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death: . . .

He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him (Hebrews 11:2, 4-6).

The efficacy of a belief that God is and that "he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" in producing a "pure heart and clean hands" is conclusively evidenced by the fact that it moves one to repent of his sins and obey the principles and ordinances of the celestial law.

The significance, power, and indispensability of such a faith in the Lord Jesus Christ have been repeatedly declared from the beginning. It was declared to them of the first dispensation by Adam, to whom the Lord said:

If thou wilt turn unto me, . . . and believe, and repent . . . and be baptized . . . in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, . . . Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost (Moses 6:52).

Such was the message of all the Old Testament prophets.

It was likewise the message of all the Nephite prophets. "As the Lord God liveth [said Nephi], there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved" (2 Nephi 25:20).

In the meridian of time, Jesus said to the Jews, as he taught them in the temple treasury: "If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins" (John 8:24).

When Peter and John were being questioned by the Jews concerning the power by which they had healed the impotent man at the gate of the temple, Peter answered:

Be it known unto you all . . . that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth . . . doth this man stand here before you whole. . . .

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved (Acts 4:10, 12).

In this last dispensation the Lord has repeatedly declared this truth. Through the Prophet, he said to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer: "Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved" (D&C 18:23).

I have quoted these several scriptures which emphasize the preeminent role of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in the plan of salvation because of my desire to teach, with all the power at my command, and bear witness to the truth that Jesus is the Son of God, our Savior and our Redeemer, and that a vital, moving faith in him is an indispensable prerequisite to forgiveness of sins, which forgiveness, as above indicated, is the catalyst which heals the sinner and creates in him a pure heart and clean hands.

To me, one of the most direct and persuasive lessons on this point is given in the book of Enos. He begins by saying, "I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a remission of my sins."

Then he recounts how, as he sought food in the forest,

the words which [he] had often heard [his] father speak concerning eternal life and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into [his] heart.

And [he continues] my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens.

And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed.

And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away.

And I said: Lord, how is it done?

And he said unto me: Because of thy faith in Christ, . . . wherefore, go to, thy faith hath made thee whole (Enos 2-8).

So much for faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the first provision of the law which brings a pure heart and clean hands. We come now to repentance, the second provision.

One who has faith, and the desire which comes with it, to "look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands" will repent, for the commandment as stated by the risen Lord himself to the Nephites is: "Repent, . . . and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day" (3 Nephi 27:20).

He early renewed this commandment in this dispensation in the revelation recorded in the 19th section of the Doctrine and Covenants.

To repent indicates a "godly sorrow for sin," which produces a reformation of life. It "embodies (1) a conviction of guilt, (2) a desire to be relieved from the hurtful effects of sin, and (3) an earnest determination to forsake sin and in the Lord's appointed way seek forgiveness" (Talmage, Articles of Faith, p. 109).

After faith and repentance, the third principle and the first ordinance in the prescribed celestial law for obtaining a pure heart and clean hands is baptism by immersion in water for the remission of sins. Baptism is symbolical. It symbolizes a cleansing, a washing away of sins. It also symbolizes a resurrection.

Know ye not [said Paul] that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life (Romans 6:3,4).

Baptism is the "water" birth spoken of by Jesus when to Nicodemus he said, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5).

One evidences his faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and his repentance, by being so baptized, by covenanting in the waters of baptism to keep the commandments. Alma, instructing the people of Gideon, put it this way:

Yea, I say unto you come and fear not, and lay aside every sin, which easily doth beset you, which doth bind you down to destruction, yea, come and go forth, and show unto your God that ye are willing to repent of your sins and enter into a covenant with him to keep his commandments, and witness it unto him this day by going into the waters of baptism (Alma 7:15).

Jesus, being sinless, did not need to be baptized for the remission of sins, but nevertheless he insisted that he be baptized, saying unto John, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness" (Matthew 3:15).

Nephi, commenting on the baptism of Jesus, explains what is meant by fulfilling all righteousness and introduces the fourth provision of the celestial law which purifies one's heart and cleanses his hands. He says:

And now, I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the Lamb of God did fulfill all righteousness in being baptized by water?

Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of man that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments.

Wherefore, after he was baptized with water the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove.

And . . . the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, . . . repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism—Yea, by following your Lord and your Savior down into the water, according to his word, behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost (2 Nephi 31:6, 7, 12, 13).

This "baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost" here spoken of by Nephi effects the great change in the hearts of men referred to by Alma. It converts them from carnality to spirituality. It cleanses, heals, and purifies the soul. It is the sealing and sign of forgiveness. It is the spiritual rebirth spoken of by Jesus to Nicodemus. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, and water baptism are all preliminary and prerequisite to it, but it is the consummation. To receive it is to have one's garments washed in the atoning blood of Jesus Christ.

Alma was trying to arouse his hearers at Zarahemla to a realization that their being able to look up "to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands" would depend upon their experiencing the mighty change wrought in men's hearts by the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost.

Reminding them that his father had accepted the words of Abinadi and that

according to his faith there was a mighty change wrought in his heart. . . .

And [that he had] preached the word unto [their] fathers, and a mighty change was also wrought in their hearts,

And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? . . . Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? (Alma 5:12-14).

It was against this background that he put the question: "Can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands?" (Alma 5:19).

This "mighty change" wrought by the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost should and does, if the proselyte is prepared to receive it, occur when he is baptized by immersion for the remission of sins and receives the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost—the two required ordinances for being "born of water and of the spirit."

Alma gave his son Helaman a most graphic account of his being born again. As he

went about with the sons of Mosiah seeking to destroy the church of God [he was called to repentance by an angel who said unto him] . . .

If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed, seek no more to destroy the church of God.

[Whereupon, said Alma] I fell to the earth; . . .

And . . . I was racked with eternal torment, for . . .

I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; . . .

Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds.

And it came to pass that as I was racked with torment, while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world.

Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! . . .

Yea, methought I saw . . . God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their God; yea, and my soul did long to be there.

But behold, my limbs did receive their strength again, and I stood upon my feet, and did manifest unto the people that I had been born of God.

Yea, and from that time even until now, I have labored without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did taste; that they might also be born of God, and be filled with the Holy Ghost (Alma 36:6, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17-20, 22-24; italics added).

In the following three verses of the 4th chapter of Mosiah we have an account of a whole multitude experiencing a new birth.

And now, it came to pass that when king Benjamin had made an end of speaking . . . that he cast his eyes round about on the multitude, and behold they had fallen to the earth, for the fear of the Lord had come upon them. . . .

And they all cried aloud with one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God. . . .

And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ (Mosiah 4:1-3).

Everyone who complies with the prescribed conditions is born again. As Alma sought to impress this great truth on his recreant brethren at Zarahemla, he sought also to teach them that being born again does not guarantee one a pure heart and clean hands at the final judgment.

If ye have experienced a change of heart [he said to them], and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?

Have ye walked, keeping yourselves blameless before God? Could ye say, if ye were called to die at this time. . . . that ye have been sufficiently humble? That your garments have been cleansed and made white through the blood of Christ? (Alma 5:26, 27).

The implication of these questions is in strict harmony with the teachings of all the prophets and of the Lord himself. They all proclaim that he who can at that great day look up to God with the "pure heart and clean hands," which will qualify him for eternal life, is he who so lives as to retain to the end of his life the forgiveness received through "baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost." The Savior said it in these words:

Whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled [that is, filled with the Holy Ghost]; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end (3 Nephi 27:16, 19).

If time permitted, a proper sequence to the foregoing remarks would be a consideration in depth of the things to be done to retain a remission of sins. To know what they are and do them is as important as obtaining remission of sins in the first place. Since, however, we do not here and now have time for such a consideration, I shall close by quoting Nephi's summary on this important matter:

And now, my beloved brethren after ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; . . .

Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life (2 Nephi 31:19, 20).

He who is born of the spirit, and continues to live in a state of repentance from the time he is thus "born again" to the end of his mortal life, will have retained the remission of his sins. After death he will be free from the powers of evil and he will be able to look up to God with "a pure heart and clean hands" and he will hear the great Judge say, "Come unto me ye blessed, for behold, your works have been works of righteousness upon the earth" (Alma 5:16).

That it may be so with each of us, I humbly pray. (Look to God and Live [Deseret Book Co., 1971,] pp. 261-73.)

Figure 6: Compilation of Book of Mormon.

Figure [^1] 7: Analytical Chart of Book of Mormon.

Figure 8: Possible Book of Mormon sites header.

Figure 9: Possible Book of Mormon sites continued.

Figure 10: Some Significant Journeys.

Figure 11: Major Leaders During the Last 500 yrs.

When the Prophet's brother William was later asked "What caused Joseph to ask for guidance as to what church he ought to join," he replied as follows: "Why, there was a joint revival . . . in the neighborhood between the Baptists, Methodists, and Presbyterians, and they had succeeded in stirring up quite a feeling and after the meeting the question arose which church should have the converts. Rev. Stockton was the president of the meeting and suggested that it was their meeting and under their care, and they had a church there and they ought to join the Presbyterians, but as father did not like Rev. Stockton very well, our folks hesitated and the next evening a Rev. Mr. Lane of the Methodists preached a sermon on 'what church shalt I join,' and the burden of his discourses was to ask God, using as a text, 'If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally.' And of course when Joseph went home and was looking over the text, he was impressed to do just what the preacher had said. . . ." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 1:44.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith as the "author and proprietor" of the Book of Mormon
