The First Presidency has approved a new position—international area organization adviser—to help provide training and mentorship for local leaders outside the United States and Canada. The Caribbean Area Presidency has called four sisters to serve in this new position, Damaris Fortuna, Nadine L. Brown, Delphine Gamiette, and Rocío A. Cañar. These sisters will help strengthen the Primary, Young Women, and Relief Society organizations in the area.

Sister Fortuna lives in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. She is a lawyer and currently studies psychology at Universidad Tecnológica de Santiago. She has worked as a tax adviser and banking lawyer at Pellerano and Herrera. She is the wife of Elder Cándido Fortuna, an Area Seventy. They have three children.

In the Church, she has served with her husband presiding over Honduras Comayaguela Mission. She has been president of the Young Women, the Primary and the Relief Society organizations on several occasions, both on the ward and stake level. She has also served as a Relief Society teacher and nursery leader.

Sister Brown lives in Kingston, Jamaica. She has a bachelor’s degree in computer science and a postgraduate degree in education. She is currently an English teacher. She is married to Elder Kevin G. Brown, an Area Seventy, and they have five children.

In the Church, she served with her husband presiding over the Jamaica Kingston Mission. She has been a district Primary president, a seminary teacher, a Relief Society teacher, a Sunday School teacher and a Young Women presidency counselor.

Sister Gamiette lives in Guadaloupe. She has completed formal training in business administration and accounting. She currently owns Ranch de Moreau, which offers guided tours in the rural part of the island. She is married to Claude R. Gamiette. They have five children.

In the Church, she has served with her husband presiding over the Trinidad Port of Spain Mission. She has served in presidencies of the Primary, Young Women, and Relief Society, and also as a Sunday School, seminary, and institute teacher. She served a full-time mission in the Washington Seattle Mission.

Sister Cañar lives in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. She has a technical degree in business management, an associate degree in business administration, and is currently studying towards a bachelor’s degree in marriage and family studies from Brigham Young University-Idaho. She is married to Rodrigo Cañar, and they have four children.

In the Church, Sister Cañar has served as a Primary president, and a counselor in Young Women and Relief Society presidencies. She also has served as a seminary teacher, nursery leader, and Sunday School teacher.
