Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

1Part One

The Mormon Trail

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it."

3l Isaiah 2:2

3In 1844, Rachel Emma Woolley (Simmons) was seven years old when she was taken to the Mansion House in Nauvoo, Illinois, to view the bodies of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. Her uncle Samuel Woolley lifted her up beside the two coffins lined with black velvet, and she gazed through the hinged glass lids at the faces of those two great leaders.

3Rachel was one of ten thousand mourners who solemnly filed past the two coffins to pay their last respects to the dead brothers. At her young age, Rachel could not comprehend that their deaths would change her life forever and in two years send her traveling deep into the American wilderness.

3In the years up to Joseph and Hyrum's deaths, many converts had received a testimony of the restored gospel and had joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, established in western New York through Joseph Smith in 1830. But many neighbors of those who had joined this new church had often felt uneasy about the Mormon lifestyle. Quite a few were afraid the Mormons would take over the local government. Still others opposed its work.

3The Latter-day Saints tried to live in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, but in each place they settled, members of the Church began to suffer persecutions from their neighbors. Homes and barns were burned to the ground. Crops were destroyed, and livestock stolen. Men were tarred and feathered, and people killed. In all three states, the Saints moved on to what they hoped would be more peaceful surroundings.

3The largest and most successful of the early Mormon settlements had been established in 1839 on the banks of the Mississippi River. Joseph Smith named the city "Nauvoo," which meant "a beautiful and restful place." The bustling community soon boasted a population of more than twelve thousand people.

As with their previous communities, the Latter-day Saints experienced problems with anti-Mormons in neighboring communities. Joseph Smith realized they would have to leave their beautiful city. In 1842, he told the Saints they should begin to make preparations to resettle in the West, in the Rocky Mountains.

4In 1844, still living in Nauvoo, Joseph and Hyrum were arrested and taken to the county jail in Carthage, Illinois. They were to be tried on a charge of riot, stemming from destruction of an anti-Mormon press, and for treason for declaring martial law. They were promised protection, but on June 27, 1844, a mob with blackened faces and loaded guns easily passed by the guards and burst into their jail cell. The mob shot and murdered the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum.

4As time passed after Joseph's death, Church leaders realized that the time had come for the sorrowing Latter-day Saints to move on again. After careful prayer, study of maps and guides of unsettled regions in the West, and long discussions with Western explorers and trappers, leaders announced in the Church periodical The Times and Seasons that a "resting place" for the Saints would be found "in some good valley in the neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains."

4Under the leadership of Brigham Young, the Saints would move to a place no other settlers wanted. No one would bother them there—it would be too inconvenient.

4Apostle Parley P. Pratt tried to encourage the Saints by comparing the impending exodus to the transplanting of fruit trees from a small nursery to a field where they would have room to grow. "It is so with us," he said. "We want a country where we have room to expand." There would be room to grow in numbers, enlarge their settlements and farms, and live and worship as they choose. Thus began the Mormon migration to the West.

4Although several hundred thousand American settlers moved west during the nineteenth century, for land, gold, or adventure, the Saints' migration was unlike any other. All were of one religious faith, united in purpose and desire. All shared the experience of leaving homes, loved ones, and friends for their religion's sake. The LDS companies were shepherded by religious leaders who rallied them when they were discouraged and chastised them when more order was necessary.

Journey across IowaHCOf the entire journey from Nauvoo to the Great Salt Lake Valley, the most difficult part was the first two hundred or so miles. Increased tension between the Mormons and the governments of Illinois and the United States led to the main body of Saints leaving Nauvoo in February 1846, several weeks before they had planned to depart. Temperatures were often below freezing. The wind was bone-chilling. Under such conditions, thousands of shivering families crossed the Mississippi River into Iowa.

Journey across IowaHC5Later, as the great exodus continued, Apostle Wilford Woodruff described the scene on June 30 on the western side of the river as the Saints crossed the state of Iowa: "I stopped my carriage on the top of a hill in the midst of a rolling prairie where I had an extended view of all about me. I beheld the Saints coming in all directions from hills and dales, groves and prairies with their wagons, flocks, and herds, by the thousands. It looked like the movement of a nation."

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC5After crossing Iowa, the Saints endured the winter of 1846-47 in tents, dugouts, and crude log huts in what they called Winter Quarters on the west bank of the Missouri River, in present-day Nebraska, and in other neighboring clusters of temporary settlements. More than six hundred graves in the cemetery at Winter Quarters bear testimony to the suffering these Saints endured. But this only strengthened their determination to find a permanent refuge in the Rocky Mountains.

5The trek west from Winter Quarters began the following spring, on April 5, 1847, with the departure of the first wagons in Brigham Young's advance pioneer company. The Great Salt Lake was first glimpsed July 21, 1847, by an exploring party from the company, and the rest of the pioneers, including President Young, arrived in the Valley on July 24.

5While the exodus from Nauvoo was taking place, and during the next twenty years, large numbers of newly converted Latter-day Saints from the eastern United States and Canada and from across the ocean in Great Britain gathered at established outfitting posts in Iowa and Nebraska, responding to their leaders' call to gather and move to the Valley. Thousands of families sold their homes and farms—often for ridiculously low prices—and loaded their wagons to join the trek.

5There were many tender, heartbreaking scenes of families and friends saying good-bye to each other. Many would never see each other again. But the strength of their testimonies of the gospel made it possible for these courageous people to turn to the West and begin walking.

Perpetual Emigrating FundHCA lack of money was often a problem for those who wanted to join the Saints in the West. After 1849, many Latter-day Saints traveled to the Valley with help from the Perpetual Emigrating Fund. This fund loaned money to Church converts in Europe to enable them to emigrate to America and then on to Utah. Once they were established in their new homes and began to make a living, emigrants were to repay the loan, which enabled the Fund to continue its work of assistance.

6The favorite vehicle for traveling across the plains was the white-topped wagon. This animal-drawn form of transportation also served as a mobile home. Families could use the wagons as kitchen and living rooms and sleep in and under them. Despite being packed with crates and barrels, the wagons were made more comfortable with oil lamps, rugs, pillows and even a little furniture. Boxes and bags of grain could be made into beds, and chests could serve as tables or chairs. Some arrangement in the wagon bed was often made for elderly or ill persons to rest, read, or knit as the vehicle bumped along the trail.

6The pioneers used horses, mules, oxen, and even milk cows to pull their wagons. Oxen were the most popular, preferred not for their great speed but for their strength and durability. They were less expensive to buy than horses, and they didn't require the more expensive equipment that horses used. Instead of harnesses, simple wooden yokes around their necks would do. A person "drove" oxen by walking along the left side behind the lead oxen and using a whip or prod to urge and guide them along. They were trained to respond to shouts of "gee" (right turn) and "haw" (left turn). Under normal conditions, oxen could pull a heavily loaded wagon two miles an hour.

6Many pioneers kept journals or wrote in later years about their journey. Careful study of their writings teaches us a great deal about their experiences along the Mormon Trail. The stories of young people traveling with the migrating companies are especially fascinating.

Most Mormon pioneer companies were filled with young people. Babies were held in the arms of their mothers or strapped on the back of an older sibling. Children as young as four or five trotted beside the wagon, while older brothers and sisters drove the oxen, gathered fuel for the campfires, and helped cook meals. Young teenagers frequently held the reins of teams of horses, as their fathers or mothers struggled with other duties. Older teens were expected to carry as much responsibility as the other adults. All the young people played important roles in this great migration.

7These young pioneers viewed the journey across the Great Plains very differently from the adults. Some immigrant children saw their journey to the Salt Lake Valley as a delightful and exciting vacation. Alongside their family and friends, they energetically sang the songs of Zion, caught butterflies by day and fireflies at night, and learned to love the beauty and glory of the American West. Whatever fear, for example, that thirteen-year-old George Isom felt as the trip began soon vanished as he considered "the novelty of the scene, unable to recollect having ever been more than 8 or 10 miles from home." British-born Alfred Lambourne, age sixteen, could hardly contain himself the first night out on the trail: "What a delightful change it was to one city-bred to mingle in the freedom of camp life such as we enjoyed, and to pass his days under the blue canopy of heaven!" During one such clear summer evening on the Trail, April 29, 1847, two youngsters were allowed to take a peek through Orson Pratt's telescope and see Jupiter's moons.

7For other youngsters, however, the Mormon Trail experience was one of pain and sorrow. Louisa Gittens (Clegg), who was fourteen, described the journey as "a long, miserable time." For many, it was a first and agonizing encounter with the reality of death. Adolescents stood in stunned silence as graves were dug for their parents, a sibling, or a beloved playmate. Laura Swenson (Fowers), age eight, watched her father die after a wagon accident. Her mother died seven days later in childbirth, leaving Laura with four younger sisters to proceed to the Salt Lake Valley as orphans. Clarence Merrill, age five, watched as his infant brother, Alonzo, died shortly after birth. Another brother, Alfred, and a sister, Amanda, died shortly thereafter "from chills and fever," and the three were buried under an oak tree.

7Interestingly enough, children rarely encountered the kinds of dangers they expected. While many young people worried about Indians, wolves, and poisonous snakes, they discovered that most of their fears were unfounded.

The stories in this book show that Indians frequently worried the travelers. And indeed, there were some tragic encounters. However, Indians helped the overland travelers more than they hurt them. Sixteen-year-old George Cunningham and his family were invited to camp one night with a large group of Omaha Indians at Wood River, Nebraska. "We did so and they were very friendly," he later wrote. Eighteen-year-old Stephen Forsdick watched as a man in his company traded a pint of sugar to a Pawnee Indian for a buffalo robe. Both parties were happy with the exchange. Simpson Montgomery Molen, who was fifteen, found that the Indians usually visited their camp "demanding presents as tokens of peace and friendship" but otherwise did no harm.

8One of the first Indians nine-year-old Joseph F. Smith saw "had his hair daubed up with stiff white clay." Mormons frequently met bands of Pawnee Indians. Their braves had plucked eyebrows, painted faces, and shaved heads, except for a strip of hair running from the forehead to the back of the crown, to a scalp lock at the back that looked like a horn. Children were both fascinated and frightened by the natives' war paint, weapons, and mannerisms.

8Other common fears proved groundless. Wild animals were virtually no threat at all, although many children shook with fear as they lay inside a wagon at night and heard a wolf sniffing around the camp. Wolves frequently dug up graves along the Mormon Trail, leaving a ghastly scene for later travelers, but there is no reliable evidence that they posed any significant threat to the living. Rattlesnakes were a familiar sight, but snakebites were rare.

8The real danger in crossing the plains was illness. Sickness killed more children than accidents, starvation, and exposure combined. Common identifiable diseases included scarlet fever, smallpox, and typhus, all communicated through personal contact. Intestinal diseases included cholera and dysentery. These painful and frightening illnesses claimed the lives of hundreds of Latter-day Saints, and children were less able than adults to withstand these scourges.

The second greatest danger to youngsters was accidents—the most common injuries being to children who fell beneath the wheels of moving wagons and handcarts. Wagon run-overs, in fact, injured or killed more children than all other kinds of accidents combined. Nervous parents tried to keep small children inside the wagons, but they soon became restless and curious and would hop in and out. Inevitably, a child would trip and hit the ground just as a wheel groaned over them. Gideon Murdock, age six, wrote, "I was not large enough to keep out of the way of the wagon at all times and consequently had my feet and leg run over two or three times when jumping out of the wagon to stop the team." Other dangers included rivers, poor nutrition, and exposure to the elements.

9Despite the very real dangers the Wild West presented, most young travelers were enthralled with the new territory they were discovering. Newcomers to the West saw their first buffalo, antelope, and snow-capped mountain peaks. Mary Kristine Jacobsen (Sorensen) and her friends approached Chimney Rock, in present-day Nebraska, "with the greatest of joy and curiosity." They left their company and climbed partway up the huge, slender pillar, which she later admitted was "a very hazardous undertaking." No one is known to have successfully climbed to the top of the five-hundred-foot-high formation, but legend has it that an Indian brave, to win a bride, did reach the top, only to plunge to his death. Such landmarks as Chimney Rock, Independence Rock, and Devil's Gate broke the monotony for youngsters seeking fun and adventure.

9In due time, of course, the journey came to an end. Responses upon seeing the Salt Lake Valley were mixed. Clara Decker (Young), an adult, took one look at the barren, sagebrush-blanketed valley and said, "I have come 1,200 miles to reach this valley and walked much of the way, but I am willing to walk 1,000 miles farther rather than remain here." Some voted to push on to California.

9In 1866, B. H. "Harry" Roberts, who was ten, had such high expectations of his home in the Salt Lake Valley that he mistook the Bountiful LDS Tabernacle for his new house. His family's humble cottage with its sod roof and dirt floor was a bitter disappointment.

9But for most, the Valley was a welcome sight, heralding not only the end of the tiresome journey but the beginning of a new life. Lucy Hannah White (Flake), who was eight years old at the time, wrote of her family's arrival in 1850: "That day happened to be Mother's thirty-second birthday, and was a joyous occasion. I couldn't understand her tears. I said: 'Mother, your loved ones are here, you wanted to come, so why are you crying?' She squeezed my hand gently, and smiling through her tears answered, 'Lucy Hannah, when people are as happy as I am, they cannot keep from crying.' That was the first time I knew that tears could express both joy and sorrow."

9The accounts in this book, telling the stories of Zion's youngest pioneers, portray endurance, resilience, faith, a sense of awe, and great courage. These young people are splendid examples and models, people we can learn much from, who can teach us about crossing our own deserts and rivers and taming our own wildernesses.

9Sources: The following journals and personal histories are used as references in Part One but are not listed elsewhere in this book:

9Clegg, Louise Gittens. Autobiography. In Our Pioneer Heritage, compiled by Kate B. Carter, 3:87-90. 20 vols. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1960.

9Cunningham, George. Autobiography. In Treasures of Pioneer History, compiled by Kate B. Carter, 5:252-56. 6 vols. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1956.

Flake, Lucy Hannah White. Journal, typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

10Forsdick, Stephen. Autobiography, typescript. Archives Division, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah. Hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives.

10Fowers, Laura Swenson. Autobiography. In Our Pioneer Heritage, 12:95-97.

10Isom, George. Autobiography, typescript. LDS Church Archives.

10Lambourne, Alfred. An Old Sketchbook. Boston: Samuel E. Cassino, 1892.

10Molen, Simpson Montgomery. Autobiography, holograph. LDS Church Archives.

10Murdock, Gideon Allen. Autobiography, typescript. LDS Church Archives.

10Sorensen, Mary Kristine Jacobsen. Oral interview with her daughter, Veda Sorensen, holograph. In possession of Daina Zollinger, River Heights, Utah.

10Part Two

Future Leaders

"Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men."

10"Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day.

13"Therefore, if ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work."

13Doctrine & Covenants 4:1-3

15The Mormon trail proved to be a testing ground and learning experience for virtually all who made the journey. It further bonded together a people who would establish hundreds of permanent settlements in the Mountain West and make it Mormon country.

15Among those making the trek as youngsters were future prophets, apostles, Relief Society presidents, and other valuable leaders in the Church. To learn of the skills and testimonies they forged as young pioneers is to better understand what would later enable them to serve successfully as leaders in their communities and in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

15Brigham Henry Roberts

15Born: March 13, 1857, Warrington, Lancashire, England

15Parents: Benjamin and Ann Reed Everington Roberts

151866: William Henry Chipman Company

16Age at time of journey: 10

16In the above photograph, B. H. Roberts is in the disguise he used to pass through hostile territory and retrieve the bodies of two missionaries who had been shot.

16"Harry" Roberts, age ten, and his sister, Mary ("Polly"), age sixteen, crossed the Great Plains with an LDS wagon train. Their father remained in England, and their mother had gone to the Salt Lake Valley four years earlier, where she was anxiously awaiting their arrival. They departed from a camp called Wyoming, which was south of Council Bluffs, Iowa, on the Nebraska side of the Missouri River, and which was on a branch of the Oregon Trail.

16Captain William Henry Chipman's train was the company to which my sister and I were assigned for the journey. He was from American Fork in Utah County. The company was one of the largest leaving Missouri that year and made an imposing trail of covered wagons as it started over the long and adventurous trail. There was much cheering and cracking of whips by the teamsters and shouting of war whoops in imitation of the Indians by the Western men as they passed through the immense encampment of wagons which were to follow later in similar groups. There was a thrill in the departure for the long journey. All were rested up by the stay at the Missouri encampment, and all were eager for the march.

16Soon the lack of preparation for my sister and me became manifest. Of course our clothing was sparse and by now worn and not suitable to the journey. Our mother, in distant Utah, had sent with a young teamster who came from the settlement in which she lived—Bountiful, Davis County—gloves and a shawl and stout walking shoes for Mary, with heavy quilts, homemade, for bedding and a little money, such as she could manage to scrape together. But all these comforts that would have been well-nigh invaluable for us never reached our hands. The teamster to whom our things were entrusted claimed that he could never find us in the Missouri encampments on the journey.

The only night covering I had was a petticoat that my sister Mary slipped to me after retiring into the wagon. This night covering I caught with eager hands, and I curled up under the wagon and generally shivered through the night.

17On one occasion, I and a boy about my own age had become interested in some ripening yellow currants along one of the banks of the stream and lingered until the train had passed over a distant hill. Before we realized it, we were breaking camp regulations, but still we lingered to fill our hats with the luscious currants we had discovered. The caps at last filled, we started to catch the wagon train and were further behind it than we realized.

17Coming to the summit of a swale in which the wagon road passed, we saw to our horror three Indians on horseback just beginning to come up out of the swale and along the road. Our contact with the Indians around the Wyoming encampment had not been sufficient to do away with the fear in which the red men were held by us, and it could be well imagined that the hair on our heads raised as we saw an inevitable meeting with these savages.

17Nevertheless, we moved one to the right and the other to the left with the hope that we could go around these Indians, but nothing doing. As soon as we separated to go around, the Indians also separated—the one to the right, the other to the left, and the third straight forward. There was trembling and fear that we were going to be captured. It was, therefore, with magnificent terror that we kept on slowly towards these Indians whose faces remained immobile and solemn with no indication of friendliness given out at all.

17I approached my savage, knowing not what to do, but as I reached about the head of the horse, I gave one wild yell, the Scotch cap full of currants was dropped, and I made a wild dash to get by—and did—whereupon there was a peal of laughter from the three Indians. They say Indians never laugh, but I learned differently. As the race for the train continued with an occasional glance over the shoulder to see what the Indians were doing, I saw they were bending double over their horses with their screams of laughter.

17The running continued until each of us had found his proper place beside the wagon to which he was assigned. The fright was thought of for several days, at least by strict adherence to camp rules about staying with your wagon.

One morning, Harry heard the company was going to cross the Platte River (probably near Ft. Kearney, Nebraska) for the first time to pick up the Mormon Trail of 1847. He wanted to be the first in the company to arrive at the crossing, so he walked on ahead of the rest of his group.

18Up the stream, probably one quarter of a mile where a side stream dipped into the Platte, clumps of willows grew, and as the sun by now was burning hot, I thought of the grateful shade that could be reached by going that far above the point where the road dipped into the river. I went on and soon found a comfortable place where I could recline and dropped into a sound slumber that had been denied me the night before on account of the cold.

18I slept on and on, and not all the shouting of the teamsters and emigrants nor the lunging of the wagons into the river awoke me. In fact, when I did awake, the last wagon of the train was just pulling up the opposite bank of the river, where the road led into the cottonwoods and other river trees, and was winding up the opposite bank of the turbid stream. Shouting at the top of my voice and rushing down to where the road met the river, I attracted the attention of Captain Chipman, who sat upon his horse on the opposite bank, watching the last wagon as it was drawn from the river bed by its long line of yoked teams. Cupping his hands the captain shouted to know if I could swim and was answered in the affirmative.

I was directed to "come on then." With this, my old clogs [wooden shoes] from England were shuffled off blistered feet and left on the sand bar. Slipping off my coat—made as will be remembered from an old suit of a policeman, thick and heavy—with only shirt and barn-door trousers left, I plunged through one stream after another between the sandbars until I came to the main stream, which surged to the north side of the Platte above which on the bank sat Captain Chipman. Without hesitation I plunged into this last stream, to be carried down very rapidly. Apparently Captain Chipman felt uneasy and drove his horse, well practiced, into the stream and came swimming to where I was struggling for the further shore. The captain slipped his foot from the stirrup and bade me take hold of it, and the horse without being turned upstream swam down until a suitable landing place was reached, and all three of us came up from the river together. The Captain held in his hand a light horse whip, and as I let go of the stirrup and scampered up the bank to reach the road, the captain felt it evidently not unjust to give several sharp cuts cross my pants, which stung sharply, but no cry was uttered, and I felt that I was well out of a bad scrape.

19During another crossing of the Platte River, Harry and a young lady in the camp secretly rode in the back of a wagon that became stuck in quicksand midway across the river. After several attempts were made to free the wagon, the team of horses was unhitched and taken to the other side of the river until another, stronger team could be brought in. Meanwhile, the following incident took place while Harry and the young girl waited for help:

19A team did not return until the next morning, and all through the night the vibrations of the wagon in the sand were continued until the water reached and seeped into the bed of the wagon and soaked the sugar bags. Hunger, of course, asserted itself, and how to satisfy it for the time was the question. But I was carrying as my most precious possession a four-bladed pen knife, a gift for my mother, which had been purchased with money coming into my hands in England. In addition to the four blades there were a pair of pinchers, a nail file, and some other contrivances that made it an amateur tool chest. The knife was used to slit a hole in one of the sacks of sugar; one of the pieces of side bacon was uncovered in the same way, and pieces of raw bacon or ham were hacked off. Upon these the young lady and I feasted.

19While cutting the bacon, the knife slipped and dropped into the turbid water of the Platte River and was never found, and the treasure which had been bought for my mother, who was remembered to be a seamstress and to whom the complex knife and other implements would have been useful, was gone forever.

The next morning teams were brought to the relief of the freight wagons, of which there were several, which had been left in the river bed from the day before. It was always a matter of regret that the young lady's name was either never learned or else not remembered.

20On one occasion a night drive was necessary, and a young man was entrusted with the freight wagon team. The young teamster was unusually devoted to helping the young ladies, especially on this night, so I ran in behind the ox on the near side and climbed up on the seat that had been arranged in the front of the wagon by the regular teamsters. This seat consisted of a broad plank placed across the open head of a large barrel. The day had been hot and the hours of the journey long, and I was decidedly tired, nearly unto exhaustion. Fearing that my riding, which was "agin" the law, would be discovered, I slipped the broad board from the barrel head and conceived the idea of dropping down in the barrel, secure from the eyes of those who might oust me from my seat in the wagon if I were found. To my surprise, if not amazement, I discovered when I let myself down in the barrel that my feet went into about three or four inches of a sticky liquid substance which turned out to be molasses. The smarting of my chapped feet almost made me scream with pain, but I stifled it. Too tired to attempt to climb out, I remained and gradually slipped down and went to sleep doubled up in the bottom of the barrel, with such results as can well be imagined. It was daylight when I woke up, and there began to be the usual camp noises of teamsters shouting to each other to be prepared to receive the incoming team driven from the prairie by night herdsmen. As I crawled out of the uncomfortable position, and with molasses dripping from my trousers, I was greeted with yells and laughter by some of the teamsters and emigrants who caught sight of me. I crept away as fast as I could to scrape off the syrup, which added to the weight and thickness of shirt and trousers, for there was no change of clothing for me, and so bedaubed I had to pass on until dusk and drying somewhat obliterated the discomfort.

The lads in the train were always in search of swimming holes, so they scampered down through the willows in search of bathing places. I and a comrade more venturesome than the rest went some distance down the stream until we found a swimming hole that was admirable. The water had washed out a hole on the west side of the creek with quite a deep clear collection of water under the banks held up by the willow roots. Here we began our bath. Cattle were on both sides of the streams when suddenly a strange rattling sound was heard, followed by intense hissing and hissing. Looking out of the swimming hole, we observed three Indians riding up the bank of the stream. One of them had a dry piece of rawhide in his hand, which by shaking produced the rattling noise. All three, following the rattling of the rawhide, hissed intensely. As they did so, the cattle with loud bawling rushed out of the willows to the open prairie, which rolled off in successive hills. Pretty soon it seemed as if the whole herd, whose thundering hoofs could be heard, were stampeded, their mad race accompanied with bawlings. The thundering of their hoofs would have waked the dead.

21As soon as the Indians and cattle had reached the creek bottom, we, naked as when born, ran for camp full speed. We found Captain Chipman seated on the tongue of his wagon and made our report of the Indians among the cattle, apparently stampeding them. The captain laughed at us and advised that we had better find our clothes before we went into camp. While saying this, he climbed upon the tongue of his wagon and opened the lid to his bread box in front, making an improvised seat of it. As he did this, it enabled the captain to see over a line of willows, and he beheld the whole herd under stampede, followed by the three Indians. All at once a cry arose from the encampment, a number of whom now saw the cattle under stampede. Then there were attempts of mounting in hot haste and seizure of firearms and a rush made to follow the marauders. Captain Chipman, however, stood at the west entrance of the encampment and commanded all to remain where they were until he could give his orders. We two boys, meantime, wended our way back to the swimming hole, where we obtained our clothing.

21Captain Chipman here proved himself a real plainsman captain, and the thought nearest his heart was care for the emigrants bound on their way to Zion. He ordered the men to roll up the wagons into solid corral formation, namely by pushing the wagons together in such manner as to have the forewheel pushed up and interlocked with the hind wheels of the wagon before it. The corral became an improvised fort, with the men and the women of the camp and such stock as remained huddled on the inside. After this the three remaining horses of the encampment were brought out and saddled, and three men mounted and went after the Indians to bring back as many of the herd as would be possible.

21As a result of this incident, the company lost over one hundred head of their strongest and best cattle and six or eight riding horses. The men were able to bring home only a very few of the herd.

It was the custom of the emigrants to gather and carry in their arms, or else in the rear of their wagon, dry sticks gathered from the bushes or else "Buffalo Chips" from the plains for the evening camp fires. "Buffalo Chips" were the droppings of cattle and buffaloes that once inhabited the region in certain seasons of the year, and these "dried chips" made an excellent smoldering fire that gave out a great amount of heat.

22Before dark, I had gathered my quantum of such fuel. Then the train was drawn up in such formation as the usual corral. I wandered outside the corral a bit until I found two boulder stones, which I rolled together. Between the two I lighted my fire, carrying a blazing buffalo chip from another fire with which to ignite this fire. After it had burned down a little, I curled myself about the two stones with the fire between, and in the warmth sleep soon overcame me. In the early morning when I awoke, to my amazement I was covered with an inch or two of snow which had fallen through the night and which had covered me and my now dead fire, as with a white blanket. Shaking off the snow, I made my way to look for breakfast, grateful for this long night of pleasant and apparently warm covering until the sharpness of the morning hour made me shiver again with cold.

22Before long, we approached Chimney Rock, Nebraska, which had a peculiar attraction to Mary and me because it was at this point that our baby brother, Thomas, who had been carried from the Missouri River in the arms of our mother, had died and was buried. To us it was, in a way, his monument. The child had been afflicted from its birth with water on the brain, and the head had grown large with the progress of the disease. He was peevish and during the whole journey did not permit anyone to touch him but his mother, and here this burden had ended.

22There was a pathetic painful incident in his burial. Morton B. Haight was the captain of the company in which my mother made the journey, in the year 1862. The grave for the baby was dug between Chimney Rock and the Platte River, and the babe wrapped in a blanket, a bed sheet, and lowered into the grave. Then came the dropping of the dirt upon the body. This was too much for my mother, and with a groan she sank beside the grave in a dead faint, as she heard the clods of dirt fall upon her baby's body. "Hold on," said the captain, beginning to feel the grief, "this is too much for me." He went to his wagon and took out the bread box in the front end of it and came back with it to the grave. Then the body was taken up and comfortably placed in the bread box and in this improvised coffin was again lowered to the bottom of the grave, which was then filled in and covered with cobblestones gathered from the surrounding hills to afford protection. Ever after, of course, the name of Captain Haight was an enshrined memory in the Roberts house.

23Harry describes their arrival in the Great Salt Lake Valley on September 14, 1866:

23In the morning everybody seemed to be up with the first streaks of the light of day over the eastern mountains, and in great haste in preparation to take up the journey. Breakfast seemed to be neglected, and there was not much to eat anyway. Before the sun rose, the train, falling into its old line, swung down the low foothills until they struck a well-defined road leading into the city.

23This entrance proved to be via Third South—then and long afterwards known as "Emigration Street," now Broadway. When Captain Chipman's ox team swung around the corner of Third South into Main Street, I found myself at the head of the lead yoke in that team, walking up the principal street of the city, the rest of the train following. Here the people had turned out to welcome the plains-worn emigrants and were standing on the street sides to greet them. Some horsemen dashed up the street swinging their cowboy hats, the customary cowboy handkerchiefs around their necks as if they were in from the ranges.

Along the road, perhaps nearly halfway from the mouth of Parley's Canyon to the city, as I strode on ahead of Captain Chipman's team, I saw a bright-colored, dainty, charming little girl approaching me in the middle of the street. It was a strange meeting, we two. My hair had grown out somewhat. But three months' journey over the plains and through the mountains without hat or coat or shoes for most of the way had wrought havoc with my appearance. My hair stuck out in all directions; the freckles seemed deeper and more plentiful and the features less attractive than when the journey began. Shirt and trousers barely clung to my sturdy form, and my feet were black and cracked but now covered by the shoes I had taken from the feet of a dead man at a burnt station. These I was wearing in compliment to my entrance into "Zion." Also my face had been more carefully washed that morning.

24But try as I would, the shock of hair was unmanageable, and so no wonder the dainty little lady was somewhat timid in approaching me. She had on her arm a basket of luscious fruit, peaches, plums, and grapes. These she extended to me, the "ugly duckling" of a boy from the plains, and asked me if I would have some peaches. The answer was to gather up several which I strung along in the crook of my arm, and as soon as I had obtained what I supposed a reasonable portion, I wondered how I could get this fruit so wonderful back to Mary and at the same time retain my place in the march up Main Street. Pondering this question, of course unknown to the young girl who had brought me such a treasure, I finally turned back as best I could to the wagon where Mary was concealed under the wagon cover because of her being a little ashamed of her appearance. Running behind the wheel ox and climbing up on the tongue of the wagon, I called to my sister, handed to her the fruit, and then scrambled back to the ground and ran for my place at the head of the train and marched on until the head of Main Street was reached.

24This then was the old tithing office behind the high cobble walls with its half-round bastions and through a crude gateway on the west side of the block leading into the stock corrals of President Young, where most of the wagons of the train were driven and placed under the many straw-covered sheds that then occupied the place where the Deseret Gymnasium now stands. The cattle were soon freed from the yoke and seemed delighted with the straw and hay brought them.

24Across the way on Temple Square block, the foundations of the temple rose above the general level of the surrounding ground and seemed to be an object of interest to nearly all the emigrants, many of whom were permitted to go within the wall and view it. By and by there were numerous meetings in various groups of people, friends of the emigrants, parents, and sweethearts, and perhaps in some instances wives of the teamsters that had returned. There seemed to be an air of cheerfulness in all this meeting of people on the arrival of this large emigrant train of Saints.

24Mary and I seemed to be so little part of this excitement and joy, because nobody seemed to come for us. Mary remained concealed under the wagon cover, and I, lonesome and heartsick, sat upon the tongue of Captain Chipman's wagon, my chin in my hands and elbows upon my knees, thinking "Zion" was not so much after all, if this was all of it. The spirit of sadness, if it was not forlornness, settled upon me.

Presently, however, approaching from the west gate, I saw a woman in a red and white plaid shawl slowly moving among the hillocks of fertilizer that had been raked from the sheds and the yard. She seemed to be daintily picking her way, and there was something in the movement of her head as she looked to the right and to the left that seemed familiar to me. The woman was moving in my direction, and the closer she came the stronger the conviction grew upon me that there was my mother. I would have known her from the dainty cleanliness of everything about her.

25I stood until she came nearly parallel to where I sat; then sliding from the tongue of the wagon, I said, "Hey Mother," and she looked down upon my upturned face. Without moving she gazed upon me for some time and at last said, "Is this you, Harry? Where is Mary?" Of course Mary was in the wagon, and I led my mother to where she was hiding, and when mother and daughter met, there was a flood of tears on both sides. At last I joined them, making the trio of the united family. It seemed difficult for our mother to realize that we at last were her children after more than four years of separation, but once in a while, a smile would break through the tears and she seemed to be extremely happy. A neighbor of hers, Brother John K. Crosby, a New Englander, had driven her from Bountiful to the city to get us children, and it took but a short time to leave the remaining emigrant teams and people to find this wagon and make the start for home, Bountiful.

25There was one thing remembered in this reunion, and that was on my part. I felt that I had arrived, that I belonged to somebody, that somebody had an interest in me, and these were the thoughts that were in my mind as I sat in the wagon on the drive home to Bountiful.

26Harry later became known as B. H. Roberts, who became a president of the First Council of the Seventy at the age of thirty-one. He was elected to the United States Congress, and he became a prolific writer of theology and history. Elder Roberts married Sarah Louise Smith, Celia Louisa Dibble, and Margaret Curtis, and was the father of fifteen children. He died September 27, 1933, in Salt Lake City.

26Source: B. H. Roberts. The Autobiography of B. H. Roberts, edited by Gary James Bergera, 25-44. Salt Lake City: Signature, 1990. Note: B. H. Roberts used third person pronouns (he, him, his) in his account when referring to himself. Bergera has changed them to first person (I, me, my).
