Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

26Aurelia Read Spencer (Rogers)

26Born: October 4, 1834, Deep River, Middlesex, Connecticut

26Parents: Orson and Catherine Cannon Curtis Spencer

261848: Brigham Young Company

27Age at time of journey: 13

27Aurelia and five younger siblings crossed the plains without their parents. Their father was serving a mission in England at the time, editing the Millennial Star, a Mormon periodical. Their mother had died in the severe cold as the Saints were driven from Nauvoo, Illinois.

27We left Winter Quarters about the first of May, 1848, traveling in President Young's company.

27On this journey I met and became acquainted with Thomas Rogers, who afterwards became my husband. He drove a team for Andrew Cahoon, who was captain of our ten; the company was divided into tens and fifties.

27During the journey the company would stop once in a while for a few days to recruit their teams and give the women a chance to wash, iron, bake, etc.

27On one of these occasions, we camped on Looking-Glass Creek, Nebraska, which emptied into the Platte River about a mile below. The people had been counseled not to go far from camp; but either forgetting or not heeding the counsel, about a dozen girls, myself included, took it into our heads, one bright moonlight night, to go to the mouth of the creek and bathe in the river, thinking the distance would make us safe from interruption. The Platte River was very wide in places, and the water quite shallow, being interspersed with sand bars. The company forded it many times in the course of their travels.

27One elderly lady, namely Sister Mima Young, generally called Aunt Mima, went with us as a protector, or to stand guard while we should take our bath. A nice place was selected, and we were soon splashing around in the water as happy as could be.

28Presently one of the girls said, "Let us play baptize." Some of the rest consented and were soon ducked under the water, although I don't remember that any ceremony was used. We were soon interrupted in our sport, however, by some one exclaiming, "See! what is that? What is coming?" All looked in the direction pointed out, and sure enough something white and strange looking was coming, right towards us across the river, and only a short distance away. Then such a screaming and rushing for the shore were perhaps never witnessed before nor since, some of the girls almost falling down in the water from fright. I was like one paralyzed, could not speak or move for a few seconds, and was nearly the last one out of the water. But all gained the shore in safety; looking back we saw the object which had so frightened us go up the creek and disappear.

28Our conjectures were varied in regard to what it might have been; some thought it much larger than it seemed to others. But whatever it was, it floated towards us until we started for the shore, then turned and went up the creek. All agreed that it was a warning, and felt that we had done wrong in playing baptize.

28We wended our way back to the wagons quite sobered, reflecting and talking these things over as we went along; but the mystery of what we had seen was never solved.

29Aurelia Spencer married Thomas Rogers March 27, 1851, and they lived in Farmington, Utah. They became the parents of twelve children. It was Aurelia who first suggested the Church start an organization for children. Her idea was accepted by President John Taylor, and the Primary was organized. She became president of the first Primary, organized on August 25, 1878, in Farmington, Utah. In recognition of her role in founding the Primary, the children of the Church raised funds to publish her book Life Sketches in 1898. Aurelia died August 19, 1922, at the age of eighty-seven. She is buried in Salt Lake City, Utah.

29Source: Aurelia Spencer Rogers. Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, and History of Primary Work, 76-79. Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1898.
