Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

Other EmigrationHC29Ruth May (Fox)

Other EmigrationHC29Born: November 16, 1853, Westbury, Wiltshire, England

Other EmigrationHC29Parents: James and Mary Ann Harding May

Other EmigrationHC301867: Leonard G. Rice Company

Other EmigrationHC30Age at time of journey: 13

Other EmigrationHC30Whatever the reason, when the time came for our departure from England, I was in the seventh heaven. The lady who was to be my stepmother, and her daughter—who was about my own age—and myself left our home under cover of darkness to avoid the curiosity of the neighbors. Could anything be more thrilling?

Other EmigrationHC30After a walk of four or five miles under the stars, we boarded the train to Liverpool, England. Arriving there, some necessities had to be purchased. Then came the novelty of climbing into a great steamship. To stand on a floating city and gradually pull away from the wharf with hundreds of people waving their hats or handkerchiefs in a fond adieu and hearty "God-speed you" is an event never to be forgotten.

Other EmigrationHC30We had secured berths in the steerage, which meant that we must descend through a trap door to our quarters below the deck. The sleeping accommodations consisted of a large shelf or platform on either side of the vessel, which, by means of boards, could be divided into spaces just large enough to accommodate one person. If a family preferred to sleep closer together, the boards could be removed, thus giving more room and perhaps more comfort, if comfort could be thought of under such conditions.

Other EmigrationHC30As I remember, there was absolutely no privacy, no provision even to hang up a pair of hose for protection from the eyes of the curious. On the same level were great long tables where we sat to eat our meals, the usual menu being soup, rice, hardtack, and sour biscuits.

Other EmigrationHCIt happened that an old gentleman from Lancashire, England, and his wife occupied berths next to ours. For at least half an hour before the soup was served, he would entertain himself and annoy the rest of us by hammering his hardtack into little bits so that it would eventually absorb sufficient soup to make its passage down the esophagus more easily.

Other EmigrationHC31Near the end of our trip what's that we hear? Oh joy, "Land in sight!" Now for thrills! Everybody must see land and joyously watch the vessel going nearer and nearer to the shore. But things must be gathered up and packed. Trunks must be brought up from the hold. Good-byes must be spoken. Everybody is busy and excited, each vying with the other in seeing who shall leave the old ship first. At last we landed at Castle Garden, New York, and there we must stay until friends or relatives learn that the Louisiana is in port. It was late evening and quite dark save for the lamplight when through the crowd I heard my father say, "There she is. Bless her dear little face." We soon moved to Philadelphia and found employment. My wage was a dollar a week and board. Thus we began to save and prepare for the journey to the Valley.

Other EmigrationHC31In July, 1867, we started for North Platte, which was then the terminal of the railroad and the outfitting place for those who were going West. We had to change trains at Niagara Falls and to our delight had a few hours' stay near that awe-inspiring torrent, which is forever dashing over the brink to the foaming depths below.

Other EmigrationHC31One night we spent on a cattle boat sailing up the Missouri River. The cattle,judging from their bellowing, seemed not to enjoy our company any better than we enjoyed theirs.

Other EmigrationHC31When we arrived at North Platte, it so happened that a certain brother had a wagon and one yoke of cattle, so the bargain was made that Father join his cattle to this outfit and drive all the way for his share in the wagon. The owner of the outfit had a wife and seven children. Our little family consisted of five, as Father was bringing a little girl across the plains to join her relatives in Salt Lake City. So you see there were fourteen persons with all their worldly possessions in that one wagon. The owners of the wagon used it for a sleeping apartment, and my father bought a small tent, just large enough for the five of us to lie down in side by side, like sardines in a can.

Other EmigrationHC31Imagine if you can these would-be drivers, who had, perhaps, never seen a Texas steer before, go through the procedure for the first time of yoking their cattle. Truly no rodeo could match the scene. The men had to be instructed in this art, and some did not learn very quickly. The same was true of the use of firearms. Every man was supposed to have his own gun and ammunition, though he had never fired a shot in his life.

Other EmigrationHCWith everything in readiness, the command is given and our sixty wagons—fifty of them belonging to Scandinavian Saints—are on the way, and we could sing:

Other EmigrationHC32We've left the realms of Babylon and crossed the mighty seas; We've left the good old ship where we walked about at ease. And now's the time for starting boys, We'll jog on if you please. So gee up; my lads. Gee whoa! Push on my lads, Heigh Ho! For there's none can lead a life like we Merry Mormons do.

Other EmigrationHC32Other than one birth and an accidental death by a bullet when men were shooting sage hens, our journey across the plains seems to have been rather lacking in perilous adventure but was always interesting.

Other EmigrationHC32We camped where there were trees and water. I do not remember the name of the place, but I do remember this incident: It was quite late at night when one of the brethren thought he could hear someone stealthily moving among the bushes. You must know that everyone was a little watchful of Indians. So this brother took out his pistol and three times he gave the warning, "Speak or I'll shoot! Speak or I'll shoot! Speak or I'll shoot!" and then off went the gun. This, however, caused some merriment as it was discovered later that it was merely the wind playing with the leaves.

Other EmigrationHC32The Platte is a very winding river, so we crossed it many times without much inconvenience as the Scandinavian brothers would take us girls on their backs and carry us cross the stream.

Other EmigrationHCOne night we pitched our tent in this sand, when lo the wind blew and the rain descended and beat upon that tent, and great was the fall thereof. Mother hurried to the wagon of a friend, and we girls held up the tent while father tried to drive in the pins, which was an almost hopeless task. However, as we trudged along the next day we sang lustily:

Other EmigrationHC33We may get wet a little when we have a shower of rain, The heat may skin our noses, but they'll soon get well again. And when we think of Zion's land, we'll forget the wet and pain So, Gee up! My lads. Gee whoa! Push on my lads, Heigh Ho! There's none can lead a life like we Merry Mormons do.

Other EmigrationHC33Chimney Rock, in Nebraska, and Independence Rock, in Wyoming, had both contributed to our recreational activity, but no one but those who have walked over prairies and deserts for days, where water is so scarce that the creeks were reduced to little puddles of alkali water, can imagine the beauty and glory of a river! On the Sweetwater we rested, washed our clothing, went in bathing, and had a real jollification.

Other EmigrationHC33On one of these few and far between occasions, father being very tired, having walked every step of the way, after he had unyoked his cattle, threw himself on the ground to rest, when one of the brethren came along and asked, "Well, Brother May, how are you today?" Father answered quickly, "Oh! There isn't much the matter—I have a sick wife, two sore heels, and two dummies, that's all." I was one of the dummies.

Other EmigrationHC33At Echo Canyon we were joined by a couple of boys whose home was in Goshen. These lads offered to ride us girls through this rugged freak of nature, so lickety split we came down the narrow defile, expecting every minute to be thrown from the rickety old light wagon and killed. This afforded great sport for the boys, who knew no fear of the canyon and saw no dangers, but to emigrants who had never before seen such a sight, it was breath-taking, to say the least.

Other EmigrationHC33Our last pull was through Parley's Canyon and up to the top of the hill. This was accomplished at twilight, and here we got our first glimpse of the little city of Salt Lake.

Other EmigrationHC33I have to admit some disappointment as I exclaimed: "Oh, have we come all this way for that?" We continued on to the campground that night. Next morning was the Sabbath.

Other EmigrationHCThe sky was blue and radiant, the valley fair, and the grand old mountains proudly guarded the home of the prophets. The family took a bath in a wash basin, put on our best clothes, and went to the tabernacle services. My dreams came true, and all was well in Zion.

Other EmigrationHC35Ruth May married Jesse Williams Fox on May 8, 1873, when she was nineteen. They became the parents of twelve children. She served as General President of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association (YWMIA) from 1929 to 1937. Ruth May Fox was active in many political and civic organizations, including the Utah Woman Suffrage Association, and she helped draft the suffrage clause of the Utah Constitution. She died on April 12, 1958, in Salt Lake City at the age of 104.

Other EmigrationHC35Source: Ruth May Fox. "From England to Salt Lake Valley in 1867." The Improvement Era 38, no. 7 (July 1935): 406-9, 450.
