Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

37Part Three

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCHandcarts

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC"No person can describe it, nor could it be comprehended or understood by any human living in this life, but those who were called to pass through it."

l Journal of Jens Neilson

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC41member, James G. Willie Handcart Company By 1856, the expense of outfitting several thousand immigrants each year with covered wagons and livestock was becoming too great for the pioneers and for the Church. Leaders decided to furnish immigrants with small two-wheeled carts, close in size to those used by apple peddlers in Eastern cities, which could be pulled and pushed by hand to the Salt Lake Valley.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC41Although the Latter-day Saints did not invent this method of crossing the plains (some gold-rushers had used wheelbarrows and handcarts as early as 1850), their development of this method became the most remarkable travel experiment in the settlement of the American frontier.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC41The vehicle required no time-consuming harnessing and no concern for maintenance of livestock. Each cart carried provisions and a few personal effects for four or five people. Wagons accompanying the train transported heavier belongings, one wagon for each twenty handcarts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC41The idea seemed so practical that nineteen hundred people signed up for the handcart immigration in 1856, traveling by train from the ports of Boston and New York City to Iowa City, Iowa, where the handcarts were waiting. Later, the railroad would go as far west as the Missouri River, making it a new departure point. There, immigrants were then organized into companies of one hundred carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC43The handcart era lasted only five years, bringing about three thousand Saints to the Valley. Out of the ten handcart companies that were organized, eight arrived safely and with little difficulty. Two companies in 1856, however, under the leadership of James G. Willie and Edward Martin, started too late and suffered terrible hardships in early winter storms in Wyoming. Rescue teams were sent out from Salt Lake City, but they did not arrive in time to prevent many deaths from exposure and malnutrition. Of the approximately one thousand immigrants in these two companies, more than two hundred died.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC43Small though their total numbers were, the three thousand handcart pioneers carved a monument of legendary proportions in the minds and hearts of the entire Mormon people.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC43Peter Howard McBride

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC43Born: May 3, 1850, Rothsay, Isle of Butte, Scotland

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC43Parents: Robert and Margaret Ann Howard McBride

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC431856: Edward Martin Handcart Company

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC44Age at time of journey: 6

44In above photograph, Peter McBride with wife, Ruth, and their baby, Robert Franklin.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC44In the year 1856 my parents decided to emigrate to America, as they had heard that it was a wonderful place to live. They sold their good comfortable home and in May of that year embarked on the good ship Horizon. After leaving our home in Southport, Scotland, we visited with my mother's people and were not treated very kindly by them. My grandfather said, "I never want to see you again. If you should write, your letters will be burned before we read them. I hope you will all be swallowed up in the ocean before you land on that American shore. You bring disgrace to the family name by joining such a cursed church."

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC44The McBride family went by train to Liverpool, England, and then crossed the ocean. They traveled by train to Iowa City, Iowa, where they were assigned handcarts with which to cross the Great Plains.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC44We had to burn buffalo chips for wood, not a tree in sight, no wood to be found anywhere. Just dry earth and rivers. We children and old folks would start early so we wouldn't be too far behind at night. A great many handcarts broke down, oxen strayed away, which made traveling rather slow. Quite an undertaking to get nearly one thousand persons who had never had any camping experience to travel, eat, and cook over campfires. It took much patience for the captain to get them used to settling down at night and to get started in the morning.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCWe saw a great many buffalo as we traveled up the Platte River. The people were forbidden to kill them, as it made the Indians angry. So they hired the Indians to kill what they needed to eat. An Indian sold a man a whole buffalo for five cents' worth of tobacco. Both parties were satisfied. Sometimes a herd of fifty thousand buffalo would cross the plains, and one time our company met three thousand Sioux Indians, all warriors all in war paint. Our people were much frightened, fear held the whole camp in its grip as they all expected to be annihilated. But their fears were groundless. They told our interpreters they were going to fight the Pawnee tribes. They wouldn't hurt us because we were mostly squaws and papooses. It would be cowardly to fight us, so they gave us the road.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC45Much hunger and cold were experienced by these weary handcart travelers; all they had to eat was a little flour, which was cut to 3/4 pound to a person. Many aged people died; even the young people could not stand the hardships. My baby sister and I were even cut to less flour, and we were really hungry. Our teams gave out and died, and we were glad to eat the meat. I remember some men passed us one day and stopped to talk. They gave my baby sister some cookies. She carried them in her little pocket, and I was always with her and would tease for a bite. She would give me a taste once in a while, and it was so good. No cake I ever tasted since was ever so good. The exposure to cold rain, snow, and ice, pushing carts all day, the scarcity of food and wood caused many strong men to perish.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC45A man by the name of Cyrus Wheelock, just returning from a mission to the Eastern States, was riding a horse. He carried some of the children across the river, even helped pull some of the handcarts by a rope fastened to his saddle. One time he had three little boys on his horse, one in front and two behind him. I was the last boy on that side of the river and tried to wade across. He told me to climb up behind the last boy behind his saddle, which I did. We crossed the river all right, then the horse leaped up the steep bank, and I slid off in the shallow water. I held on to the horse's tail and came out all right.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC45That night the wind was blowing very cold, and the carts were sheltered behind a big bluff, but the snow drifted in and covered our tent. My father died that night. He had worked hard all day pushing and pulling handcarts through the icy waters of that dangerous river, helping many people with all their belongings to reach the other side.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC45When Peter saw them bury his father, he ran out and started crying. Someone stopped him and tried to console him about his father's death. He cried more. He walked to the place where they had buried him and said, "My father had my fish hooks in his pocket and I want them."

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCMy mother was sick all the way over, and my sister Jenetta had the worry of us children. She carried water from the river to do the cooking. Her shoes gave out, and she walked through the snow barefoot, actually leaving bloody tracks in the snow. Father was a good singer. He had charge of the singing in our company, and the night he died he sang a song, the first verse that reads "O Zion, when I think of you, I long for pinions like a dove, And mourn to think I should be so distant from the land I love."

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC46We camped at the Sweetwater River. A meeting was held. It was decided that we could go no further, the snow so deep and no food. We were doomed to starvation. They gave me a bone of an ox that had died. I cut off the skin and put the bone in the fire to roast. And when it was done some big boys came and ran away with it. Then I took the skin and boiled it, drank the soup, and ate the skin, and it was a good supper.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC46The next day we had nothing to eat but some bark from trees. Later we had a terrible cold spell; the wind drifted so much I knew I would die. The wind blew the tent down. They all crawled out but me. The snow fell on it. I went to sleep and slept warm all night. In the morning I heard someone say, "How many are dead in this tent?" My sister said, "Well, my little brother must be frozen to death in that tent." So they jerked the tent loose, sent it scurrying over the snow. My hair was frozen to the tent. I picked myself up and came out quite alive, to their surprise.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC46That day we got word that some teams were coming to meet us from the Valley. Three teams came that night. No one but a person having gone through what we had suffered can imagine what a happy moment it was for this "belated handcart company." Men, women, and children knelt down and thanked the Almighty God for our delivery from certain death. It put new life into all the Saints. The next day several more teams arrived, and there was room for all to ride.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCWe finally arrived in Salt Lake City, November 30, 1856. Our teamster took us to his sister's place, where we were kindly treated. The next day we drove as far as Farmington, Utah, and we stopped at another place that night, and, oh, the difference in treatment. After the grown folks were through eating, there wasn't any food left, and we children were put to bed hungry. Yes, we were half starved. My little sister Maggie and me cried ourselves to sleep. All my life I have worried for fear my children might get as hungry as I was, but thank goodness they have never wanted for food.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC47Peter Howard McBride's family settled in Ogden City, and later Eden, Weber County, Utah. He married Ruth Burns in 1874, and they became the parents of fourteen children. He also married Laura Lewis in 1882, and they had eight children. Peter was very musically talented—he sang, composed humorous songs, and played numerous instruments. He was called by President Brigham Young to "help promote music and singing" in their area. This "mission" lasted throughout his lifetime. Peter and his family lived the United Order along the Little Colorado River in Arizona. They later moved to Gila Valley, in Arizona, where they had a 160-acre farm. Peter taught vocal classes at the St. Joseph Academy in Thatcher and served in the bishopric for twenty years. He died April 8, 1932, in Glenbar, Graham County, Arizona.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC48Sources: Peter Howard McBride. Life Sketch, typescript. In possession of Ella Cochran Madsen, Placerville, California. Original writings in private possession of descendants.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC48See also Our Pioneer Heritage, compiled by Kate B. Carter, 13:359-63. 20 vols. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioners, 1970.
