Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC48Mary Ann Stucki (Hafen)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC48Born: May 5, 1854, Biglen, Bern, Switzerland

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC48Parents: Samuel and Magdalena Stettler Stucki

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC491860: Oscar O. Stoddard Handcart Company

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC49Age at time of journey: 6

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC49On the shore of the North Sea in Holland, we boarded a small ship. We went down to a large room under the deck. The floor was covered with a thick layer of straw, which came in handy as the sea was very rough. It tossed us about until nearly everyone was sick. I remember Mother sitting on the floor with her back against the wall, holding the baby and trying to brace herself.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC49After a day and a night's travel we landed at Liverpool, England, or thereabouts. As we walked toward the big sailing ship awaiting us, we were warned by the Mormon elders not to let any stranger carry our bags or children as some had been stolen and sold. I remember how frightened I was when a lady came to my mother and offered to help with her baby. Here we were joined by a large company of emigrants from many countries. There must have been several hundred. As we went on board, we were each vaccinated.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC49When we set sail, Uncle John Stucki had to stay behind, as he was sick with smallpox. For weeks we were on the Atlantic Ocean. As we children played around, sometimes we stood and watched the cooks kill chickens by wringing their necks. This seemed horrible to me. But afterwards I remember how good the chicken bones tasted that we picked up after the sailors had thrown them away. I remember with pleasure the evening meetings where we enjoyed the sermons of the elders and listened to the Mormon hymns, which I loved even as a child.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC49One afternoon while we were playing on the deck, one of the sailors pointed out a mermaid. I looked but could see only what seemed to be a lady's head above the water. The sailors told how mermaids would come up to comb their hair and look into a mirror. They said it was a sure sign of storm.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCSure enough there arose a great storm next day. The waves came up like mountains and broke over the deck. We were all ordered under deck, and the water splashed on us as we went down the steps. All night the storm raged. Our ship tossed about like a barrel on a wild sea. Two large beams or masts broke off, and we were driven many miles back.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC50We were so frightened that we did not go to bed but stayed in a group with the elders praying for safety. Though the captain cried out, "We are lost!" we did not give up hope. We had been promised a safe voyage. The next morning the sun came up bright and clear. We all gave thanks to God for our deliverance. The ship was repaired, and we had pleasant sailing the rest of the way.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC50At last we saw the lights of New York City. How the people did shout and toss their hats in the air for joy! I remember best my first meal on shore, because we were served with good light bread and sweet milk. After long weeks of zwieback, or hard tack, and dried pea soup, this was a happy change.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC50On our trip to the Missouri River by train, I remember that Brother Wittwer had an accordion and harmonica to help pass the time.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC50When we reached Florence, Nebraska, near present-day Omaha, we were forced to stop for a while because there were not teams enough to take us across the plains to Salt Lake City. The men set to work making handcarts, and my father, being a carpenter, helped to make thirty-three of them. Ours was a small two-wheeled vehicle with two shafts and a cover on top. The carts were very much like those the street sweepers use in the cities today, except that ours was made entirely of wood, without even an iron rim.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC50When we came to load up our belongings, we found that we had more than we could take. Mother was forced to leave behind her feather bed, the bolt of linen, two large trunks full of clothes, and some other valuable things which we needed so badly later. Father could take only his most necessary tools.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51Our company was organized with Oscar O. Stoddard as captain. It contained 126 persons, with twenty-two handcarts and three provision wagons drawn by oxen. We set out from Florence, Nebraska, on July 6, 1860, for our thousand-mile trip. There were six to our cart. Father and Mother pulled it; Rosie (two years old) and Christian (six months old) rode; John (nine) and I (six) walked. Sometimes, when it was downhill, they let me ride too.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51The first night out the mosquitoes gave us a hearty welcome. Father had bought a cow to take along, so we could have milk on the way. At first he tied her to the back of the cart, but she would sometimes hang back, so he thought he would make a harness and have her pull the cart while he led her. By this time Mother's feet were so swollen that she could not wear shoes, but had to wrap her feet with cloth. Father thought that by having the cow pull the cart, Mother might ride. This worked well for some time.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51One day a group of Indians came riding up on horses. Their jingling trinkets, dragging poles, and strange appearance frightened the cow and sent her chasing off with the cart and the small children. We were afraid that the children might be killed, but the cow fell into a deep gully, and the cart turned upside down. Although the children were under the trunk and bedding, they were unhurt. But after that, Father did not hitch the cow to the cart again. He let three Danish boys take her to hitch to their cart. Then the Danish boys, each in turn, would help Father pull our cart.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51After about three weeks my mother's feet became better so she could wear her shoes again. She would get so discouraged and down-hearted; but father never lost courage. He would always cheer her up by telling her that we were going to Zion, that the Lord would take care of us, and that better times were coming.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51Even when it rained, the company did not stop traveling. A cover on the handcart shielded the two younger children. The rest of us found it more comfortable moving than standing still in the drizzle. In fording streams the men often carried the children and weaker women across on their backs. The company stopped over on Sundays for rest, and meetings were held for spiritual comfort and guidance. At night, when the handcarts were drawn up in a circle and the fires were lighted, the camp looked quite happy. Singing, music, and speeches by the leaders cheered everyone. I remember that we stopped one night at an old Indian campground. There were many bright-colored beads in the ant hills.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC51At times we met or were passed by the overland stagecoach with its passengers and mailbags and drawn by four fine horses. When the Pony Express dashed past, it seemed almost like the wind racing over the prairie.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCAt last, when we reached the top of Emigration Canyon, overlooking Salt Lake, on that September day, 1860, the whole company stopped to look down through the valley. Some yelled and tossed their hats in the air. A shout of joy arose at the thought that our long trip was over, that we had at last reached Zion, the place of rest. We all gave thanks to God for helping us safely over the plains and mountains to our destination.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC53In 1861, Mary Ann Stucki settled with her parents and other Swiss Saints in Santa Clara, in Southern Utah. She married Johannes Reber, who died shortly after their marriage. In 1873, she married John George Hafen, the bishop of the Santa Clara Ward, 1884-1912. The couple had eight children. Because of tensions in Utah concerning plural marriage (Mary Ann's husband had other wives), she reared her family in Bunkerville, Nevada. She and her children were among the first settlers there. She was very resourceful, bringing up her children with very little means. She died January 16, 1946, in St. George, Washington County, Utah.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC53Source: Mary Ann Hafen. Recollections of a Handcart Pioneer of 1860: With Some Account of Frontier Life in Utah and Nevada, 18-26. Denver: privately printed, 1938.
