Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60Elizabeth White (Stewart)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60Born: February 22, 1838, Bloomsbury Square, London, England

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60Parents: William and Mary Ann Syer White

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC601856: John A. Hunt Company (This wagon train traveled alongside the Martin handcart company.)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60Age at time of journey: 18

61In the above photograph, Elizabeth White Stewart is seated on her horse, Old Birch.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC61On May 22, 1856, Elizabeth left London with her mother, brother Barnard, and sister Eliza. They sailed from Liverpool to the Boston Harbor and then traveled by train twelve hundred miles to Iowa City, Iowa.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC61When we completed our journey to Iowa City, we were informed that we would have to walk four miles to our camping ground. All felt delighted to have the privilege of a pleasant walk. We all started, about five hundred of us, with our bedding. We had not gone far before it began to thunder and lightning, and the rain poured. The roads became very muddy and slippery. The day was far advanced, and it was late in the evening before we arrived at the camp. We all got very wet. The boys soon got our tent up, so we were fixed for the night, although very wet. We camped there until September.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC61We had about forty wagons in our company, led by Captain John Hunt. We got along real well, had no trouble with Indians, but when we were near Fort Laramie, Wyoming, a herd of buffalos came along as we were traveling and caused our cattle to stampede, resulting in the death of Mrs. Walters. She was driving the team in front of ours. She was knocked down and trampled upon by the oxen. She never spoke, but died in a few minutes, leaving a young baby. This sad affair cast a gloom over our camp. She was sewed in a blanket and buried on the wayside.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe weather was fair, and we got along real well until we were near the Platte River. It was getting very cold by this time. We finally reached the last crossing of the Platte River. We were then about five hundred miles from Salt Lake. Our company camped on the east side, and the handcart company passed over that night. All our able-bodied men turned out to help them carry women and children over the river. Some of our men went through the river seventy-five times. The snow fell six inches during that night; there were thirteen deaths during the night. They were so worn out. This was on the twentieth of October.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC62By the time we reached Devil's Gate, in Wyoming, we were nearly out of provisions. Our dear mother said she had never seen her dear family want for bread, but said the Lord would provide. About midnight that night all the camp had retired, and we were awakened with a noise and thought it was the yelling of Indians. We got up expecting they were upon us, but to our great surprise the noise was caused by the teamsters of a relief team, and some of the camp shouted for joy. They were loaded with all kinds of provisions: flour, bread, butter, meat of all kinds, but all frozen so hard. Everything was so good. The bread was like cake, so sweet and nice. I remember we had to cut everything with the hatchet, but oh how thankful we all were that the Lord had answered our prayers and saved us all from starvation. Through the timely action of President Brigham Young in organizing this company, we were saved. The loaded wagon that came to our camp was from Draper, Utah. George Clawson and Gurnsey Brown were the teamsters.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC62When we got to the foot of the big mountain, the snow was so deep I had to put men's boots on. The teamsters were tall, and so was Esther Brown, and she could step in their tracks, but I could not in hers, and I had to make my own road up both mountains, frequently falling down. The snow was so deep and drifted, but they told us when we got to the top we would see Salt Lake City. We were so thankful and delighted that it seemed to renew our strength and energy. It was the hardest part of my journey, but the thought of being nearly at our journey's end after six months traveling and camping was cheering.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC62When we got to the top of the big mountains, the men folks took off their hats, and we waved our handkerchiefs. They then pointed out Salt Lake City, and I could not believe it was, for it looked to me like a patch of sagebrush covered with snow. I could not believe it until we got nearly to it. We arrived in Salt Lake City just at sundown on the thirtieth day of November 1856.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC63Elizabeth White married Isaac Mitton Stewart in 1857, and they became the parents of eleven children. They lived in Draper, Utah, where her husband was a well-known educator and a bishop. While rearing her family, Elizabeth milked cows, made all their butter and soap, and wove the cloth from which she sewed her children's clothing. In her later years, Elizabeth said, "I have knitted for my great-grandchildren over sixty pairs of stockings. I am seventy-eight years old and still doing my own work." Elizabeth died May 7, 1917, in Salt Lake City.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC63Source: "Autobiography of Elizabeth White Stewart," typescript. In Ancestors of Isaac Mitton Stewart and Elizabeth White, compiled by Mary Ellen B. Workman. Privately printed, 1978.
