Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

80Part Five

Suffer the Children

"He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young."

83l Isaiah 40:11 Between 1847 and the coming of the railroad to Ogden in 1869, several hundred souls died along the Mormon Trail, from exhaustion, exposure, disease, and lack of food. Very few were killed by Indians. Travelers along the trail were subdued as they passed burial mounds along the way, silent witnesses of the suffering and death of some of those ahead of them. By the banks of streams, on grassy knolls, in the sands, beneath groves of trees, or among piles of rock, the graves were dug.

85Many of those who lost their lives were children and the elderly, those least able to fight off the effects of disease and the harsh elements. Their deaths were every bit as tragic as those young mothers and fathers who succumbed to the dangers and illnesses associated with the American frontier. They left behind grieving children, including some too young to understand a loss that would change their lives forever.

85If narrow escapes are the raw material of high adventure, these stories of those who sacrificed their lives or suffered because of the deaths of their loved ones are the stuff of tragic and inspiring heroism.

85Peter Weston Maughan, Story Told by His Mother

85Peter Weston Maughan Born: May 20, 1847, New Diggins, Lafayette County, Wisconsin

85Parents: Peter and Mary Ann Weston Maughan

851850: Warren Foote Company

86Age at time of journey: 3

86Above portrait is of Peter's mother, Mary Ann Weston Maughan. The following incident, as told by Peter's mother, took place just west of Fort Kearney, Nebraska:

86About noon as we were traveling along on a good plain road, my little Peter, about three years old, was sitting in the front of the wagon between his brother Charles and his sister Mary Ann. They were looking at a cow that had lost one horn. He leaned forward, lost his balance, and fell before the wheels. The first passed over him, and he tried to escape the other one. But alas, the wagon stopped just as the hind wheel stood on his dear little back. The brethren from behind ran up and lifted the wheel and took him from under it. He was bruised internally so that it was impossible for him to live long.

86We did all that was possible for him, but no earthly power could save him. He did not suffer much pain. The people left their wagons and gathered around mine, and all wept for the dear little boy that we knew must soon leave us. I had talked to him many times to be careful and not fall out of the wagon, or he might be hurt very bad.

86I did not know that his father had fainted, for the brethren stood to hide him from my sight. On my asking for him, they said he would come soon. As soon as he was able, he came to the wagon, covered with dust. But his little boy could not speak to him. He opened his eyes and looked so lovingly at us, then gently closed them and passed peacefully away and left us weeping around his dear little bruised body.

86Then loving hands tenderly dressed him in a suit of his own white linen clothes. He looked so lovely. I emptied a dry goods box, and Brother Wood made him a nice coffin; and it even was a mournful satisfaction, for we had seen our brothers and sisters bury their dear ones without a coffin to lay them in.

86We buried him on a little hill on the north side of the road. The grave was consecrated, and then they laid him to rest. Someone had made a nice headboard with his name printed on, also his age and date of death. This was all we could do, and many prayers were offered to our Heavenly Father that he might rest in peace and not be disturbed. We turned away in sorrow and grief.

A few days after, we heard that his grave had not been touched, but another little one made beside it, and afterwards some more were buried by them. This was a great satisfaction to us, to know that he remained as we left him.

87Peter Weston Maughan died July 12, 1850. His parents were among the first settlers in Wellsville, Cache County, Utah. Weston, Idaho, was named in honor of his mother.

88Sources: Mary Ann Weston Maughan. Autobiography, typescript. Special Collections, Merrill Library, Utah State University, Logan, Utah.

88See also Our Pioneer Heritage, 2:376-77.
