Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

96Susan Noble (Grant)

96Born: July 25, 1832, Sheldon, Genessee, New York

96Parents: Ezekial and Theodocia Bates Noble

961847: George B. Wallace Company

96Age at time of journey: 15

97In the above photograph, Susan Noble Grant is seated at center.

97Susan begins her reminiscence by telling of traveling alongside Captain Jedediah M. Grant's family through central Wyoming. After crossing the North Platte River, they moved southwest to the Sweetwater River, a three-day journey through very unpleasant country. The soil contained much alkali, a salty chemical, which made vegetation sparse and the water nasty and poisonous to drink.

97My, how we boys and girls worked day after day to keep our cows and sheep from drinking too large a dose at one time of this brackish water. The weather was so hot, though, and the animals increased in their thirst by the salty country that, in spite of our poundings and pleadings, they would gorge themselves upon the morbific, soap-bubbly stuff and then almost immediately begin being sick. An epidemic of cholera had broken out, spreading first among the animals and then attacking the people, especially the children. As the days passed and the conditions grew no better, the malady increased in severity. I remember one afternoon when our best milk cow stretched out and died. This was the first of our animals to go. All through camp oxen, horses, sheep, pigs, and even the chickens were affected alike. As the human sick list grew, greater loads were added to the weary cattle. Oh, it was just terrible! The vomiting and purging and the knifelike cramps that sapped the vitality in just a few hours, bringing some of the strongest to the wagons and keeping them there for days and finally leaving them pale and weak.

But hope was before us. The Sweetwater River, they declared, was just a day or so ahead. This was a clear, sparkling river running eastward from the Rocky Mountains. As our wagon was close to Captain Jedediah Grant's, I remember how worried he was and how he prayed at our evening meetings that the animals and people would be spared to reach our new home in the mountains. But I guess he didn't pray much harder than some of the women folk, for they had charge of a number of the outfits, hitching and unhitching the oxen and waiting on the sick as well. You see, their husbands and oldest sons, having left the year before with the Mormon Battalion, were now fighting to help bring into the Union the land toward which we were headed. Brigham Young was so sure that all the country westward would belong to the United States that he kept Jedediah Grant from joining Brigham Young's first company by sending him east on important business. He instructed him to buy material for a huge Stars and Stripes flag that should wave over our new homes toward the Pacific. This cloth was later made into a mammoth flag that waved for years over Salt Lake City.

98As I was saying, we were close to Captain Grant. His wife, Caroline, was exceptionally kind to me, inviting me often to fix our supper with her. Then in the evening, I helped tend Sister Grant's two little girls, Caroline (whom we called "Caddie"), age two years, and Margaret, age six months. I was regularly charmed with Brother Grant's talks, many of which were from his experiences with the Prophet Joseph. At times, as he spoke, he seemed to be so filled with the inspiration of heaven, that all present thrilled with emotions of testimony. We young people often had the chance to express our own feelings in these little meetings around the prairie campfires.

98Oh, children, you do not know how happy we were, even during these severe days of hardest trials! As young as I was, I knew the gospel had been restored. More than once I had heard Joseph Smith declare that our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus, the resurrected Savior, had come and talked with him. To this day this testimony has never left me. And when I am gone, I want you to tell this to your children and grandchildren.

98In spite of our faith and prayers, while we were still in the "salertus country," several children died. Think of holding a little short service, moving forward and leaving the fresh mound in the dim distance. Mothers' hearts were almost broken at such trials.

98Sorrow now visited our captain's wagon. Sister Grant had not been very well for several days, and little Margaret got the cholera. And by sundown she was seized with violent spasms. I was so worried, I stayed close by their wagon while I took care of Caddie, the older girl. As night came on, Margaret grew worse. About midnight I was sent to my bed, but later as I looked out, I could still see the parents, accompanied by Sisters Eliza R. Snow and Rebecca W. Riter and Brother and Sister Noble, working with the child by the fire on the sheltered side of their wagon.

The hot weather had brought on a thunderstorm, the first for days. A terrible wind was springing up from the west, driving the loose clay dust before it. In just a few minutes the downpour was upon us. The fires sizzled briefly and were forced out; everyone hurried for shelter. The gale, resembling a hurricane, roared through the country with terrific speed, bringing sheetlike columns of rain in alarming force against the wagon. Several tents were toppled over and almost blown away, while the drenched occupants in their night clothing raced to safer abodes. The storm seemed to be coming from the mountains. After a little it slackened, yet it kept up most of the night. Worried but weary, I finally went off to sleep.

99The next morning when I awoke, the sun was shining brightly on my wagon cover. Margaret flashed immediately into my mind. I quickly sat up. No one else had been to bed in our wagon. I was ashamed that I had gone to sleep. Outside I could hear low voices, and I learned that we were to move on to the Sweetwater River before making breakfast. Just then, from the wagon next to ours, I heard little Caddie calling, half lonesomelike, for her mother. I was only half dressed but I was soon ready, and scrambling out, stood for a moment looking about from the wagon tongue. One quick glance and I read part of the sorrow the night had left behind. Over on the side of a rolling clay hill about a stone's throw away, and half surrounded by people, principally women, was a new little mound. Nearer me, the men were busy in the slippery clay, hitching up the cattle for moving. Climbing quickly into Sister Grant's wagon, I threw myself by the side of Caddie, sobbing as only a heartbroken girl can. After a little I heard the folks returning. Then, as I waited, I thought of that cold burial, and I knew there had been no material for a box of any sort—oh, it was terrible!

99Brother Grant's animals were now hitched to his wagon. I then heard Brother Riter suggest quietly, "Brother Grant, Sister Riter will ride with Caroline and Caddie this morning. Caroline is not well and must be relieved from all care and further worry." As I softly climbed from the wagon, Brother and Sister Grant saw me. Sister Grant exclaimed, "Oh, Susan!" and throwing her arms around me, she gave expression to her feelings, weeping as if her heart would break.

That morning as we moved forward, the trail proved heavy and slippery. Every gully was chockfull of mud and debris, forced there by the storm of the night before. The air that morning, though, was cool and invigorating. Such a wonderful change naturally revived our spirits. By noon we were on the Sweetwater River. The Badlands, like a departing nightmare, lay grim in the distance behind us. A much-needed rest, with plenty of good feed for the animals and a river of clear, fresh water for all, revived the sick and again set us thinking of the mountains.

100About noon (September 8), like messengers from another world, three men came riding into camp from the West, members of the Quorum of the Twelve, with Brigham Young at the head. Following them were their well-equipped outfits. They had found us a home by the inland sea, they declared, and were now on their way back to Winter Quarters, Nebraska, to lead out in the general movement in the early spring, wherein thousands of people would make their way westward. You should have seen the meeting of Jedediah Grant and Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball; why, they just hugged each other like youngsters; Heber and Jedediah were not counselors to Brigham then, but they were later. You see, Brigham was not sustained as President of the Church until he arrived back in Winter Quarters.

100The trail from here to South Pass, a hundred miles or more, was all upgrade, but after this splendid rest we moved forward rapidly. Sister Grant was so improved that she walked a little each day. Most of the other sick were rapidly gaining in strength. We had heard so much of South Pass that we thought, of course, a dangerous and difficult climb was before us. One can hardly imagine our surprised feeling when we found the Continental Divide a long, broad, easy upland valley with splendid trails. It was hardly believable until we saw the waters of the Sandy [evidently a small stream] running westward toward Green River.

100As our hopes were now flying high, many a teamster shouted, including the women. All felt they had a right to be happy, looking forward and not backward. As our wagons rolled easily along, all joined in singing many a trail song. I'll sing you two or three, but of course I can't make them thrill you as they did us in those days:

100Cheer up, brothers, as we go over the mountains westward ho, Where herds of deer and buffalo furnish the fare. We'll stay on the farm and we'll suffer no loss, For the stone that keeps rolling will gather no moss. Oh, wife, let us go; oh, don't let us wait; I long to be there, and I long to be great; While you, some fair lady, and who knows but I May be some rich governor long 'fore I die.

Our soaring spirits were soon to return, however, and hug the ground in silence, for joys seem to ebb and flow with sorrows ever present. In just a few days, "mountain fever" had confined a great number of people to their wagons. It was with difficulty that the sick could ride at all, for the roads became but trails and were rough and difficult.

101Sister Grant, full of faith and hopeful determination, fought off the first signs of the mountain fever, but as she was weakened from the effects of cholera and deep sorrow, back it came with alarming consequences. It was with difficulty now that we could travel at all.

101As Sister Grant's condition became rather critical Saturday, she and her bed were gently transferred to a tent that was set up nearby. Sunday brought a higher fever and complete delirium. For the first Sunday on our long journey there was no singing, preaching, or music heard in camp. These were replaced by fasting and prayer for Caroline's recovery. As Brother Grant was a very sympathetic man, this grief, added to the worry and sorrows of the past, was almost more than he could bear. Brother Grant often took Caddie from me, hugging and kissing her while the tears ran down his face.

102During the evening of Sunday, as I sat near the fire at the tent door with little Caddie on my lap, I watched carefully the language expressed in the eyes of the attendants. Later on, when the child went to sleep, I was quietly taking her toward my wagon to tuck her away from the cool mountain air when Sister Snow caught up to me, and as she handed me a shawl, she exclaimed a little anxiously, "No, don't take her away." Not until then did it really dawn upon me that there seemed to be no hope. Wrapping the shawl about me and the sleeping child, I sat waiting in silence. About midnight Sister Grant rallied a little and whispered, "Susan—Caddie." I sprang up so quickly when I was called that I woke the little girl, who opened her big eyes and stared about on every side. In a moment we were both by the bed, while Caddie kissed her mama and tried to huddle into the covers. Sister Grant looked at us knowingly; then as she contently closed her eyes again and seemed to be sinking, I heard her whisper to Jedediah, "All is well! All is well! Please take me to the Valley, Jeddy. Get baby Margaret—bring her to me!" Brother Grant answered tenderly as he sobbed with sorrow, "Yes, yes, Caroline. I'll do my best. I'll do my best."

102During the night the sisters prepared the body of Sister Grant in the very best manner possible, and the brethren made a box from one of the top beds of the wagon. And with the first dawn of daylight we were hurrying toward the Salt Lake Valley, which was reached three days later on the evening of July 29th. Here the whole group was thrown into intense sorrow, as Sister Grant had been with the Church almost from the beginning. The services were held that evening, and early the next morning the first white woman to be buried in the Salt Lake Valley was quietly laid to rest.

102Susan Noble's birth parents were Charles Fairchild and Eunice Noble, but she was adopted and reared by her maternal grandparents, Ezekial and Theodocia Noble. Susan later became the wife of Captain Jedediah Grant, marrying him February 11, 1849. They became the parents of two children, a boy and a girl. They adopted a boy, Lewis McKeachie, whose parents had died crossing the Great Plains, and the Grants also raised a girl, Bertha Zahler, from Switzerland. Bertha's parents sent her to Utah in care of LDS missionaries, and she was taken into the Grant household. Susan lovingly reared "Caddie," daughter of Jedediah and his deceased wife, Caroline. After Jedediah's death in 1856, Susan married his brother, George D. Grant, by whom she had a son. Susan became president of the Davis Stake Relief Society and later served as a member of the Relief Society General Board from 1892 to 1914. She died March 7, 1914, in Bountiful, Davis County, Utah.

102Source: Carter E. Grant. "Robbed by Wolves, a True Story." Relief Society Magazine 15 (July 1928): 355-64.
