Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

102Part Six

Life on the Plains

"I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion."

105l Jeremiah 3:14 Historians have called the Mormon migration the best-organized movement of people in American history. The Mormons were transplanting an entire people, a culture, not just isolated, unrelated individuals. They moved to the Salt Lake Valley as villages on wheels.

105Church leaders organized each company into groups of tens, fifties, and hundreds, and provided leaders for each group. Some men were appointed to scout out the trail ahead and others to ride along the front, sides, and rear—guarding and enclosing the moving camp in an orderly formation. For safety's sake neither people nor animals could be allowed to stray from the group.

105Brigham Young laid out what the daily routine of each pioneer camp should be:

105At 5 o'clock in the morning the bugle is to be sounded as a signal for every man to arise and attend prayers before he leaves his wagon. Then the people will engage in cooking, eating, feeding teams, etc., until seven o'clock, at which time the train is to move at the sound of the bugle. Each teamster is to keep beside his team with loaded gun in hand or within easy reach, while the extra men, observing the same rule regarding their weapons, are to walk by the side of the particular wagons to which they belong; and no man may leave his post without the permission of his officers. In case of an attack or any hostile demonstration by Indians, the wagons will travel in double file—the order of encampment to be in a circle, with the mouth of each wagon to the outside and the horses and cattle tied inside the circle. At half past eight each evening the bugles are to be sounded again, upon which signal all will hold prayers in their wagons, and be retired to rest by nine o'clock. (William Clayton's journal, entry for April 18, 1847, quoted in B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1965], 3:165-66.)

There were other camp rules as well. Travelers were not to abuse their cattle but to treat them properly. They were not to yell or cry out or make any noise, nor were they to be up at night. They were to put out fires and tie up their hogs and dogs.

107Such camp organization was chiefly the result of a revelation to Brigham Young, published as Section 136 of the Doctrine and Covenants. It begins, "The Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West," and outlines with inspired conviction the ideals of faith, obedience, sacrifice, mutual support, and joyfulness that made both the crossing of the plains and the settling of the Great Basin possible.

107Sarah Sophia Moulding (Gledhill)

107Born: March 7, 1858, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

107Parents: William Henry and Eliza Wickens Moulding

1081861: William Andrews "Independent" Company

108Age at time of journey: 3

108Before we began our journey to the Salt Lake Valley, the men, including my father, had to go to the corrals and practice driving the ox-teams, as it was an entirely new occupation for them. The idle men of the town hung around to watch and make fun of them, but the Mormons had lots of pep and soon learned. They also knew they would have to walk most of the thousand miles to Utah, but they bravely undertook the task.

108We came in what was called an independent company, but it was well organized, having a leader for every four or five wagons. We had a hard trip, but I never heard my parents complain of it when telling me about it later.

108I was just past three years of age when we made the trip, and Ida, my sister, was about four and a half. Mother was not very well when we started on the trip, having just recovered from the smallpox and having the new baby. She was very pale, but the fresh air seemed to help her a lot, and she too was able to walk most all the way.

108The covered wagon was heavily loaded, and the older ones had to walk to make the load lighter. In our wagon were two large wooden boxes, or chests, filled to overflowing with clothing, dishes, Father's tools for his business, and numerous other articles. In the back of the wagon was fastened the sheet-iron stove, cooking utensils, and our food. On top of the chests was placed bedding of all kinds, and on top of all this we three children had our living quarters during most of the trip. As little as I was, I can remember the noise of the wagon and the jingle-jangle of the pots and kettles fastened underneath and at the sides of the wagon. I remember the dust and dirt from the wagons in front of us.

We were so thirsty, and the only time we could stop and get a drink from the canteen that father carried over his shoulder was when the other wagons stopped. Everyone had been warned to keep up with the wagons and not stray behind on account of the Indians. When we did stop to get a drink, I would always have to wait until my sister had her drink because in England, where my parents were from, the older child was always favored and came first in everything. I can remember how I would dance up and down waiting for her to finish getting her drink, and how thirsty I was. The water was warm and never very good. And at times the water was terrible because they would have to dig a hole to get it, and then it would be muddy.

109The baby cried a good deal of the time from being bounced around in the wagon so much, and we two girls often cried in sympathy with him. The meals were about the same and very tiresome; the bread was poor, and we didn't have butter. It was hard to bake bread, crossing the plains. They would set up the stoves and probably just get a fire started when the wind would come up, and away would go the stove pipe.

109At night they had their times of enjoyments, holding meetings and singing songs of Zion. They even danced once in a while. We girls would get out and play with a little girl in the next wagon, who had a set of dishes made of lead. The red ants were so bad, and Mother often had to strip off our clothes to get rid of them, and how they did bite!

109As we got closer to Utah, we children could only look out of the front end of the wagons, and all we could see was the ever-present thistle and skunkweed that grew just beside the road. I remember getting such a dislike for them, and to this day I cannot stand the sight of the color. Mother used to hate the mountains when we first came to Utah, and I guess it was because they seemed to shut her away from her folks in England. She finally became accustomed to them, and later on she loved them just as we children did.

109After reaching the Salt Lake Valley, I remember seeing one of the last companies of handcart pioneers when they arrived after crossing the plains. They walked onto the Eighth Ward square, and groups of children were out to see them, peeking through cracks in the high board fence.

One family in particular attracted my attention: there was the father, mother and two children about twelve and thirteen years of age. The father was cooking over the open fire, and the mother was sitting down on the ground near the handcart. The children were passing things from the mother to the father for him to cook. The man was the thinnest, most ragged I have ever seen. His sleeves were in tatters to the elbow, and his pants were rags to the knees. The handcart pioneers all looked like Indians, they were so brown from exposure.

111Sarah S. Moulding safely reached the Salt Lake Valley in late September 1861. She married Adam Gledhill in 1887. They settled in Ogden, Utah, and became the parents of two children. Sarah owned property at 28th Street and Pingree Avenue in Ogden. She had four homes built on the property, which she rented for extra income. She gave her son one of the homes as a wedding gift. She was an excellent hat maker and worked at the post office in Ogden. Sarah died December 30, 1952, at the age of ninety-four, in Roy, Utah.

111Source: Sarah S. Moulding Gledhill. Autobiography, typescript. Special Collections, Merrill Library, Utah State University Library, Logan, Utah.
