Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

114William Henry Freshwater

114Born: May 23, 1852, Hertford, England

114Parents: William and Martha Gootch Freshwater

1141863: William B. Preston Company

115Age at time of journey: 11

115In the above photograph, William Henry Freshwater is the adult standing in front of the door of his store.

115May 8, 1862. We left Hertford, England, my native city and country, with several other Latter-day Saints, all enroute for Utah, U.S.A.

115May 10th. We left Watford, England, at 8 a.m. by railroad. We passed through several tunnels; in one of them Mother fainted. We took berth on a sailing ship named William Tapscott, which was bound for New York, America.

115May 13th. The ship raised anchor and left the dock with seven hundred and eighty-five Mormons on board and went into the River Mersey. Two accidents occurred today. One, a boy fell from the main deck to the lower and broke his leg very bad; the other, a woman, in coming down the hatchway, slipped and spilled some boiling water on the face of a child. The vessel was towed out of the river by steam tug into the Irish Sea. The weather is beautiful and warm.

115May 15th. A few of the passengers are a little seasick. There were two boys found in the hold, and Captain Preston is going to make them work their passage across the sea.

115June 8th. In the morning, wind very fair but during the day it increased until the sailors had to tie ropes about the ship to hold themselves on. They spiked all the hatchways down and would not let any of the passengers go on deck at all. The captain told us it was the worst storm he had ever witnessed although he had made many trips across the ocean.

115June 24th. We arrived in the mouth of the Hudson River, at four o'clock and dropped anchor at five. This is a very beautiful port. Far excels Liverpool, England.

115June 25th. We were all up at the first peep of day and anxiously awaiting the arrival of the examining doctor, who came at 8 a.m. and pronounced us all well except two who remained on board the ship, the last we heard of them. The steam tug took us to Castle Garden, the New York immigrant landing where one can stay for ten days only.

William and his parents and sister lived and worked in New York City eleven months until they had earned enough money to go on to Utah.

116June 26, 1863. In company with my father, mother, and sister, Valora, I left Williamsburg, New York with a company of Mormon immigrants for Great Salt Lake City, Utah. Just before we arrived in St. Joseph, Missouri, the rebels, or bushwhackers, fired two cannonballs through our train. One shot went through the passenger car, exactly eight inches above the people's heads, and the other through a baggage car, destroying a great amount of baggage. We stayed in St. Joseph three or four days, afraid to go on because of the rebel soldiers being all through the country.

116While we were there, some fifteen rebel soldiers were taken prisoner, right from among our company, by the northern soldiers. Two companies of Union soldiers surrounded the depot and made the rebels surrender, or they would have killed them. I can truly say I saw a little of the War between the North and the South.

116July 9, 1863. We started across the plains with a train of fifty wagons drawn by three to five yoke of cattle; some of them were trail wagons. The Platte River was very high. We had considerable trouble in crossing several streams. We had several heavy storms; one I remember was near Chimney Rock, in Nebraska, a lot of lightning and thunder. Our cattle stampeded and started running away. The teamsters unyoked them as best they could, some of them two and three yoked together. Three of the oxen were dragged to death. That night, herders went after them on horses.

116Devil's Gate, in Wyoming, was quite a scenic place. The wagon train went around and up a canyon, but most of the passengers went over the mountain. When we got over and into the valley on the west, the sagebrush was as large as fence poles and eight to ten feet high.

116We arrived in Great Salt Lake City Thursday, September 15th, 1863, just as the peaches were ripe. We stayed in Salt Lake three days and visited all the main places. The temple was then about four feet high.

117William Henry Freshwater married Sarah Ann Davies, and they became the parents of eight children. He owned and operated a successful hardware store on Center Street in Provo. He was short and stocky, always kept a diary, and enjoyed fishing and playing cards with his children and grandchildren. He was known for his honesty, and his generosity helped many families through the Great Depression. William Freshwater died January 27, 1937, in Provo, Utah, at the age of eighty-four.

117Source: William Henry Freshwater, "From His Diary," in Our Pioneer Heritage, comp. Kate B. Carter, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1964), 7:248-52.
