Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

117Lucina Mecham (Boren)

117Born: March 11, 1841, Lee County, Iowa

117Parents: Moses Worthen and Elvira Derby Mecham

1171853: John Brown Company

118Age at time of journey: 12

118The above photograph shows Lucina Mecham Boren with her grandchildren.

118Just a short time before the Prophet Joseph Smith was killed, he came to our place in Nauvoo, Illinois. He took me on his knee; I was too young to remember what he said, but I can remember him holding me on his knee. When we were out playing and he happened to pass, everyone stopped playing to watch him until he was out of sight.

118I shall never forget when Mother took me and my baby sister, Elvira, to see the Prophet and Patriarch Hyrum Smith after they were killed by the mob. Mother did not want to take me, as I had no shoes, but I wanted to go. She said, "I will take you so you can always remember you saw the Prophet and his brother." The night they were killed, the dogs were howling all night. The people of Nauvoo beat their drums to let the mob know we were on the lookout for them, and now I am eighty-three years old, but I cannot help crying whenever I hear a dog howl or a drum beat.

118While we were in Nauvoo, I was burned very bad, then caught cold and was very sick. Father was not home. Mother sent for the elders, and a Brother Goddard came and administered to me. He told Mother to wilt a cabbage leaf and put it on the burn, and I would be all right. I never suffered any more pain, and I have had faith in the elders ever since.

118The day we left Nauvoo, we had not had flour for weeks. Father purchased a little white flour and Mother made some light bread. We children were so anxious to eat we would keep asking how long it would be until we could eat. Our dear patient mother did not get angry with us as most mothers do, but when we did get to eat, what a feast it was: white bread and milk from old Muley! Never have I had such a dinner.

One day a woman came to Uncle Ephraim with a pig's ham to sell. Aunt Polly, his wife, said she did not have anything to pay for it. Afterwards Aunt Polly said she did not like the looks of it. In a few days a friend told Aunt Polly that the pig had died of "collory" and the woman had said it would be good to kill the Mormons with.

119We moved to Kanesville, now Council Bluffs, Iowa, where my father took up some land one and one-half miles from Kanesville. We had just got settled when a flood came and took about everything we had. We then built a house on a hill, where we had to carry water three-fourths of a mile. I well remember how frightened we were going through the woods, as some of the men had killed a wild cat. We picked wild grapes, strawberries, raspberries, gooseberries, blackberries, elderberries, also walnuts, hazelnuts, hickory nuts, and butternuts. Thus I earned my first pair of shoes. Up to this time my mother had made moccasins out of buckskins.

119We moved to Kanesville, Iowa, in 1847. My mother cut her hand very badly, and her only sister, Aunt Polly Mecham, came to see her. She took Mother to her place for three weeks. While she was there, my brother made her a cupboard, and we girls bought and filled it with dishes, and oh! how happy she was when she returned.

119In the spring of 1853 we started for Utah. We went a long way on a raft. I was always afraid of water. We crossed the Missouri River on a ferry boat, which frightened me very much, as the water was very high.

119We left the Missouri River July 18th. My father started with two wagons, one yoke of oxen, two yoke of unbroken steers, and four cows. The man that sold Father the oxen had stolen them, and the man that he had stolen them from came and took them from us, so we only had one wagon and the cows.

119The Indians were on the warpath, so we all had to travel together for safety. We were stopped once by the Indians. I thought there were one thousand of them! They could easily have killed us all, but we gave them provisions by robbing ourselves and then suffering from want of food.

119We children had to walk most of the way. We stopped one day each week for washday, and we were always allowed time to keep ourselves clean. When we camped at night, the first wagon would stop. The next wagon would stop at his side, and so on, till they were all in a circle making a corral of the wagons and we would stay inside for safety. After supper and the animals were taken care of, we would sit around the fire, sing songs, tell stories, and those that were not too tired would dance. One brother had a violin, and he was very good at it for dancing.

My sister Sarah and I stopped to rest one day, and the wagons passed us. Sarah said she was not going any farther. I begged her to come with me, but she said she would rather be eaten by wolves than go on. She tried to get me to go and catch the wagons, but I told her I would not leave her. Then she said, "I will not see the wolves get you, so come on, let us go to camp."

120When we were three days from Salt Lake, my cousin Daniel Mecham met us with a load of food, flour, meat, and vegetables. And what a godsend it was, for we were out of food. The next day Brother Allen I. Stout, a friend of ours, came with another load of food. We all rode in the extra wagons to Salt Lake. We arrived October 16, 1853.

121Lucina Mecham married William Jasper Boren July 3, 1859, in Provo, Utah. They became the parents of thirteen children, living in Wallsburg, Utah County, Utah. Lucina became a midwife and delivered over five hundred babies. At the age of fifty, she took music lessons and became the ward organist. She also ran a small mercantile store and worked in the Manti Temple. She died June 21, 1925, at the age of eighty-four.

121Source: "Journal of Lucina Mecham Boren." In Treasures of Pioneer History, 6:301-48.
