Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

131Part Seven

Fun and Romance

"The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness."

135l Isaiah 35:10 The journey to the Salt Lake Valley was not just endless work. Like children everywhere, young Latter-day Saints were creative in having fun and finding amusements as they walked or rode the trail to Zion. For children, as well as their parents, the prairie and mountains presented a new land of infinite variety to explore. Just as an infant grabs at anything within reach, holds it, tastes it, and learns to discriminate among objects, youngsters on the plains were also anxious to experience fully their new surroundings.

135Riding inside the wagons, small boys and girls played with everything around them and, as soon as they could, jumped out to explore the scenes they had been watching for hours. There were colored pebbles and discarded antlers to collect, wild flowers to pick, and prairie dogs to chase. Slightly older children were everywhere—gathering snake skins, beetles, wild berries, and animal dung. Much to their mother's displeasure, they caught (and usually executed) spiders, centipedes, and snakes.

135Children also found ways of making their work into play. Teenage girls had contests gathering service berries for pies, and the boys made games out of chopping wood or gathering buffalo chips for the evening fires. They also participated in more organized games such as "Run, Sheepie, Run," "Anti-I-Over," and "Hide 'n' Seek."

137In the evening, after finishing the chores of the day, both young and old joined around the campfire for singing, dancing, and listening to someone in the company play the fiddle, harmonica, or trumpet. Under the light of the moon, the young women took their turns bathing in a nearby stream, splashing and having fun, under the watchful eye of a maiden aunt from their camp.

137And of course there were romances in these traveling communities. Numerous marriages were performed on the plains, and other couples decided to tie the knot after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley. One thing was certain: courtship on the Great Plains gave both parties a chance to see each other under a variety of unusual and trying circumstances, which meant that there was little chance of being surprised at a spouse's temperament or personality after the marriage ceremony.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC137Alma Elizabeth Mineer (Felt)

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC137Born: May 1, 1855, Landskrona, Malmohus, Sweden

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC137Parents: Andrew and Inger Jensen Mineer

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC1371861: John R. Murdock Company

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC138Age at time of journey: 6

138In the above photograph, Alma Mineer Felt is seated at center.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC138In 1861, Father and Mother sold our lovely home in Sweden and came to Utah. At Liverpool, England, we embarked on The Monarch of the Sea, a very old and rickety ship and entirely unseaworthy. The sea was so rough and stormy that the waves washed over the top of the deck. When the people were frightened, the captain said, "We'll land in New York all right. We've got Mormons on board, and we always get through when we have Mormons." On its return voyage, The Monarch of the Sea, loaded with cargo, sank, but the captain and the crew were saved.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC138There were a lot of sailors on the boat, and they were so good to me. A Negro cook who had his kitchen on the upper deck was very kindhearted and generous. He used to give me prunes, dried apples, raisins, and sometimes cookies, and often a little bowl of soup. I was on deck frequently and knew all the sailors and the cook. Sometimes he used to sneak some soup down to the emigrants in the steerage because he felt so sorry for them. The captain caught him at this, and he was put in jail. The jail was on the upper deck, and I can remember that I used to see his black fingers over the bars through the high opening of the door. One day he died. They told me that the captain had starved him to death. The body of my friend, the Negro cook, was brought into the kitchen, where it was sewed up in a sheet. Then they put him on a long board, carried him to the side of the boat, and slid him into the ocean. I was the chief mourner because he had been so good to me.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHCOne day my sister was on deck, and one of the sailors who was up on the mast dropped one of the iron spikes on my sister's head, and the blood was streaming onto the deck. The poor boy did not mean to do it, but some of the officers started to beat him. My mother came up on deck, elbowed her way through the crowd to the boy, and said, "You leave him alone; he never meant to hurt my child!" Although she could not speak the English language, she made herself understood in Swedish by her actions. They all let him alone, and he was very grateful to my mother.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC139Castle Garden, New York, was the dumping ground for all kinds of cargo, and it was also crowded with emigrants. The floor was greasy and dirty. Here we had to make our beds on the floor, as did all the other emigrants. Mother spread out the quilts and bedding, and we all lay down in a row, the children and Mother and Father. There were sacks of brown sugar at our heads. My little brother was sleeping next to me, and in the night he awoke and whispered, "Alma, there is a hole in the corner of this sack, and I am going to have some of the brown sugar." We had not had any sugar or candy all the way over, so we got a spoon out of the box and had all the brown sugar we could eat. In the morning we were so sick! We did not care for brown sugar after that.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC139We traveled by train to Omaha, Nebraska, where we started on our long journey with eighty wagons in our train, under the direction of Captain Murdock.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC139One night we traveled all night long. The Indians were so bad; they had stolen a woman from a train ahead of us, so we walked all through the night to escape them and get past their camps. This night it was very difficult for my father to keep up with the wagon train. He kept going slower and slower because of his rheumatism. I kept hold of his hand and tried to help him as much as I could. Finally he could not keep up with the train any longer, and told me to keep hold of the last wagon and continue on and he would catch up with us later when we camped. He was finally left behind. Soldiers were camping in the hills and had a big bonfire. Father mistook this for our camp and went in that direction. When he got there, he was surprised to see so many soldiers. He did not know how they would accept him. They asked him what he could do, and he said he could play the violin, so they had him play all night long.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC140In the morning, one of the men brought him to our camp just as we started out to travel on. Mother had cried all night because she was afraid the Indians had taken him and she would never see him again. We all thanked our Father in Heaven that he was with us again, for the train would have had to start on without him. It was too dangerous to wait for anyone.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC140After three and one-half months walking over a hot desert, up the rugged hills, and down the hills and canyons, we finally came out of Emigration Canyon, dirty and ragged. When I saw my mother looking over this valley with the tears streaming down her pale cheeks, she made this remark: "Is this Zion, and are we at the end of this long, weary journey?" Of course to me as a child, this had been a delightful pleasure jaunt, and I remember it only as fun. We children would run along as happy as could be. My older sisters used to make rag dolls as they walked along for us little children to play with. But to my mother, this long, hot journey with all of us ragged and footsore at the end and the arrival in the valley of desert and sagebrush must have been a heartbreaking contrast to the beautiful home she had left in Sweden. But to me and to my mother, the gospel had been worth all it had cost.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC141Alma Elizabeth Mineer's family lived temporarily in Mount Pleasant and Brigham City, Utah, before settling in Salt Lake City. While a teenager, she became an exquisite seamstress, making fine dresses for the wealthy women of the valley and costumes for the Salt Lake Theater. She was a cast member for many productions in the theater. Alma Elizabeth married Joseph Henry Felt in 1875 at the age of twenty, and they became the parents of six children. They adopted four additional children. She died July 29, 1950, in Salt Lake City, at the age of ninety-five.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHC141Source: Alma Elizabeth Mineer Felt. Journal. In An Enduring Legacy, 7:193-232.
