Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

141Margaret Gay Judd (Clawson)

141Born: September 6, 1831, North Crosby, Leeds, Canada

141Parents: Thomas Alfred and Teresa Hastings Judd

1421849: Allen Taylor Company

142Age at time of journey: 17

142Our journey was like all such journeys—it had its pleasant side, and its unpleasant side. When the sun was shining and the roads were good, we trotted along feeling that we would soon be at our destination, but when the rain poured down and the roads were so bad that we could not travel—then that was the other side.

142While moving from New York to Nauvoo, Illinois, another man and his family traveled with us. His name was Chauncey Noble. A better, pleasanter, and more agreeable man never lived, but his wife was just the opposite—always grumbling, fault-finding, and wanting to go back. She never would camp out with the rest of us. Her husband always had to get a bed for her at some farmhouse along the way. How often it happens that good, kind men get vixens for wives, and amiable women get brutes for husbands. So it is, and always will be.

142What a pleasant trip it all was for us children. Nothing to worry us; that part of it was all left for our parents. Oh, why can't children appreciate the happy, careless life they have before coming to the years of responsibility! Trifling things make deep impression on children's minds. I remember today a sight I witnessed on our journey. After traveling all day, we camped just before sundown in a nice place, not far from a farmhouse. When Mother commenced to get supper, she gave me a little tin pail and told me to run across the way for some water. When I got to the well-curb, there was a man sitting close to it and looking right at me. He had no eyelids, no nose, nor lips. Well, it didn't take me long to get back to Mother, without any water either but almost scared to death. If Mother had not gone for the water herself, she never would have believed that I had good reason to be frightened. He certainly was an awful sight. Those staring eyes! Those grinning teeth! That noseless face! He haunted me for nights. Father afterwards learned that this poor man had had an accident, while making potash, that burned his flesh off.

On the road to Nauvoo, we passed through Kirtland, Ohio, and camped not far from the temple, and we were given permission to go through it. I well remember with what awe we entered it. My parents looked very serious and spoke quite low and cautioned us children not to speak at all. The impression remains with me today.

143In the fall we came to a little place in Illinois called Walnut Grove. The greatest recollection I have of Walnut Grove is of the big watermelons and the great amount of black walnuts that grew there. Riley (my brother) and I went one day with Father and gathered up a heaping wagon load of them. We put them in the garret of the log house we then lived in and feasted on them all that winter.

143The next move we made was to a little town called La Harpe, twenty-five miles from Nauvoo. Father was anxious to get a good stock of provisions before going to Nauvoo, as they were very scarce and high there. Mother would have gone right on without a loaf of bread, she was so anxious to be where she could see and hear the Prophet Joseph Smith.

143Father planted us a garden that spring. The vegetables grew very fast, but the weeds grew faster, and Mother made Riley and me do the weeding (or some of it). We used to say if it were only shady and we could sit down, it wouldn't be so hard, but to go right out in the hot sun and stoop over to pull the weeds—we thought it awfully cruel of Mother to have us to do it. She often used to show us how to do it. It seemed so easy for her. Why, she could pull more weeds in five minutes than we could in half an hour, and still she insisted on us doing it. Oh, the hardships of childhood!

143After the Saints left Nauvoo, my parents redoubled their exertions to get an outfit to go to the Rocky Mountains. How well I remember what a hard time Father had breaking in the animals to draw the wagon. There were six cows and two oxen. The oxen were well broken and quite sedate, but the cows were wild and unruly. Father would get help to yoke them up and then would start to drive them. All at once they would run off in an opposite direction from where he wanted them to go or would run around to the back of the wagon and get all tangled up. This went on for days and days, and while Father was breaking the cattle, Mother was praying. She afterwards told me that many nights when we were in bed asleep, she would go out into the orchard at the back of our house and there pour out her soul in prayer, asking the Lord to open the way for us to go with the Saints. She was willing to share their privations for the sake of being with them.

After weeks of hard work, Father had the cows broken so that he could drive them, and on the ninth day of May, 1849—my brother Riley's sixteenth birthday—we said good-bye to our friends and relatives, got into our wagon, and started on our long, eventful journey. Oh, how Mother's countenance beamed with joy! What did she care for hardships, if she could only reach the goal?

144One of many little romances: The night before we left, my true lover, Henry Ridgley, came to bid me farewell, and under our trysting tree (a big tree close by) we each vowed eternal constancy, for four years at least. At the end of that time he would be of age, and then he would come to claim me for his own, even if I was at the end of the earth. Well, he did come to see me, but it was forty years after instead of four years. He had a wife and three children. I had a husband and was the mother of thirteen children. The romance of youth gone, the reality here. How we did talk of the long ago and laugh at each other's inconstancy. After a pleasant two weeks' visit with us, he returned to Springfield, and in five years after, I received a letter from his wife telling me of his death.

144We camped in Council Bluffs, Iowa, for one month waiting for companies to be made up. Oh the monotony of camp life when not traveling! How delighted we all were when we started on our journey for good. Everything was bright and beautiful. I was young and healthy. All was "color de rose" for me. The responsibilities, anxieties, and cares rested on my parents.

144There were several nice young men in our company, which made it interesting for the girls.

On the fourth of July we camped for the day, not entirely to celebrate but to wash and do mending and various other things that were necessary. We camped in a pretty place near a creek. I was to wash with my sister Phebe's help. She was only twelve but very energetic. We selected a place, quite secluded, close to the creek where we could have plenty of water. Well, we were making suds when a dapper young gentleman from New York, a nephew of our captain, who was on his way to California, discovered us and brought a large piece of delicious fruit cake, which was made to celebrate the Fourth on the plains—it was a rather embarrassing position to accept this compliment in the midst of soiled linen and soap suds, and I had not been introduced to him before. However, I accepted the cake with great patriotism, and from that time he often called at our wagon, that is, our wagon yard. So when any of the young folks called, I was as much at home sitting on an ox yoke as if I were sitting in an easy chair in a parlor. Such is life on the plains.

145There were several very nice young men in our company. Especially one. He used to say such lovely things to me—told me that I was beautiful and intelligent, and even went so far as to say that I was amiable, something I had never been accused of before. He told me that I was the only woman he ever loved and that we were just suited to each other. I began to believe him, and when he proposed, what could I say but "yes." Well, the course of true love did run smooth, at least until we got into the Valley. Then we had the usual lovers' quarrel but not the usual making up. In a short time he let me know that another girl appreciated him, if I did not. He married one of the girls of our company, whose ignorance he had ridiculed to me many times while on our journey. Such is the constancy of man! I understood she made him a good wife but stood in great awe of him, the man who had honored her so highly. The fates seem sometime to interfere with our plans, all for our best good.

145My brother drove an ox team across the plains for a widow and her little girl. The little girl was very sweet and amiable, the mother rather peculiar. He said that the girl would ask more questions in a day than ten men could answer in a week. He was a born joker and could no more help joking than he could help breathing. He could never tell her anything so absurd or ridiculous but what she believed it. He got so tired of her questions, such as "Riley, I wonder how far we have traveled today, and I wonder how far we will travel tomorrow," "I wonder if we will get to water," "I wonder if we will see Indians, and I wonder what they will do," "Will they be friendly or savage?"

The "wondering" got so monotonous Riley could hardly stand it. At last he had his revenge, when we came in sight of Chimney Rock, Nebraska. (Anybody who has crossed the plains either by wagon or rail will remember seeing this landmark.) It is very tall and shaped something like a smokestack and probably centuries old. At the rate we traveled, it could be seen several days before we reached it. The girl began her speculations about the rock, and he told her in a most confidential way that as soon as we got to it, he was going to push it down, that he was sick and tired of hearing so much about Chimney Rock, and that it had stood there long enough anyway. As soon as he got his hands on it, over it would go. Well, she begged and implored him to let it stand, that other emigrants might see it who came after us, but he was obdurate. She then threatened to tell "Brother Brigham" when she got to the Valley. That was always her last resort. He kept her anxiety at fever heat for two days until we were within about a half mile of it. He then gave in to her pleadings and said he would let it stand. She was so delighted that she gave him an extra good dinner and supper that day.

146One cow in our team was very intelligent; in fact, she was so bright that she used to hide in the willows to keep from being yoked up, but when father found her and yoked her, she was a good worker and a good milker. She got very lame at one time and could scarcely travel. My parents were very much worried, having already lost one cow. They were afraid they could not keep up with the company, and so Mother said she would make a poultice and put it on as soon as Bossy lay down for the night. Mother made a very large plaster that covered all the cow's lame hip. Well, the next morning when Father went to get the cows up, he called out, "Why, Mother, you have poulticed the wrong hip." Mother said, "Never mind; it's all right, it has gone clean through;" and sure enough, Bossy limped a very little that day and was soon as well as ever. I know there was a great deal of faith mixed up with that poultice.

146Along in the early fall, we used to find wild fruit, such as chokecherries, service berries, and a little red berry called buffalo or squaw berries. One day I decided to have a reception that evening, so after we camped, I asked some of the girls and boys to come and spend the evening at our campfire after their chores were done. Verbal invitations and short notice never gave offense then. All were delighted to come, no regrets. In the meantime, I had asked Mother to let me make some buffalo berry pies. Of course she did. Pies were a great luxury and were seldom seen on the plains. I wanted to surprise my guests with the sumptuousness of my refreshments, and I did. Well, I had hardly got the ox yokes and some other things artistically arranged before my company arrived. After we had chatted awhile and sung songs together, I excused myself to go into the pantry (a box under the wagon) and brought out my pies. In passing the pies, I rather apologetically remarked that they might not be quite sweet enough. One gallant young man spoke up very quickly saying, "Oh, anything would be sweet made by those hands." And I believed him. After serving the company, I joined them with my piece of pie. Well, with the first mouthful—oh, my, how it set my teeth on edge, and tasted as if it had been sweetened with citric acid! That ended my pie making on the plains. I often wondered how my friends could have eaten it, but etiquette demanded it. I don't think there was enough sugar in the camp to have sweetened that pie.

At last we came to the end of our long, tedious journey, and on the evening of October 15, 1849, we camped at the mouth of Emigration Canyon. Oh, what a glorious sight it was to look down the valley of the Great Salt Lake!

147The next morning we were up bright and early and soon drove down. In the meantime, Brother and Sister George Stringham, old friends and neighbors in Springfield, who came to the Valley the year before, sent word to my parents to come to dinner and to camp on their lot. Never was an invitation more gladly accepted.

147That dinner—can I ever forget it?—never before nor since have I tasted anything like it. There was a nice, juicy, fat beef pot roast, baked squash, boiled potatoes, mashed turnips, and boiled cabbage. It seemed very extravagant to have so many kinds of vegetables, but Sister Stringham wanted to give us a real treat, knowing that we had not eaten any kinds of vegetables since leaving home. Everything tasted as if it had been sweetened with sugar. It was a feast fit for the gods. I wonder how our fancy cooks nowadays would like to get a full dinner in an open fireplace with wood for fuel and very few cooking utensils. That was the way we got our meals in those early days.

147Margaret Gay Judd married Hiram Bradley Clawson, a close associate of Brigham Young, in 1852. They became the parents of thirteen children, including two sets of twins. Margaret was known for her keen sense of humor, her poise and charm, and her devotion to her family. She spent the later years of her life working in the Salt Lake Temple. She died February 10, 1912, at the age of eighty. Her son Rudger Judd Clawson was called as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1898. He was president of the Quorum from March 17, 1921, until his death, in 1943.

148Sources: Margaret Gay Judd Clawson. Reminiscences, holograph. LDS Church Archives. Manuscript is also filed in the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.

148See also "Reminiscences of Margaret Clawson." Relief Society Magazine 6 (1919): 251-62, 317-27, 391-400, 474-79, 505-9.
