Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

148Mary Ann Stearns (Winters)

148Born: April 6, 1833, Bethel, Oxford, Maine

148Parents: Nathan and Mary Ann Frost Stearns

1481852: Harmon Cutler Company

149Age at time of journey: 19

149Parley P. Pratt married Mary Ann Frost Stearns, a widow, when her daughter Mary Ann was four. When this account opens, Elder Pratt was on a mission to South America.

149With the close of January, 1852, leaving Kanesville, Iowa, all dances, festivities and amusements ceased, and our hearts and labors were turned to the preparation for our journey to the valleys of the Great Salt Lake. We had no idea how we were going to make the journey, but all were told to get ready, with the promise that the Lord would help when they had done the best for themselves that they could. I think our hopes must have been greater than our faith, for there was not the least chance in sight for us to make the journey. What we needed was a wagon, team, provisions to last three months, and a driver, and where they were to come from was a mystery to us.

149One bright Monday morning in the early days of May, A. W. Babbitt called at our door and said to my mother, "Sister Pratt, I am just starting for the Valley. I have put a hundred dollars in the emigration fund with the express purpose that you have a good substantial comfortable wagon to make the journey in across the plains, and I want you to be sure that you get it." She thanked him for his thoughtfulness in our behalf, and he was off on his long journey westward. We looked at each other in astonishment, Mother and I, for his promised help and blessing had seemed to drop right down from heaven in our behalf.

149Two days later, Joseph A. Kelting called to say good-bye, as he was going back east to Philadelphia to visit his old home and to buy goods for his store and would not cross the plains for another year or so. He said to Mother, "Sister Pratt, I have put one hundred dollars in the emigration fund with the express understanding that you have a suitable and comfortable outfit for the long and tiresome journey that lies between us and your friends in the Salt Lake Valley. It is there for your benefit, and I want you to have it."

Words failed to express our gratitude for the help offered in our time of great need. We had been living by faith, and now the substance was growing large in our sight, and we marveled at the providence of our Heavenly Father in our favor.

150Mother proposed that we take our sewing and visit Mrs. Ellison for an hour or two and bring some butter home with us. After the greetings were over, Sister Ellison began to inquire about our prospects for the journey, and Mother told her we had the promise of a wagon and thought we would have plenty of provisions to last us, but we did not know where a team and driver were coming from. Sister Ellison turned from her work and raised her hand, saying, "Well, I can tell you about that right now. There is a brother boarding with me who has been working all winter to get his team, and he wants to go in someone's wagon and drive this team. He will furnish his own provisions and would desire to have his washing done in return for his services. He will be up to supper at six o'clock, and you must stay and see him, for I believe it is just the right chance for both of you." All of these opportunities had come to us in a short space of about one week.

150As our ox team was to be our companion on the journey, perhaps it will not be out of place to introduce them by name. Dick and Darby were their names when they were purchased. Brother Murie, our driver, called the cows Lady Blackie, Lady Milky, and Cherry. And the one that was the most vicious, he said, was Lady Lucifer, since it was the most proper name for her.

We made a nice camp one night, pitched the tent which Brother Murie and James had all to themselves, and we retired with the prospect of a good night's rest, but in the night a thunderstorm arose. It rained and lightninged and blew a small hurricane, and as the storm increased, Mother proposed that we should be ready for any emergency. Our wagon stood broadside to the wind, and with every fresh gust it seemed as if the bows would snap in spite of us. We tried to hold against the wind, but our strength was puny. Brother Murie had taken the same precautions that we had, was up and dressed and holding on to the tent to keep it to its fastenings. Jimmie, covered up in bed, was still asleep, as were the children in the wagon. As the ground was sandy, some of the pins pulled loose, and the tent collapsed and buried them in its wet folds. This aroused Jimmie, and he scrambled around but could not find his clothes, and it was with difficulty that they could get out from under the heavy, wet tent. Mother handed out a big shawl to wrap Jimmie in, and they climbed into the wagon, and with our united efforts we pressed against the bows until the storm subsided. Mother fixed a place on the foot of the bed for Jimmie and covered him with some extra bedding, and the rest of us sat and nodded until daylight, thankful that the Lord had preserved us from the destroying powers of the elements. The sun came out warm and smiling as if nothing had ever happened to disturb our peace.

151We could now knit or sew comfortably, as the teams were jogging along the level ground, and I made us some heavy white shirts to use when the cool weather should come and knit some cotton stockings to wear as we were going along. We had a new wooden tub, and we would put some cold water in it in the morning and set our butter and other things in it, cover it thickly, and it answered quite a good purpose as a refrigerator—not making the butter exactly ice cold, but better than melted butter. Our morning's milk we put in our new tea kettle, placed a cloth under the cover, put a cork in the spout, tied a cloth over that, and tied it to the reach under the wagon; and no matter how hot the day was, the draft under the wagon made it very comfortable for our dinner, for there was a piece of butter the size of a teaspoon bowl, which was very fresh and sweet, and the children took turns having it on bread.

151There was one thing that we enjoyed very much, and that was the bath in the river. The men of the camp found a convenient place down the river and had their swim in the daytime. We could always tell when they did this, because they came into camp looking so fresh and clean, for most of the time they were a dusty lot. And the sisters each procured a bathing suit of some kind, and we took our baths by starlight. We were afraid to go far from the shore on account of the quicksands. We would make a line from the nearest to the shore and the farthest ones out could get a good ducking without much danger. We were very still about it all, for we never could tell when Indians might be lurking around, and we slipped into our beds quietly, greatly refreshed and thankful for the opportunity.

151One night there came up a big windstorm, not rain, but a dry, hard wind, and it seemed to me that it blew harder and harder with every gust. Our wagon was just a few feet from the bank, and it was twenty feet down to the water, and I was on the side next to the river. And, oh, how I did suffer with fear that night. I thought I could feel the wagon tipping many times. Mother tried to comfort me, telling me of the many times the Lord had brought us through trying scenes in the past and that His hand was still over us to protect and save. About daylight the wind began to abate, and by sunrise it was a calm, still day again, and we traveled on as usual.

After camping the night of August 16, 1852, at Deer Creek, Wyoming, the travelers made needed repairs on their wagons, did washing, and prepared for the Sabbath, the following day. The next morning they held a worship service in a small grove that included seats, a rude platform, and a pulpit erected by a previous company.

152That familiar hymn "How Firm a Foundation" was sung, and after a prayer by one of the aged brethren and another hymn, testimonies were borne, and counsel and instruction given by the captain. And all felt to renew their diligence in serving the Lord, and with fresh hope in their hearts to soon meet with the faithful in the Valley. After the close of the meeting and the noon luncheon had been partaken of, they enjoyed a season of quiet rest till the lowering sun admonished them to prepare for the night. And just as the evening meal was about ready, a carriage was espied coming from the East. Some going out to meet it, word was soon sent back that it was Apostle Lorenzo Snow just returning from his mission to Italy. He camped with us that night. The people met and received instructions and counsel from him for their future guidance and encouragement, and he told them of some of his experiences on his mission.

152And now an event occurred which changed the current of life for me.

152The "event" to which Mary Ann was probably referring was her marriage that very evening, August 16, 1852, to the teamster Oscar Winters, a member of her company. Sadly, Mary Ann ended her account without giving any information about the wedding. A note appended to her account tells us that the ceremony was performed by Apostle Lorenzo Snow. Their wedding meal was bread baked on a skillet, a piece of meat, and a little lump of fresh butter, with a cup of cold water. The note also adds this information: "She [Mary Ann Winters] laments even in the long years after her marriage date that she had no looking glass, and this was a trial as the hair must be arranged smoothly, every hair in place, as she was anxious to please her young husband. But it was great fun, she says, using Oscar's money after reaching the Valley, to buy things at Kincaid's store, trembling a little inwardly lest the clerk should discover what a new housekeeper she was."

153Mary Ann and Oscar Winters arrived safely in Utah and settled in Pleasant Grove. They had eight children. Their daughter Augusta became the wife of Heber J. Grant, seventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Mary Ann died April 2, 1912, in Salt Lake City, Utah.

153Source: Mary Ann Stearns Winters. In Treasures of Pioneer History, 1:473-85.
