Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

153Part Eight

Teenage Drivers

"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven."

155l Matthew 5:16 President Brigham Young knew that teenagers enjoy driving. Beginning in 1860, President Young tried a new way to transport immigrants across the plains. He decided to send "out and back" wagon trains—"out" from Utah to Florence, Nebraska, to pick up merchandise, machinery, and immigrant baggage, and then "back" to Utah. (They were also known as "down and back" trains.) Needing drivers for the Utah wagons, he called many young men in Utah on "out and back" missions during the spring and summer. Between 1860 and 1869, most immigrants arrived in Utah walking beside one of the Church wagon trains.

155These wagon trains did not leave Salt Lake City empty. They were stuffed to their bows and covers with flour, tents, and other supplies, which were dropped off at various stops on the way east for use on the return trip.

155At the eastern end of the journey, these young men were virtual taxi drivers, taking wagons into Florence, Nebraska, picking up passengers, and shuttling them to various campgrounds, where final preparations were made for the long journey. In addition to their responsibilities as teamsters, these Utah boys gathered firewood, built fires, tracked down missing cattle, helped set up and break camps, and spent hours in rivers helping wagons to cross. They repaired harnesses, shod horses and oxen, fished, swam, and filled their hats with berries.

157By the time the "out and back" riders were active, the trail was a virtual highway of activity. One teamster recorded in his diary that on one day in 1861 he met 205 emigrant teams bound for California. Two weeks later he passed a large band of Sioux Indians on their way to fight the Pawnees. Large numbers of overland travelers in search of gold, furs, or adventure passed or were passed by the trains of the Latter-day Saints.

157The "out and back" drivers were not the only young teamsters. Many wagons in the regular pioneer companies were driven by adolescent boys and girls. It was not uncommon to see girls as young as eleven holding the reins of frisky, hard-to-manage teams of horses. Eight- and ten-year-old boys and girls walked alongside yokes of oxen, urging and prodding them along the seemingly endless trail. They were a remarkable group of young people, these teenage teamsters, who contributed in an important way to moving Zion westward.

157Rachel Emma Woolley (Simmons)

157Born: August 7, 1836, Columbia County, Ohio

157Parents: Edwin Dilworth and Mary Wickersham Woolley

1581848: Brigham Young Company

158Age at time of journey: 11

158How long it was after the Prophet Joseph Smith was killed before the Saints began to leave Nauvoo, I cannot say, but previous to our leaving I became acquainted with two old Scottish ladies by the name of Sutherland. They had never been married and consequently hadn't had any children. They always made much of me, as I was a favorite of theirs and loved these old ladies with all my heart. There was not a day passed but what I spent some portion of it with them. Many a nice apple or bit of cake they have saved for me, and when the Saints were leaving Nauvoo, they were afraid they would be left. I begged Father to take them with us, but he couldn't as he had all that he could do to move his own family, but I was not satisfied, for I did not want them left behind. So I went to Brother Edward Hunter, who is bishop of the Church. He lived opposite us and had plenty of money then as now. I was very intimate with his family, or his wife, I might say, for that was all the family he had at that time. So, as I have said, I made bold to ask him to rig up a wagon for the old ladies. I pleaded with all my heart. I remember he had at that time an old dump cart, and I asked him if he was going to use it, and he said no. I told him that it would do for them, and they would be so glad to have even that good. I said one yoke of oxen would be enough to take them. When I said all I could say, and he listened with great patience, he patted me on the head and said, "There, there, you are a good little girl to think of them. I will see what I can do for them." But I had to go and leave them after all. I never knew whether they were brought out of Nauvoo or whether they suffered with other Saints that were left behind.

There are a few instances I remember of our journey to Winter Quarters. I remember recrossing the Mississippi with Father a few days after we left, and in that short time the mob had destroyed many of the houses. Ours was in an awful state. The doors were off the hinges, the windows broken, and the well almost filled up with rubbish.

159We left Winter Quarters the first part of May, 1848. We traveled a few miles the first day and camped on what was called Horn, or Elk Horn, River. We had three wagons and a light spring wagon for Mother to ride in, as her health was rather delicate at that time. [She was expecting a baby.] Her wagon was fixed very comfortably, so she could have her bed made all the time, and she could lie down if she wished. My brother Frank was to drive a wagon, but he had to drive Mother, as one of our teamsters left soon after we started, so then I had to drive. I did so in fear and trembling, as one of the horses was very vicious. She used to kick up dreadful until she would kick the board of the wagon all to pieces, but it made no difference, I had to go at it the next day just the same.

159When we got fairly started on our journey, there was a very large company; I think there were two hundred wagons traveling up the Platte River. The wagons were divided into sections. President Young headed one section. That was a dreary part of the journey. For miles and miles, one could see nothing but the unbroken plains. Not a tree or a shrub in sight, nothing but the white dusty road as far as the eye could see. At night when the camp was reached, myself and companions would always make a rush for the river to bathe. It was great enjoyment after the warm, dusty day.

159While traveling, there was always someone sent ahead on horseback to search out the best place for a camp; then when it was reached, the wagons at the head of each line would stop, and the next one would drive just as close as possible to it, then the next, and so on until they were all in each row formed into a semicircle, with an opening at the beginning and end. These gates or openings were left so the animals could be driven out and in. There was a guard placed both in the corral and out, and I often think of the cheery call of the guard when all was quiet in camp. It was in this wise, "Twelve o'clock in the corral, and all is well." Then the next would take up the call, until each one of the guards had given the hour.

July the fifth we were camped on a small stream called Goose Creek, in Wyoming. It was here that my sister Mary Louise was born. We never laid over a day in consequence of Mother's sickness. The Lord blessed her and fitted her to bear the journey, as he did many others at that time. I have heard her say she never got along better in her life. Mary grew so fast she was one of the finest of Mother's children, even if she was born under difficulties. We had to burn buffalo chips while coming up the Platte. I used to get out just before camping, take a sack, and fill it as our journey progressed. When we got into the Black Hills, our companies were divided into tens, so they were called, because the facilities for camping were not so good for so many in one place.

160We heard so much of Independence Rock, in Wyoming, long before we got there. We nooned at this place, but Father stayed long enough for us children to go all over it. I went with the boys and with Catherine. It is an immense rock with holes and crevices where the water is dripping cool and sparkling. We saw a great many names of persons that had been cut in the rock, but we were so disappointed in not having a dance. Our company was so small, and we had not a note of music or a musician. We camped that night on the Sweetwater River. The companies ahead of us lost a great many animals at this place due to the minerals in the water. The stench was awful, and the wolves were as thick as sheep. It seemed as though they had gathered for miles around. There wasn't a wink of sleep that night for any of us. The wolves were so bold they would come right into camp, and some of them would put their feet on the wagon tongues and sniff in at the end of the wagon. This was my birthday; I was twelve years old.

160Another day I was driving as usual, and to make matters worse, we had an old pig that was expecting babies that day, and she had to ride in the buggy, as Father was very anxious to save the little pigs, but they all died in consequence of the rough road. I remember I was so glad when we camped that night, because I was so completely tired out with the road and the frisky horse.

160I don't remember anything else of note until we drew near our journey's end. We came to what is called Big Mountain, in Utah, and it is rightly named. We had to double teams to get up, that is, take all the teams in camp and put them all on two or three wagons, take them up to the top, then go back for others. Then coming down, we had to put them on the back of the wagons to hold them back. Those that came when we did know something of the difficulties of traveling. Five months of that kind get monotonous after a while, but we were so near our journey's end that we could rejoice even withall.

161Coming down the mountain, the axle tree on Mother's wagon broke, which caused some delay. Father cut a young tree and fastened it under the wagon so that it could be brought into the Valley.

161With what gladness we got our first glimpse of the Salt Lake Valley. We camped just at the mouth of Emigration Canyon in the afternoon to wash and fix up a little before meeting our friends that had preceded us the year previous. Uncle John had been here a year and was living in the Fort, as it was called. His wife had supper ready—corn, cucumbers, and other vegetables. I have no doubt but what we did justice to that supper, being the first in a house for five months. We went to Brother Ensign's, who kindly offered us the hospitality of their one room until we could do better. So we pitched our tent in his yard and settled down to rest after our long journey. We arrived September 22, 1848.

161Rachel Emma Woolley married Joseph Marcellus Simmons, a Church public works bookkeeper, in the Great Salt Lake Valley at the age of fifteen. The marriage ceremony was performed by President Brigham Young. Rachel became the mother of ten children. Her sister Mary, who was born on the plains, became the mother of J. Reuben Clark, who served as counselor in the First Presidency to three Presidents of the Church. Rachel Simmons was left a widow at age thirty-five. She became a practicing midwife at age thirty-eight to support her large family. One of the babies she delivered as a midwife was Spencer W. Kimball, who became the twelfth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She died November 30, 1926, in Salt Lake City, Utah.

162Sources: "Journal of Rachel Emma Woolley Simmons." In Heart Throbs of the West, 11:161-63.

162See also Leonard J. Arrington and Susan Arrington Madsen, Sunbonnet Sisters, True Stories of Mormon Women and Frontier Life, 40-45. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984.
