Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

162Ebenezer Farnes

162Born: February 4, 1843, Dagenham, Essex, England

162Parents: John Burnside and Ann Isacke Farnes

1621862: Benjamin Hampton Freight Train

163"Out-and-back" teamster

163Age at time of journey: 19

163At about nineteen years old, in April, 1862, I emigrated for America, on the ship William Tapscott, with 852 passengers. This ship was a three-mast sailing vessel, old and worn out, an old tub not fit for merchandise but good enough to carry "Mormons" on.

163About the third week on the voyage there came a terrible storm, which tore everything down that could be broken. So bad was the storm that the people had to stay in their beds for three days, the hatchway being closed most of the time, the water being one foot on the first and second decks, washing from one end of the ship to the other and side to side as the ship tossed and rolled. The Captain said it was the worst storm he had ever seen, and he had been a captain for twenty-five years. The ship sprung a leak, and the pumps had to be kept going night and day until we reached New York. When the Captain was asked about the storm, he said if he had known the condition of the ship he would not have sailed on her but consoled himself that, as he had a load of "Mormons" on board, he would get through all right, as there had never been a ship lost that was carrying Mormons. After the ship landed in New York, she was not considered fit to carry anything back but lumber, so they loaded her with that, and she got waterlogged and was lost at sea.

164Taking the voyage all in all, it was quite an experience for us all. There were only two deaths, one child and a man who was sick when he came on board. The burial at sea is a sad thing. The body is sewn in a canvas, and a ball of iron placed at their feet so as to make the body sink feet first so the sharks cannot get it. A long plank is placed on the rail of the ship, part on the ship and part over the water, and the body is placed on the plank, feet to the water. After the burial ceremony the plank is lifted at one end, and the body slides into the sea. You can see the body go slanting down for a long distance.

164During the calm, the emigrants had a good time playing on deck, climbing up the riggings, dancing, and playing games. One game we played all the time was pumping water out of the vessel, about ten men at a time on the pump. One of them would sing all the time, making up the song as he pumped. But it helped to break the monotony. I remember on one of the calm days the ship lay in the water rolling from side to side, and the porpoise, a fish from four to six feet in length and as fat as a pig, was playing about the ship, and the water [was] like a sheet of glass.

164Ebenezer crossed the plains with a freight train, where he was employed as a cook. For his work he was paid $35 for the entire trip.

164We made pretty good time on the plains, but it became monotonous day after day, the same old thing—we get up in the morning at 4:00, make a fire, cook breakfast, eat, and get ready to start at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. It was hard on me, as I had a very bad leg through a kick one of the boys gave me because I beat him in a wrestling match. My leg got so bad that my shin bone was bare for four or five inches and made me very lame, but I got along as well as I could riding in the wagon, sometimes on good roads, until we reached Green River. The river was very high that year, and it was very dangerous to cross it. However, the captain found a gravel bar so that we could cross the stream. We started to cross when the third team got stalled in the river, and my leg hurt me so much standing in the water up to my waist that I started to pass the team that was stuck. The captain saw me and came dashing up to me and commanded me to stop, for if I had gone twenty feet further across the stream, my team, wagon and myself would have gone down the river and perhaps been lost, as the bar in the river was narrow, and there was not room for two teams to pass each other.

I had to stand in the ice cold water for more than an hour. At first my leg hurt me, then got numb; at last it seemed no use to me. I had to drag it along like a piece of lead, but at last we got across the river and camped. After turning our cattle out to feed, I got back to the river and took my boot off, and the sight of my poor leg made me feel sick. The flesh of my leg around the sore place looked all white, like a piece of boiled tripe. I wrapped up my leg and thought perhaps I could get to Utah and then have it taken off. Pleasant thoughts for a young man all alone in the desert. But from that day forth the sore did not pain me so much, and day by day the wound got smaller and smaller, so when we got to Salt Lake City, the wound was more than half closed and soon got well.

165After arriving in Utah, Ebenezer made arrangements to work supplying the Church blacksmith shop with charcoal. In return, the Church agreed to bring his parents and the rest of his siblings from England to Nebraska. From there, the Church would bring them to Utah through the Perpetual Emigrating Fund. Ebenezer walked eighty miles round-trip to a post office in Utah to mail his family in England a letter telling them they could now come to Salt Lake City. He writes of meeting them on the plains.

165In the fall of 1863, I was asked at a minute's notice if I would take a pony team and go back on the plains alone and meet all of the companies and ask them if they would need any tents and transact other business. I told them I was ready to start that day, so they started me off without any provisions or cook. I took twelve tents, some oats for the horses, some flour and some bacon. I tried to buy some bread but could not get it. I traveled about forty miles a day, rather lonesome, but then I should see my father, mother and my sisters on the way.

About noon I met two men on horseback. I asked them how far Captain Daniel McArthur's train was behind, and they told me about three miles. I asked if a family named Farnes was in the train, to which they replied, "Yes, your father died yesterday," and rode on. The blunt way in which he told me was almost more than I could stand. The contrast between my feelings before and after he answered me is too great to imagine. The joy I hoped to experience upon meeting my father and mother and loved ones soon was dispelled by the knowledge that my father died the night I camped at South Pass, Wyoming. It broke me down. I stopped my team and could go no further, as I felt my heart would break at meeting the train. I lay beside the road, weeping tears from my heart, if there is such a thing.

166After a while the train came in sight, and they passed me, but I could not muster courage enough to meet my mother. After a time I drew myself together, knowing that they would camp soon. I hitched up my team and turned back and overtook the company just as they were making camp. I found the wagon they were in and after a while went there and found my mother in a burning fever—the mountain fever—we call it typhoid fever. My mother did not know me. She thought it was my brother M. H. and called me her Matthew. My sister Matilda, age eighteen, was just getting over the fever, while the others, Jane, my sister, age fourteen, John Lyons, an adopted brother, age three, and Mary Ann French, a British emigrant who would later marry my brother Matthew, were worn out with sickness and the death of Father. Father had walked from early morning until 11:00 p.m., and while putting up a tent for the girls, fell down three times and was dead in less than an hour. He died at 12:00 p.m. and was buried at daylight with the dead sweat all over his body, and all this hurry because Captain Andrew McArthur of St. George, Utah, wanted to make a record of making the best time and by bringing his cattle in the best shape across the plains.

166After staying at the camp until the ox teams were ready to continue the journey, I bid good-bye to my mother. It was hard for me to turn my back on them and go three hundred miles east. A young man volunteered to go back with me and show me the way where my father was buried. My intentions were to dig up the grave and see if he was dead when they buried him, as one of the men who helped to put him away told me he did not think Father was dead, as his shoulders were warm with sweat.

166The next day I saw one of the sights of the desert. Near the crossing of the Sweetwater River, there had been a large number of cattle die at one time from minerals in the water, and they were lying in the center of the road. We saw seventy-five or eighty of the large prairie wolves eating the carcasses that lay there, and about one hundred coyotes standing nearby waiting until the wolves were satisfied. These wolves were the largest kind, and there were enough of them to have eaten us both and my team in less than an hour. I did not feel much afraid of them as they had plenty to eat, and they will only attack a man when they are hungry or wounded.

166Well, it was a sight to see their long hair and bushy tails shining in the sun, their red mouths open, and their white teeth snarling at us as we passed through, some of them not more than twenty-five feet from our team. It was quite a relief when we got past them and out of sight. Few men have seen such a large number of grey wolves at one time.

That evening we got to the place where my father was buried. The grave was all that one could ask for, under the circumstances. After a few hours' rest we journeyed east and soon met another emigrant train.

167This company was under Captain William Hyde. After being with this company an hour, a sister came up to me and asked me to go to a poor Welsh woman and try to get her to take something to eat, as she had not been out of the wagon for two days. She and her husband had been quarreling two days before and she was sulky. I went to the wagon and spoke to the woman but received no answer. I looked closer and could see part of her legs, her body being covered. I put my hand on her and asked her to get up, as there was a brother from Salt Lake City who wanted to talk to her, and again received no answer. I told her if she did not get out I would pull her out by the feet. No answer came, so I started to pull her by the ankle and found she was dead.

167Ebenezer Farnes married Mary Catherine Bullock and Veta Josephine Fjeldsted. Mary had five children, and Veta had nine. He spent most of his life in Logan, Utah, where he was a butcher. He died February 13, 1920. His grandson was Harold Silver, an important inventor of agricultural and mining machinery used throughout the world.

168Sources: Ebenezer Farnes. Reminiscences, typescript. LDS Church Archives.

168See also The Story of Ann Isacke Farnes and Her Family, compiled by Marilyn Austin Smith and Glenna King Austin. Typescript, 1972, in possession of family.
