Susan Arrington Madsen, I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on the Mormon Trail ( 1994)

168Zebulon William Jacobs

168Born: January 2, 1842, Nauvoo, Hancock, Illinois

168Parents: Henry Bailey and Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs

1681861: Joseph W. Young Wagon Train

168"Out-and-back" teamster

169Age at time of journey: 19

169Zebulon Jacobs crossed the plains for the first time in 1848 at the age of six. In 1861, when he was nineteen, he was living in Salt Lake City. President Brigham Young asked him to return to Nebraska to help transport immigrants across the plains. Zebulon drove one of the forty wagons that rolled out of Salt Lake City around April 23, 1861. Three other trains left too, totalling two hundred wagons that headed east that week.

169May 19. Left camp 8 a.m. Made seven miles to Devil's Gate, in Wyoming. Dug out a piano and several sacks of salt that had been cached four years ago by earlier pioneers. They were not damaged in the least.

169July 1. We had three blankets and one buffalo robe for three of us to sleep upon. Woke up in the morning feeling rather cold. Felt for blankets, and blankets were gone. Looked and saw William Biler some six or eight feet away on one side and Samuel L. Sprague about the same distance on the other with a blanket each. I had possession of the robe.

169July 4. It being the glorious day of which every true American is proud, we tried to be as jolly and happy as possible. In the morning we had an Indian War dance in costume. In the afternoon a sham battle between Indians and white men, which was well done. Towards evening we had a grand circus, which pleased the people very much. Our Indian exercises frightened some of the new drivers very much till they were made acquainted with the program.

169July 23. Went eight miles in the morning and drove nine miles in the afternoon. Camped. Wood rather scarce. Had to watch the mules pretty close to keep them out of the corn, being camped close to some fields.

169July 24. It being the anniversary of the landing of the pioneers in Great Salt Lake Valley, we were up at daylight and called out the National Guard, the teamsters, who fired a volley of musketry and any other kind of guns that were handy. Then the martial band struck up "Hail Columbia" (the band being composed of tin pails, pans, kettle lids, bells, and various other instruments of music); then there was another volley by the Guard. At sunrise, the firing of cannon (which was about three inches in length). We concluded the morning performance with an Indian jig. In the morning went eight miles, in the afternoon went nine miles, at sunset the firing of a cannon. In the evening we had a grand ball at (what our tent was called) the Bachelors Hall.

July 31. Out early. Helped shoe an ox. Looked and saw that the mosquitoes and horseflies were driving off the horses and cattle; had to keep what is called the dog trot for about a mile before I caught up with them. Caught a horse and jumped on and with considerable difficulty I got them back to camp.

170August 2. I fixed the mules' feet, mended harnesses, and played laundress. In the evening I went to meeting, but the mosquitoes were there first. The mosquitoes sang at the opening, sang during service, and at the closing, and finally sang all night. Tried to sleep, but they pulled me out of bed.

170August 4. Went to the river to have a bath. We found mosquitoes there too. They very soon got rid of us. I then went to a meeting. The meeting was well attended. Mosquitoes came in clouds. The people soon went in disgust to their tents but not to sleep. No, no, that was impossible.

170August 16. This morning a mule took the rope that I was leading it with and landed me after various gymnastics about twenty feet distant from the place that I had ought to have occupied. Hurt my foot a little. It is very disagreeable traveling, on account of the softness of the soil and a number of spring streams that cross the road. I came very close to stepping on a rattlesnake. Considerably scared. Killed it and went to camp.

170August 17. As we woke up in the morning, all hands that were in the tent began laughing at each other's faces. We came to find out we all had our faces besmeared with tar and wagon grease. Some of the boys from the other camp had paid us a visit and left their compliments upon our faces. Helped shoe several oxen. Received several pretty severe raps from the oxen floundering.

170August 24. Henry Parker and myself went on guard. About 10 p.m. we saw a man coming towards us. We hailed him and found that he belonged to Heber C. Kimball's train, which was a short distance ahead. The Utah boys had got him to catch rabbits in Yankee fashion by building a small fire and lying down by it with an open sack for the rabbits to run into, and then hitting them on the head with a club, now and then giving a low whistle, the other boys going out to drive the rabbits in.

All of a sudden the boys gave a yell. The man thought that the Indians were upon him, and off he started at full run. He had run about a mile when we stopped him. The fellow was scared out of his wits. The cause was that he knew everything but Yankee tricks. We took him back to his train, which was three-fourths of a mile distant. The method of catching rabbits just described was a trick.

171Zebulon Jacobs made "out and back" trips again in 1862 and 1863. He married Frances Woods Carrington, and they became the parents of five children. He served in the Blackhawk War as a sergeant in the cavalry. He became a railroad man, working as a conductor on the Utah Central Railroad. Later in life he became a guard at the Utah State Penitentiary. Zebulon died September 22, 1914, in Salt Lake City. His mother, Zina D. H. Young, plural wife of Brigham Young, became the third general president of the Relief Society, serving from 1888 to 1901.

173Sources: Zebulon Jacobs. Reminiscences and Diaries, holograph. LDS Church Archives.

173See also William Hartley, "Diary of a Teenage Driver." New Era, July 1984, 8-11.
