Easter serves as a reminder that this life, though it has an end, is not the end. Because of Jesus Christ, we will be reunited with our physical bodies and can be reunited with our loved ones. His infinite sacrifice is the greatest hope available during our mortal journey.

President Russell M. Nelson taught:

“I am grateful I was home that Saturday in 2005. My first wife, Dantzel, and I had completed our household chores and decided to relax for a few minutes. We sat on the couch, held hands, and began watching a program on television.

“Within a few moments, Dantzel suddenly and unexpectedly slipped peacefully into eternity. My efforts to revive her proved fruitless. Shock and sorrow overwhelmed me. My best friend of nearly 60 years was gone.

“Ten years earlier, I had lost a daughter to cancer. Emily was only 37 years old. In 2019, I lost a second precious daughter to that dread disease. Wendy was only 67.

“At those times of loss, how grateful I was for my testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ. In His victory over the grave, we see the promise of our own resurrection.

“‘All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth’ (Matthew 28:18), the Savior declared following His Resurrection. That power includes the keys of the Resurrection. I know He will use those keys to raise Dantzel, Emily, and Wendy, just as He will use those keys to raise the rest of the human family.

“For God’s children, resurrection means that aging, deterioration, and decay will be done away. ‘This mortal shall put on immortality’ (Mosiah 16:10), and ‘the spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form’ (Alma 11:43).

“Resurrection also makes possible another reuniting—the reuniting of families. We live together in love, so we weep when a loved one dies (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:45). But like Mary Magdalene, we can have our tears of sorrow turn into tears of joy as we anticipate the future from the perspective of an eternal family.”

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about Jesus Christ’s Resurrection. They have also shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

[Video]: “At Easter, we join all Christians in celebrating the literal Resurrection of Jesus Christ. In appearances to His Apostles after His death, He assured them that He was not a spirit. In words reported by Luke, a physician of that day, Jesus said, ‘Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have’ [Luke 24:39].

“But will every mortal be resurrected with a body? Restoration scriptures provide a clarity that unites us in the firm belief and proclamation that all will be resurrected in a perfected body. The Book of Mormon teaches that spirit and body shall reunite. Modern revelation describes angels as resurrected personages who have bodies of flesh and bones. Most specific is the following from the Book of Mormon.

“The prophet Alma taught, ‘The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; … even a hair of the head shall not be lost; [and] all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame’ [Alma 40:23].

“All of us have a special reason to look forward to the resurrection of a perfected body.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, First Counselor in the First Presidency, Facebook, Apr. 6, 2023, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“A testimony of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is a source of both hope and determination. He lives, and because of His sacrifice, we will be resurrected and sanctified. Jesus is the risen Christ, our Savior, and our perfect example and guide to eternal life. I pray that we may, with all our hearts for all our lives, remember His sacrifice and His love of us.”

President Henry B. Eyring, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, Facebook, Apr. 4, 2023, facebook.com/henry.b.eyring.

“I witness the complete and absolute truth of the Savior’s incomparable atoning sacrifice and of His glorious Resurrection. As we focus our lives on this thought, I promise we will feel His hope, His peace, and His love.

“When we unexpectedly lose someone we love, the sadness and grief can be overwhelming.

“Late last year, the life of radiant Brigham Young University freshman Anna Peterson ended suddenly following a tragic sledding accident. Anna was a humble, loving, and kind disciple of Jesus Christ. She sought ways to help others feel God’s love. In fact, she had just finished her application to become a full-time missionary.

“Though many lost a friend when Anna passed, her parents, John and Julie, lost a beautiful light, who they had cared for, prayed over, and loved for 18 years. The death of a daughter is enough to engulf anyone in grief. However, despite the deep sorrow they feel, John and Julie have chosen to lean on the Lord Jesus Christ.

“I asked John—who served as a missionary with me when I presided over the France Bordeaux Mission—and Julie to share with me their thoughts as they continue to practice faith in Jesus Christ in the face of this tragedy. This is what they shared with me:

“John: ‘Anna’s sudden and tragic death tore what feels like a massive wound in my chest. But there is a balm in Gilead, and as we have leaned into gratitude for both the Savior’s Atonement and the wonderful, amazing times we had in Anna’s 18 years, the tender mercies fill us to overflowing. We have strength to press on.’

“Julie: ‘Shortly after Anna’s accident, I was prompted to make the theme of our efforts ‘Turn to the Light, Our Savior.’ As we share with each other these opportunities to choose light rather than choosing darkness to cope, we strengthen each other, and the Lord carries us in our grief. I/We choose to trust the Lord.’

“I sincerely admire John and Julie’s faith in Jesus Christ. They are a wonderful example to me. During this Easter season, I testify that Jesus Christ broke the bands of death, allowing all to live beyond the grave, and, most importantly, He promises each of us that as we believe in and follow Him, we can live with Him forever—yes, forever!”

Elder Neil L. Andersen, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Apr. 7, 2023, facebook.com/neill.andersen.

“As Easter approaches, I have reflected on an experience my wife and I had in our recent travels to Central America. On our last day in Guatemala City, we attended a devotional where four stake Primary choirs shared musical and verbal testimonies of Jesus Christ.

“It was a beautiful, heartwarming meeting. I will never forget the sincere, simple testimony of Brother Ángel Zúñiga. As he bore a simple testimony of Jesus Christ, I felt a powerful witness in my heart that Ángel really does know that Jesus Christ is his Savior. It was a moment I won’t soon forget.

“Later, after the devotional, we were shaking hands with each of the children. One young boy asked me, ‘How is Jesus?’ I responded, ‘Jesus loves you, and He has confidence in you, and you can have confidence in Him.’ This young boy responded with a big, knowing smile that filled my soul with joy.

“As we think about what our Savior did for us during the week preceding Easter, I invite each of you to fill your souls with the knowledge that Jesus loves you, He has confidence in you, and you can have confidence in Him.”

Elder Dale G. Renlund, Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Apr. 5, 2023, facebook.com/DaleGRenlund.

“I hope all of you have a wonderful Easter weekend, always remembering that the reason we celebrate Easter is because of our dear Savior’s atoning sacrifice and Resurrection. Without that, without Him, there would be no reason to celebrate because there would be no hope for us in this world or in the world to come. We should always remember Him; because of Him, there is always hope.

“I have always loved this quote from Elder Jeffrey R. Holland: ‘One of the great consolations of this Easter season is that because Jesus walked such a long, lonely path utterly alone, we do not have to do so. … Trumpeted from the summit of Calvary is the truth that we will never be left alone nor unaided, even if sometimes we may feel that we are. Truly the Redeemer of us all said: ‘I will not leave you comfortless.’ …

“‘… As we approach this holy week … may we declare ourselves to be more fully disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, not in word only and not only in the flush of comfortable times but in deed and in courage and in faith, including when the path is lonely and when our cross is difficult to bear. This Easter week and always, may we stand by Jesus Christ “at all times and in all things, and in all places that [we] may be in, even until death,” for surely that is how He stood by us when it was unto death and when He had to stand entirely and utterly alone’ (general conference, April 2009).

“I add my testimony to his that because of our Savior Jesus Christ, none of us will ever walk alone. As President Camille N. Johnson so beautifully said in her conference talk, ‘Jesus Christ is relief!’ May we find that relief through Him, and may we each come to have our own sure witness that we do not now nor will we ever walk alone. Happy Easter!”

Sister J. Anette Dennis, Facebook, Apr. 9, 2023, facebook.com/RS1stCounselor.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="164935205" id="p_vP7VR">Follow the teachings of living prophets and Church leaders.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
