Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Preface

This book is a companion volume to my Doctrine and Covenants Compendium. Numerous references have been placed in the text so that the reader can easily follow the parallel material in the Nephite text itself.

For the convenience of readers, I have written a chapter on the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. Much of the historical material has been the result of the research and labor of my late friend, Elder Andrew Jenson, of the Church Historian's Office. I am also indebted to my colleague, Dr. Richard L. Anderson, who has done extensive research on the Book of Mormon witnesses, for checking the data in my chapters and for offering suggestions that have helped to better it. My thanks go to him.

The greatest contribution of this volume is probably to be found in my explanations of the meaning of the Isaiah chapters in the Book of Mormon. These explanations have presented a very difficult talk and could not have been done except by constant reference to the parallel Hebrew texts and to our modern scriptures; a knowledge of Hebrew history and Hebrew manners and customs was also necessary. I have attempted to break down each chapter of Isaiah into logical divisions and have given general explanations for each, followed by the text itself, with explanations within brackets of difficult words, phrases, and clauses. When the text is adjudged to be poetry (most of it is), it is printed as such. Question marks within the brackets generally indicate difficulties of some kind such as problems of text, difficulties in finding a suitable explanation, problems of verbal tenses, and so on. Some problems arise in chapters where our knowledge of Hebrew history is not sufficiently clear at the present time. In explaining the text of Isaiah, I have taken advantage of the labors of many scholars, Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant.

Numerous commentaries, translations, and dictionaries have been consulted. I am particularly indebted to the following: Dr. I. W. Slotki in the Isaiah volume of the Soncino Books of the Bible series; Dr. E. J. Kissane, The Book of Isaiah, 2 vols., (The Richview Press, Dublin, Ireland); Dr. C. Von Orelli, The Prophecies of Isaiah, (J. S. Banks, tr., T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh); the Isaiah section of The Interpreter's Bible; Dr. J. A. Bewer, The Book of Isaiah, 2 vols., (Harper & Brothers, New York); Drs. L. Koehler and W. Baumgartner, Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti Libros, 2 vols., (Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon, Wm. B. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, Mich.); A. Harkavy, Hebrew and Chaldee Dictionary, (Hebrew Publishing Co., New York: Third Edition, Revised); The Oxford Annotated Bible, (Oxford University Press, New York, 1962), and the translation of Isaiah in The Jerusalem Bible, (Doubleday & Co., Inc., Garden City, New York, 1966).

I am indebted to two of my former Hebrew students, Dr. Ellis T. Rasmussen and Professor Keith H. Meservy, now my colleagues in the College of Religious Instruction of Brigham Young University, for looking over my work on the Isaiah text in the Book of Mormon and for offering helpful criticisms and suggestions, a number of which I have adopted. They are not, however, to be held responsible for any errors, or slips in the interpretation of the Isaiah chapters which may be found in this book. I am hopeful that my work on Isaiah will, in a measure, help to bring about the fulfillment of one of Nephi's prophecies that in the latter days men shall understand Isaiah's words. (2 Nephi 25:8.)

In this volume I have reversed my views, held many years ago, that the Hill Cumorah, around which the last great battles of the Nephites and Jaredites took place, was in the State of New York. The book of Mormon data are very clear and show quite conclusively that the Hill (Ramah to the Jaredites) was in the land of Desolation, somewhere in Middle America. I have summed up my arguments and conclusions in connection with the discussion of Mormon, Chapter 6. My conclusions have been tested in a number of classes of graduate students who were challenged to demonstrate their falsity. Up to the present time, no one has done so. The Hill Cumorah in New York, from which the Prophet Joseph Smith obtained the Nephite plates, may have been so named by Moroni in commemoration of the Cumorah in the land of Desolation, around which his father and fellow Nephites lost their lives in their last struggles with the Lamanites.

I thank Dean Daniel Ludlow of the College of Religious Instruction of Brigham Young University for his great interest and help in the production of this volume. My thanks also go to the secretarial staff of the College for their labors in typing the manuscript.

Professor Ralph A. Britsch, another of my fine colleagues at Brigham Young University, has been kind enough to review the entire manuscript of this volume. His suggestions and corrections have bettered it considerably, and I feel greatly indebted to him. He is not responsible for any slips in fact or language that remain in the book.

My thanks go to Marvin Wallin, manager of Bookcraft, Inc., for his unfailing help and courtesy in matters of publication. It was at his suggestion that I undertook the production of this volume in the first place.

The views expressed in this volume, unless otherwise indicated, are my own. They do not necessarily represent those of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I trust, however, that they will help many students of the Book of Mormon gain a better appreciation of and respect for the Nephite record.

Brigham Young University January 20, 1968
