Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 1

The Nature and Origin of the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon is that translation literature or volume of scripture which deals principally with the covenant relations of God with the descendants of two groups of Hebrews who left Jerusalem in ancient times and were led by him to this continent. One of these groups of people left Jerusalem about six hundred years before the birth of Christ under the leadership of a prophet by the name of Lehi; it was composed chiefly of people from the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. The other group was made up of refugees who left Jerusalem about 590 B.C. (Book of Mormon chronology) when Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away captive into Babylon. One of these refugees was a son of Zedekiah by the name of Mulek, who is not mentioned in the Bible. It will be remembered that the other sons of Zedekiah were slain by the Babylonians. (2 Kings 25:7)

Some years after arriving on this continent-possibly about twenty-the first colony split into two groups: (1) the Nephites, led by Nephi, the fourth oldest son of Lehi; and (2) the Lamanites, led by Laman, Lehi's eldest son. The Lord cursed this group with a dark skin, that they might not be enticing to the more righteous Nephites. (2 Nephi 5:21)

The members of the second Hebrew colony, known as the Mulekites, were also led by the Lord to this continent but did not bring the scriptures with them as did the Nephites. (Omni 16-17) In time they became more numerous than the Nephites and finally united with a small party of them, sometime between the years 281 and 130 B.C. [^1] (Omni 12-29; Mosiah 25:1-2 )

The Book of Mormon mentions another colony of people-the Jaredites-who came to this continent under divine guidance from the Tower of Babel. They are dealt with in an abridged book known as the Book of Ether. These people became a great nation but were finally destroyed by fighting among themselves, some years after the Nephites and Mulekites came to this hemisphere. [^2]

It will be observed from what has been said that in point of time, Book of Mormon history covers a period of about twenty-seven hundred years: (1) the history of the Jaredites from 2300 B.C. (?) to 600 B.C.; and (2) the history of the Nephites and others associated with them from 601 B.C. to A.D. 400. [^3] We hasten to add at this point that much of the Nephite scripture consists of abridged records, the details of which will be considered in subsequent chapters.

The Book of Mormon-like the Bible in many respects-is a book of life. It deals with the history of nations over a period of hundreds of years and therefore contains a great number of vital experiences, political and spiritual, individual and national, social and ethical, pleasant and painful. Through and behind these significant and vital experiences we behold God at work, making known his character, will, and designs to his earthly children. In short, we may say that the Book of Mormon is a book of life because it faithfully records and interprets life situations in the long history of religious peoples, and simply and effectively presents a revelation of how God works with man.

Why is the Nephite scripture called the Book of Mormon? The answer to the question lies in the fact that the principal editor of this volume of scripture was known as Mormon. Because of his great labors on the book, it is fittingly called after his name. As a matter of fact, the Book of Mormon is a small library of books. All of its separate parts are called books with the exception of a small explanatory section known as The Words of Mormon. There are, all told, fourteen books in the volume, not counting the explanatory section just referred to. Many writers and editors were responsible for the text of the Book of Mormon which was translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In order to explain the rather complex structure of the Book of Mormon, we shall cast it into four logical divisions, with a brief analysis of each. The fourfold division is as follows:

I. The Small Plates of Nephi

These contain the independent and unabridged work of nine writers: Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, and Amaleki. The writings appear in six books, from 1 Nephi to Omni. They cover a period of about four hundred and seventy years: from 601 B.C. to 130 B.C. In the current edition this part of the Book of Mormon contains a little more than 131 printed pages. These plates pleased Mormon so much that he included them with the plates containing his abridgment of the Large Plates of Nephi. (Words of Mormon 3-11)

II. Mormon's Explanatory Notes

These contain editorial remarks by Mormon explaining his previous work of abridging the Large Plates of Nephi (Words of Mormon 3), the reason for the presence of the Small Plates of Nephi among his records (Words of Mormon 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11), his notes concerning the abridgment which follows of the Large Plates of Nephi (Words of Mormon 5, 9), and some historical data. This material was written about A.D. 384, a short time before Mormon's death in battle, and contains about two printed pages in the current edition.

III. The Literary Labors of Mormon

The literary work of Mormon includes the abridgment of the Large Plates of Nephi (Words of Mormon 3, 5, 9) and many commentaries on them, followed by a short history of his life and times. The greater part of the Book of Mormon comes under this heading in six books (Mosiah-Mormon 7). This division contains about 338 printed pages.

IV. The Literary Labors of Moroni

Moroni's literary accomplishments comprise an addition to the record of the last days of the Nephite nation begun by his father, Mormon; an abridgment of the Plates of Ether containing an account of the Jaredite nation; and, finally, a section containing miscellaneous teachings, letters, and historical items. (Mormon 8, Mormon 9; Ether; Moroni.) A total of about fifty printed pages is found in this division.

In the discussions of the first three divisions, reference has been made either to the Large Plates of Nephi or to the Small Plates of Nephi. An explanation of these sets of plates is due the reader. It seems that the Large Plates were made shortly after Nephi's people arrived on this continent. (About 590 B.C.; see 1 Nephi 18:23; 1 Nephi 19:1.) On them was recorded a fuller account of the history and secular affairs of the Nephites than was recorded on the Small Plates. (See 1 Nephi 19:1, 2, 4; 1 Nephi 9:2, 4; 2 Nephi 5:29, 33; 1 Nephi 1:17; Jacob 1:3.) The Small Plates of Nephi were probably constructed at least twenty years after the Large Plates and, all told, about thirty years after the Nephites left Jerusalem. (B.C. 571; see 2 Nephi 5:28-29.) Upon these plates were recorded the more sacred matters pertaining to the ministry-prophecies and the like. (1 Nephi 9:2, 3, 5; 1 Nephi 19:3; 2 Nephi 5:30-32; Jacob 1:1-4 ) When these plates were filled (Omni 30), it became necessary to record more of the sacred history upon the Large Plates. In reading the Book of Mormon, one will often find the Small Plates referred to as these plates, whereas the Large Plates are frequently called the other plates. Unfortunately, as far as their identification is concerned, both sets of plates were named after Nephi (1 Nephi 9:2). The experienced reader of the Book of Mormon, however, usually has little difficulty in determining which set of plates is meant in a given context.

Within its fourfold division the Book of Mormon is divided into fifteen parts, all of which are called books with the exception of one, which, as was indicated in Division II, is a two-page exposition containing, among other things, an explanation of how the foregoing Small Plates of Nephi came into Mormon's collection and of its relation to the abridgment that follows. The fifteen parts of the Book of Mormon in their respective divisions are shown here:

I. The Small Plates of Nephi 1. First Book of Nephi 2. Second Book of Nephi 3. Book of Jacob 4. Book of Enos 5. Book of Jarom 6. Book of Omni II. Mormon's Explanatory Notes 7. The Words of Mormon III. The Literary Labors of Mormon 8. Book of Mosiah 9. Book of Alma 10. Book of Helaman 11. Book of (Third) [^4] Neph 12. Book of (Fourth) [^5] Nephi 13. Book of Mormon (Chs. 1-7) IV. The Literary Labors of Moroni 14. Book of Mormon (cont'd. Chs. 8, 9) 15. Book of Ether 16. Book of Moroni

It should be observed that the Small Plates of Nephi with their six books would not have become an integral part of the Book of Mormon, except for a strange turn of events when the Prophet Joseph Smith was engaged in the work of translation. He first translated Mormon's abridgment of the Book of Lehi, which, in point of time, covered about the same period as the Small Plates of Nephi. (See explanation in first edition of the Book of Mormon.) The 116 pages of this translation, our readers will remember, were finally obtained by Martin Harris and shown by him to his wife and others. The manuscript got out of Harris's possession, which occurrence caused the Prophet great mental anguish and distress. The Urim and Thummim were taken from him, and only after much prayer and supplication were they restored by a divine messenger. [^6]Joseph was commanded not to retranslate the abridgment which Mormon had made of the Book of Lehi from the Large Plates of Nephi. In its place the Prophet was instructed to translate the Small Plates, which would have greater spiritual value. At the same time this procedure would foil the enemies of the Prophet who had altered the words of the manuscript (D&C 10:10-46).

As has already been pointed out, the Book of Mormon is, in a very real sense, a library of books. These books were composed principally by Mormon and Moroni as abridged works; behind each abridged work there lay a voluminous source book in the Large Plates of Nephi.
