Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 2

The Events Leading to Moroni's Depositing the Sacred Records in the Hill Cumorah

Reach for your Book of Mormon and refer, with me, to its contents as I tell you the thrilling but little-known story of Moroni's last days as writer, abridger, and depositor of gold plates in the Hill Cumorah. Let us, first of all, turn to Mormon 6:5, 6 where Moroni's father, Mormon, relates the following:

And when three hundred and eighty and four years had passed away, we had gathered in all the remainder of our people unto the land of Cumorah. And it came to pass that when we had gathered in all our people in one to the land of Cumorah, behold I, Mormon, began to be old; and knowing it to be the last struggle of my people, and having been commanded of the Lord that I should not suffer the records which had been handed down by our fathers, which were sacred, to fall into the hands of the Lamanites, (for the Lamanites would destroy them) therefore I made this record out of the plates of Nephi, and hid up in the Hill Cumorah all the records which had been entrusted to me by the hand of the Lord, save it were these few plates which I gave unto my son Moroni.

It will be noted from our perusal of this interesting statement that in or about the year A.D. 384, most of the important Nephite records were hidden in the Hill Cumorah (in Middle America). Moreover, we observe that the only records not deposited in the Hill Cumorah were a few entrusted to Moroni, which we may safely presume were those found by Joseph Smith centuries later.

Now let us pass to Mormon 8:1-6, where we discover the first of Moroni's writings, his father having concluded with Chapter 7:

Behold I, Moroni, do finish the record of my father, Mormon. Behold, I have but few things to write, which things I have been commanded by my father. And now it came to pass that after the great and tremendous battle at Cumorah, behold, the Nephites who had escaped into the country southward were hunted by the Lamanites until they were all destroyed. And my father also was killed by them, and I even remain alone to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people. But behold, they are gone, and I fulfil the commandment of my father. And whether they will slay me, I know not. Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it mattereth not. Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not. Behold, four hundred years have passed away since the coming of our Lord and Savior.

Notice Moroni's emphasis on how little he has to write, which fact, as will be seen later, is of interest in connection with verse 13. The great Nephite general then proceeds to tell us of certain historical details dealing with the last great battle, including the death of his father. He writes with an air of melancholy, as if there were nothing that mattered. Whither I go it mattereth not; I am alone; and I have not friends nor whither to go. In effect, he says, I have little to write and the sooner I have finished the better.

Of striking interest is Moroni's statement that four hundred years had passed away since the coming of the Savior, making the date 400 of our era. It seems incredible that the holder of the keys of the stick of Ephraim (see D&C 27:5) never wrote a line on the plates of the Book of Mormon entrusted to him until sixteen years after the last great battle at Cumorah, but such seems to be the fact. Questions crowd us. What did Moroni do in the meantime? Where did he go? How did he live? How did he avoid his enemies? What did he do with the records his father left him? The answers to these and many other questions must be left to the imagination; the record is silent.

Moroni indeed had few things to write, for as we continue reading through Mormon 8, we suddenly discover that he formally ends at verse 13:

Behold, I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I am the son of Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi.

If this verse does not make a formal ending, what is the point in Moroni's making mention of his genealogy? (Cf. Alma 58:41) Moreover, note the implications and tone of verse 12:

And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these. Behold, I am Moroni; and were it possible, I would make all things known unto you.

An interesting likeness to verse 13 may be observed in Omni 30, in which Amaleki concludes his record as follows:

And I am about to lie down in my grave; and these plates are full. And I make an end of my speaking. (Cf. also Omni 3, 9, 11.)

Having finished his history-as he supposed-Moroni proceeded to write the first paragraph of the title page of the Book of Mormon as we now have it:

Wherefore, it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites-Written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile-Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation-Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed-To come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof-Sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile-The interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

We know that Moroni did not at this time write the second paragraph of the title page, for that mentions the abridgment of the Book of Ether, which he had not as yet planned. And, moreover, observe the tone of finality in the last part of the first paragraph of the title page.

The guardian of the sacred record now proceeded to hide it in the cement box he had prepared for the purpose on the side of the Hill Cumorah (in New York). His work accomplished, Moroni wandered alone over this continent between the years A.D. 400 and A.D. 420. It is not beyond the bounds of possibility that he traveled through our Utah valleys during those years and dedicated for a temple site the spot where the Manti Temple now stands. In Elder Orson F. Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 436, one may read the following spiritual incident:

At a conference held in Ephraim, Sanpete County, June 25, 1875, nearly all the speakers expressed their feelings to have a temple built in Sanpete County, and gave their views as to what point and where to build it, and to show the union that existed, Elder Daniel H. Wells said: Manti. George Q, Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., John Taylor, Orson Hyde, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Lorenzo Young, and A. M. Musser said, Manti stone quarry. . . . Early on the morning of April 25, 1877, President Brigham Young asked Brother Warren S. Snow to go with him to the Temple hill. Brother Snow says: We two were alone; President Young took me to the spot where the Temple was to stand; we went to the southeast corner, and President Young said: 'Here is the spot where the prophet Moroni stood and dedicated this piece of land for a Temple site and that is the reason why the location is made here, and we can't move it from this spot; and if you and I are the only persons that come here at high noon today, we will dedicate this ground.'

Whatever the facts may be in this respect, we can only conclude that there came a day when the lonely wanderer determined to return to the Hill Cumorah and its sacred records. Apparently he felt constrained to write additional memoirs of spiritual interest on the plates he had hidden for the benefit of the people of the latter days.

After his arrival at the Hill Cumorah, Moroni doubtless scouted the immediate neighborhood to make sure no prowling Lamanites would disturb his labors. In the blackness of night he ascended the hill, removed the rock over the sacred record chest, took out the gold plates, replaced the rock, and withdrew with his precious burden.

In a quiet place Moroni resumed his literary labors from the point at which he had left off years before, namely, Mormon 8:13:

And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord; the plates thereof are of no worth, because of the commandment of the Lord (Mormon 8:14).

He continues his account as we now have it to the end of Mormon 9, where he makes a somewhat formal ending. Perhaps it was his intention to quit his labors at this point, but he quickly changed his mind and proceeded at once to abridge the Book of Ether. Let us examine Ether 1:1, 2:

And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north country. And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of Ether.

There is more to this statement than at first meets the eye. If we take Moroni's words at their face value, we might be driven to the conclusion that he had to find his way into the record room of the Hill Cumorah around which the last great battles were fought (Mormon 6:6), for there were deposited the twenty-four plates called the Book of Ether. Or had these plates been transported years earlier from the Hill Cumorah in Middle America to the one in our present State of New York? [^1]In any event, if Moroni employed the twenty-four plates at first hand, it would be necessary for him to translate them before abridging, because they were written in the Jaredite language. This process would entail a tremendous amount of labor-quite unnecessary, so it seems to us. The labor involved may be judged from the fact that Moroni himself stated-if he didn't speak lightly or casually-that he did not write the hundredth part of the plates of Ether (Ether 15:33). Our current edition of the abridgment of the Book of Ether occupies a little over thirty-one printed pages. We may assume that a translation of the entire Book of Ether in modern dress would occupy conservatively about four volumes the size of our whole Book of Mormon-a wholly unnecessary preliminary to the abridging process if a translation were already available to Moroni.

Now, it must be remembered that many years before Moroni's day the younger Mosiah had translated the record of Ether into the Nephite language (Mosiah 28:11-20). Why should Moroni go to the unnecessary labor of retranslating the twenty-four plates before abridging them? Mosiah's translation was undoubtedly one of the literary treasures left by Mormon in the original Hill Cumorah. If, however, Moroni did use Mosiah's translation, we are left to explain his language when he said, I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by the people of Limhi. Perhaps he was speaking in a general sense, as so many of us do in everyday conversation without trying to be exact. But there is the distinct possibility that Moroni had a copy of the Jaredite scripture in a convenient portable from commonly used by the Nephites. If such were the situation, he could have made the abridgment at convenient times while dodging his enemies. Moroni 1:3 seems to lend itself to such a view: I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. Notwithstanding these reasonings-some of them acute-we are faced with Moroni's precise language in Ether 1:2. Whether we are to interpret this language literally or otherwise, we must leave to the reader.

When, finally, Moroni completed the abridgment of Ether's account, he appropriately appended another paragraph to the title page finished long before:

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also, which is a record of the people of Jared, who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were building a tower to get to heaven-Which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever-And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations-And now, if there are faults they are the mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

Our historian presumed that his work was finished; he says, in fact, that he had supposed not to have written more, but he did, nevertheless. Let us quote a few of his words, which constitute a human document of the first rank:

Now I, Moroni, after having made an end of abridging the account of the people of Jared, I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I make not myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me. For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ. And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I had supposed; for I had supposed not to have written any more; but I write a few more things, that perhaps they may be of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day, according to the will of the Lord. (Moroni 1:1-4)

Note the grim humor in: I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished. Also note the moral courage and magnanimity of a man who knows that his master is Jesus, the Christ. How long it took Moroni to write the ten chapters of the document that goes under his name is problematical, but we know the approximate date of its completion:

Now, I, Moroni, write somewhat as seemeth me good; and I write unto my brethren, the Lamanites; and I would that they should know that more than four hundred and twenty years have passed away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ. And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you. (Moroni 10:1,2)

It was the year A.D. 420. Moroni had wandered the American continent alone and friendless for thirty-six years. Now he had completed his literary labors begun in the year A.D. 400. He ascended the Hill Cumorah with his precious gold records, which he placed once more in the cement box prepared for them. Then he carefully replaced the heavy stone over the box and covered it with soil, grass, and shrubs to conceal its presence.

Such is the story of Moroni's connection with the sacred records. It is an epic story that has yet to receive the attention it deserves from our novelists, pageant writers, and dramatists.

---
Notas:
[^1] One of the last Jaredite prophets, possibly Ether himself, transmitted the Urim and Thummim at the Lord's behest to one of the Nephite prophets about the time of the last battles of the Jaredites. We remember that Ether hid the record that he had written about his people in such a manner that a branch of the Nephite people found them (Ether 15:33); the sacred interpreters might also have been hidden in such a manner that an inspired Nephite prophet would find them.
