Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 4

The Language and Script of the Book of Mormon

What was the nature of the language and script of the Book of Mormon? We could all wish that Joseph Smith had commented on the subject a little more freely than he did, but perhaps the fact that he didn't is a blessing in disguise-it makes us study the text of the Book of Mormon more carefully.

Approaching the study of the language of the Gold Plates, we should keep in mind the fact that the Nephite people were a branch of the Hebrew nation and that they both wrote and spoke Hebrew. Even after a thousand years of Nephite history, Moroni, their last great leader and prophet, explained that If we could have written in Hebrew [characters], behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record. (Mormon 9:33) That is to say, the Nephites were so used to writing in Hebrew that it was necessary almost to apologize for natural errors incident to the use of another script. No nation or people have been bi-lingual for an extended period of time, and the same may be said of the Nephites. They were a people of Hebrew speech and remained so to the end of their history, their language undergoing such changes as the course of time naturally brings about. Those of the Nephites who knew more than one language or script were probably very few and were confined mainly to the families of the prophets or sacred historians. When we refer to Nephites who knew more than one language, we mean those who knew Egyptian as well as Hebrew.

Is it possible to determine in which of the two languages the Book of Mormon was originally written? The writer has rather strong convictions on the subject, but let us examine some of the evidence firsthand. In Mormon 9:32 Moroni makes a vital statement. He says:

And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech.

This statement, which is of great interest to Book of Mormon students, has led numerous readers to conclude that the original language of the Book of Mormon was an altered form of Egyptian known to the Nephites as reformed Egyptian. Notice, however, that in the quotation above Moroni speaks of characters or script and not language. There is a distinct difference between the two. Nevertheless, the observant reader who studies the context of Moroni's words may ask, If, as you say, Moroni is referring to the script or 'characters' of his record, rather than to 'language' in the sense in which we use the word, why in verse 34 does he remark that 'the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language [italics ours]; therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof? That is a very good question and deserves a careful answer. If the text of Moroni's statement in Mormon 9:32-34 is carefully scanned for its meaning, there will be found a certain ambiguity. The word characters confronts us in verse 32, and the word language in verse 34. If by characters is meant graphic symbols employed in recording language, such as letters, then it is not unreasonable to suppose that language of verse 34 is equivalent to symbols or script. If, on the other hand, by characters is meant the body of words and methods of combining words used and understood by a given people, the term characters is equivalent to language. Which horn of the dilemma shall we seize? The writer favors the first view, namely, that Moroni was referring to the script, and that reformed Egyptian has reference not to the language of the Book of Mormon, but to the nature of the graphic symbols used in writing it. The nature of the language of the Book of Mormon is quite another problem.

We have spoken of a certain ambiguity in Moroni's words. Let us call attention to another instance of the same thing, a discussion of which seems vital.

In 1 Nephi 1:2, Nephi writes as follows:

Yea, I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians.

What does Nephi mean here? Perhaps it will help our discussion by putting down the substance of his thought in the form of an equation-a linguistic equation. Let us write it in this form:

Language 1. The learning of = of the Jews my father 2. The language of the Egyptians

Ambiguity will be seen at once in the fact that the word language on the right-hand side of the equation is used to define the same word on the left-hand side. If language of my father were the straight equivalent of the language of the Egyptians, we might be justified in concluding that Nephi was writing in idiomatic Egyptian. The problem isn't that simple, for language of my father is also defined in part by the learning of the Jews. The crux of our problem is, of course, to discover the meaning of learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians. At this point, so it seems to the writer, we should hark back to what was said at the beginning of the chapter: the Nephite people were a branch of the Hebrew nation and ... they both wrote and spoke Hebrew. In our opinion the phrase learning of the Jews simply has reference to the whole Hebrew cultural background of the Nephites, including what we call language. On the other hand, the phrase language of the Egyptians means only that Nephi was writing in Egyptian script or characters as mentioned by Moroni. In line with these views we may reconstruct Nephi's sentence as follows:

Yea, I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning [language] of the Jews and the script of the Egyptians.

In other words, Nephi wrote in the Hebrew language but used Egyptian characters or script in the same sense that a stenographer uses Gregg characters to express English words. It seems to the writer that a statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith in connection with the title page of the Book of Mormon reinforces this position:

I wish to mention here that the title-page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general.... (DHC, 1:71. Italics ours.)

Why did Joseph refer to the Hebrew character of the language and make-up of the Gold Plates if the original language was Egyptian? Egyptian may be read from either right to left or left to right, depending on the direction in which the characters face, but Hebrew is read from right to left. If it was composed in the Hebrew manner, we can easily understand why the last leaf of the Plates would be on the left hand side of the collection, that is, the back, in contrast to our English practice of writing, which puts the end of the book at the right.

There is another strong reason for believing that the Plates of the Book of Mormon and, for that matter, the Brass Plates as well, were originally written in Hebrew, albeit with Egyptian characters. Every reader of the Nephite record has observed the large number of quotations of the text of Isaiah, which were taken from the Brass Plates. Now it must be remembered that Isaiah was a Hebrew prophet and an adviser at the royal court in Jerusalem. Were his sermons given in Egyptian? Common sense says not. Otherwise we have to assume that they were translated into Egyptian and copied on the Brass Plates, if the usual interpretation of Mosiah 1:4 is accepted. This verse reads:

For it were not possible that our father, Lehi, could have remembered all these things, to have taught them to his children, except it were for the help of these plates; for he having been taught in the language of the Egyptians therefore he could read these engravings, and teach them to his children, that thereby they could teach them to their children, and so fulfilling the commandments of God, even down to this present time.

Doesn't it seem unreasonable to believe that the sermons of the Hebrew prophets, down to and including Jeremiah (1 Nephi 5:13), which were delivered in Hebrew, would be translated into Egyptian and then copied on the Brass Plates-itself a record kept for the benefit of Hebrews? If the word language in the above quotation means script or alphabet, as we have proposed for 1 Nephi 1:2, then our difficulties would seem to be resolved. The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates evidently became well-known in the Nephite nation, but nowhere is the statement made that they were translated from Egyptian into the Nephite language-that is, into Hebrew. The reader may find it profitable to study the implications of Nephi's words in 1 Nephi 3:19, where he makes clear that possession of the Brass Plates would make it possible to preserve unto our children the language of our fathers (i.e., Hebrew).

The writer is frank to say that he sees little evidence that our present English text of the Book of Mormon betrays its having been translated from an Egyptian original; on the other hand traces of a Hebrew original seem abundant. This verse is a good example:

And behold, I am also a man of no small reputation among all those who know me; yea, and behold, I have many kindred's and friends and I have also acquired much riches by the hand of my industry. (Alma 10:4)

The writer has italicized a number of words in this verse to which he wishes to call special attention. The great use of and is noticeable, a tendency following Hebrew rather than Egyptian usage. Hebrew is an and-loving language, whereas Egyptian is not, having no special word for our familiar conjunction. The use of kindreds for kindred betrays how literally Joseph Smith translated a well-known Hebrew equivalent. Compare Joshua 6:23, "they brought out all her kindred (lit. kindreds);" Psalms 22:27, "all the kindreds of the nations;" Psalms 96:7, "O ye kindreds of the peoples." Of special interest is the expression, by the hand of my industry. This is particularly Hebraic in cast, since by the hand of is the equivalent of beyadh, a Hebrew word compounded of a preposition and a noun in the construct state. It is used to signify agency or instrumentality. Compare Exodus 9:35, as the Lord had spoken by Moses (lit. by the hand of Moses); 1 Samuel 28:15, "neither by prophets" (lit. by the hand of prophets). We should ordinarily translate the last part of the above quotation from Alma as follows: I have also acquired great riches through my industry.

It is not our desire to harrow up the souls of our readers with detailed technical proofs that the Book of Mormon is a translation of a document essentially Hebrew in nature. We believe, however, that the testimony of the man who translated our English text of the Book of Mormon into Hebrew may prove of interest to many students. About the year 1922, Brother Herman Miller, a converted Jew, finished translating the Nephite record into Hebrew. After completing the work he made statements of interest concerning it to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve. At my request Elder Smith kindly furnished a letter relating the substance of his remarks concerning the Hebrew background of the Book of Mormon:

Office of the Church Historian Salt Lake City, Utah May 22, 1945

Dr. Sidney B. Sperry, Division of Religion, Brigham Young University Provo, Utah.

Dear Brother:

I have your letter of May 19th in which you ask me to relate the testimony of Brother Herman Miller in relation to the translation of the Book of Mormon into Hebrew. I regret that I do not have his words in writing, but I remember the substance of them very well as they impressed me greatly, especially after receiving a similar statement from another Hebrew scholar. In his conversation with me, which was repeated several times, Brother Miller said he was convinced that the Book of Mormon was translated from the Hebrew, and he was convinced that the Prophet did have such a record, because the translation of the record into English fell back readily into Hebrew, thus indicating that it was originally taken from Hebrew. This was one of the main things that impressed him in relation to the authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

The first time he said this, I paid little attention but in the meantime I received the following from Elder Josiah E. Hickman, which contained a similar thought, and this impressed upon my mind the statement of Brother Miller.

New York, Feb. 13, 1931 Elder Jos. F. Smith Salt Lake City, Utah.

Dear Brother Smith:

"I thank you for your promptness in sending the photostatic copy in Hebrew. I took it to Doctor Joshua Bloch and we went over the Hebrew sheets. He even called another Hebrew scholar to go over the sheets with him. They both said that Mr. Miller showed himself a Hebrew scholar, but that his translations were too liberal to be accurate in some of his translations, as an example: in the first chapter, 13 verse he had omitted the phrase 'into Babylon,' so that the text would be in Hebrew 'and many should be carried away captive.' There were places in the translation that the meaning was not fully clear. He further said that the Book of Mormon (in English) sounded as tho it had been translated from the Hebrew hence it would be very easy to translate it back into Hebrew with all its richness. I am giving this to you as he explained it to me. He knew nothing of your letter to me.

"I was interested in his statement: 'It reads as tho it had been translated from the Hebrew into English.' To me it was a vindication that Joseph Smith did translate the records which had been written in the phraseology of the Hebrew with Egyptian characters.

"I am returning under separate cover the photostatic copies.

"Dr. Bloch said that probably Mr. Miller would grow more accurate as he proceeded in his translation.

Thanking you kindly, I am,

Sincerely your brother, J. E. Hickman.

Respectfully your brother Joseph Fielding Smith JFS:re

The reference in this letter to Dr. Joshua Bloch is of additional interest, for he was director of the Semitic Division of the New York Public Library. His comments on the translation confirm some of my own views as communicated to Brother Smith a few years ago.

Assuming now that the Book of Mormon was written in the Hebrew language, let us discuss its reformed Egyptian script at greater length. By reformed Egyptian script Moroni simply meant altered or changed script, it being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech. (Mormon 9:32 ) As a matter of fact, long before the days of Lehi and Nephi the Egyptian script had received many notable alterations, as all scripts do in the course of their existence. From very early times the Egyptians wrote in hieroglyphics (sacred sculptures). These were picture writings and consumed much time in execution. About 2200 B.C. a reformed or altered type of writing known as hieratic (priestly) was developed. It differed from the hieroglyphic in that it was more cursive or flowing in character; consequently, the original pictorial forms of the signs were not identified easily. In effect it was a kind of shorthand formed from the hieroglyphic. Again, about 700 B.C., we notice another reformed type of script known as demotic (popular). This was a very rapid or shortened form of hieratic used in the books and documents written from the date given above to A.D. 470.

From what has been said, it is apparent that if Lehi and Nephi knew Egyptian, they could well have been familiar with three distinct types of script used in writing that language. It follows, therefore, that in the course of a thousand years of Nephite history, the prophets and scribes would further alter or adapt the Egyptian script or scripts inherited by them to suit their needs, and circumstances. These altered forms of script, as we have already seen, were denominated reformed Egyptian by Moroni.

It will be of interest to note that when the Prophet Joseph Smith obtained the Gold Plates, he copied some of the characters which were upon them. He says:

I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the Urim and Thummim I translated some of them.... (DHC, 1:19)

The characters which the Prophet had drawn off the plates were subsequently taken by Martin Harris and shown to Professor Charles Anthon, Adjunct Professor of the Greek and Latin Languages at Columbia College, New York. Since this is a story well-known to Book of Mormon students, we shall not enlarge upon it here. However, several lines of the characters purporting to be those which were copied by Joseph Smith have been published by both Mormon and non-Mormon writers. Perhaps the best and most thorough going account of the history of these characters, accompanied by photographs, is to be found in articles by Elder Ariel Crowley in The Improvement Era, 45:14, 76 (January and February, 1942). In these and subsequent articles (ibid., 150; 47:542), Elder Crowley made a brave attempt to connect the characters with true Egyptian counterparts or with the Serabit inscriptions of the wilderness of Sinai. Just how successful Brother Crowley has been is a matter which the future will decide. Though the writer believes-like Brother Crowley in this respect-that the characters are reformed or altered Egyptian in form, he has never been able to interpret them. Moreover, a leading American Egyptologist to whom they were submitted was not able to read them, nor would he pronounce them beyond cavil to be Egyptian. In light of the discussion in this chapter, however, we ought not to be too discouraged, for no earnest effort has been made as yet to read them as Hebrew. That is to say: no one has yet done the two fold job of finding the true Egyptian equivalent of each character and of transliterating it into its Hebrew equivalent. To do this successfully will entail a great amount of labor and ingenuity. We believe that the services of an expert cryptographer or code decipherer such as were used by Army Intelligence would aid greatly in helping Egyptologists and Hebrew experts unravel the meaning of the characters-assuming they can be read. One recalls the great services of Professors Hans Bauer and P. Dhorme in deciphering Ugaritic, a Semitic language whose script was entirely unknown and undecipherable at the time of discovery a few years ago. These two men were not only Semitic experts but cryptographers in the service of their respective governments, namely, Germany and France, during World War I.

In this chapter the writer has held to the thesis that the language of both the Gold and Brass Plates was Hebrew, but that the script on each was a modified form of Egyptian. Examples from the ancient world in which a given language is expressed in foreign script are not wanting. Indeed, Plautus rendered Phoenician into Latin characters, and his Poenulus is treasured today as the principal source of our knowledge of Carthaginian Phoenician. An Aramaic text written in cuneiform signs is also known. Some years ago Dr. Raymond A. Bowman of the University of Chicago called the attention of scholars to an Aramaic religious text in Demotic script. In fact, his article, which appears in the Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 3:219-23 (Oct., 1944), is entitled An Aramaic religious Text in Demotic Script. The text in question could not be read by Egyptologists. Finally, in collaboration with colleagues who knew Demotic, Dr. Bowman succeeded in transliterating portions of the text into Aramaic and gave tentative translations of it. Since Aramaic is very closely related to Hebrew, Dr. Bowman's document is an almost perfect parallel to the dual nature of the language and script appearing on the plates of the Book of Mormon.
