Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 6

The Book of Mormon Witnesses

By witnesses to the Book of Mormon we mean the men who were given the privilege of seeing the gold plates which were translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith and, in the case of a number of them, of also hefting or holding them in their hands. These men, eleven in number, bore solemn testimony to the world of the reality of the plates and the engravings thereon. Their testimony has been printed in every edition of the Nephite record from the beginning. Why were witnesses to the existence of the gold plates necessary? The answers to this question are relatively simple. In the restoration of the gospel the Lord wanted the people of the world to be without excuse as to the fact that it was his work being set forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon plates contained the witness, of the ancient inhabitants of this continent that Jesus Christ had appeared to them with the gospel in its fullness. This gospel was now to be offered to the world of our day, and it was important that sober and inquiring men be offered the evidence that Joseph Smith really received the gold plates of which he bore testimony. The Lord has always been careful to see that important phases of his work have competent witnesses. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. (2 Corinthians 13; 2 Corinthians 1; cf. Acts 14:17; 2 Nephi 11:3) The testimony of the witnesses would, in this instance, also help to preserve Joseph Smith's life and influence in performing the Lord's will (D&C 17:4).

The Book of Mormon witnesses may, for good reasons, be divided into two groups-the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses. The first group received a higher or more divine witness than did the other group in that an angel of God (probably Moroni) came down from heaven and showed them the plates and the engravings thereon. They also heard the voice of God bear testimony that they had been by translated by his gift and power. Not only that, but they also heard the voice of the Lord command them to bear testimony of what they had both seen and heard.

The other group, the Eight Witnesses, were permitted to see and handle the plates under the direction of Joseph Smith himself. They not only saw and handled the leaves of the plates that had been translated by the Prophet, but also spoke of having hefted the plates. They also bore impressive testimony to the world of what they had seen with their own eyes and what they had lifted with their own hands.

It is of interest to notice that the prophet Isaiah predicted over seven hundred years before the birth of Christ that witnesses would be raised up to testify to the truth of the Book of Mormon and to the fact that they had beheld the plates:

Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein. And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God! (2 Nephi 27:12-14)

The prophet Moroni, the last Nephite to hold and write upon the gold plates, wrote the following words to the future translator of the record:

And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work; and unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true. And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record-and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day. (Ether 5:2-4 )

When, in the course of translating the plates of the Book of Mormon, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, learned that three special witnesses were to be designated, it was quite natural that the men closest to the Prophet would want to be assigned that high privilege. And so Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris were moved upon by an inspired desire to be the chosen three. Joseph Smith inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and the following revelation was directed to them (June, 1829):

Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea. And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even by that faith which was had by the prophets of old. And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God; and this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work. And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has seen them, and it is because he had faith. And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true. Wherefore, you have received the same power, and the same faith, and the same gift like unto him; and if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given you, the gates of hell .shall not prevail against you; for my grace is sufficient for you, and you shall be lifted up at the last day. And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it unto you, that I might bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men. Amen. (See DHC 1:52, 53; D&C 17.)

Not many days after this revelation was given, the Lord fulfilled his promises to the three brethren. We shall take our account of what happened from the Documentary History of the Church. In a footnote (1:55) President B. H. Roberts, the editor, relates the following:

The day on which the Three Witnesses received their manifestation the usual morning family service was held at the Whitmer residence [Fayette, Seneca County, New York], namely, scripture-reading, singing, and prayer. Besides the Whitmer family, the Prophet and his wife and Oliver Cowdery, there were present the Prophet's father and mother and Martin Harris. As soon as Joseph rose from his knees, he approached Martin Harris and said, with a solemnity that thrills through my veins to this day, says the Prophet's mother, who relates this circumstance: Martin Harris, you have got to humble yourself before your God this day, that you may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God that you should look upon the plates in company with Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer." (History of the Prophet Joseph, by Lucy Smith, ch. xxxi.) When the former transgression of Martin Harris in the matter of betraying the trust of the Prophet, by which part of the translation of the Book of Mormon had been lost-when this and the pride and self-will of the man's character are taken into account, there was certainly a necessity for the admonition which the Prophet gave Martin Harris that morning. The circumstance also affords an explanation of Martin's difficulty in obtaining a testimony which, after his withdrawal from them, appears to have been given so readily to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer.

With this explanation we may now introduce the Prophet Joseph Smith's own account (1:54, 55) of how Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris received their heavenly witness:

We four, viz., Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself, agreed to retire into the woods, and try to obtain, by fervent and humble prayer, the fulfilment of the promises given in the above revelation [i.e., as in Doctrine & Covenants 17]-that they should have a view of the plates. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired, and having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises.

According to previous arrangement, I commenced by vocal prayer to our Heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the others in succession. We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same remit as before.

Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again, and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments;" when, immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."

I now left David and Oliver, and went in pursuit of Martin Harris, whom I found at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer, that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, "'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld"; and jumping up, he shouted, "Hosanna," blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly.

In connection with the above account, attention should be called to the fact that when the Three witnesses saw the plates, the translation of the whole Nephite record was not yet complete (see 1:59,71). This fact should be kept in mind when reading the testimony of the three men. It is possible, though not probable, that when the Angel turned over the leaves before the Three Witnesses, he showed only those which had already been translated by Joseph Smith. And when the Eight Witnesses handled the leaves of the plates already translated, it does not follow that they failed to "heft" the plates as a whole immediately after.

It is appropriate at this point to introduce another note by President B. H. Roberts that throws light upon the actions of Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses following their heavenly manifestation (1:55,56).

Another circumstance is related by Lucy Smith which is here apropos, namely, the joy of the Prophet in having other witnesses than himself to the truth of the work the Lord was then bringing forth to the world. Speaking of the witnesses returning to the Whitmer home after seeing the plates, she says: "When they returned to the house, it was between three and four o'clock p.m. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith, and myself were sitting in the bedroom at the time. On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed, 'Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world.' Upon this, Martin Harris came in. He seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard." (History of the Prophet Joseph, ch. xxxi.)

Following the Prophet Joseph Smith's account of the heavenly vision given the Three Witnesses, he adds these words (1:56,57):

Having thus, through the mercy of God, obtained these glorious manifestations, it now remained for these three individuals to fulfil the commandment which they had received, viz., to bear record of these things; in order to accomplish which, they drew up and subscribed the following document:

THE TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient onto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen. Oliver Cowdery David Whitmer Martin Harris

Not long after the Three Witnesses had given their testimony, so the Prophet tells us (1:57), the additional testimony of eight other men was obtained. the circumstances under which they gave their testimony is given in another footnote (1:57, 58) by President B. H. Roberts:

According to Lucy Smith (see History of the Prophet Joseph, ch. xxxi) the eight witnesses obtained a view of the plates near the Smith residence at Manchester. It was on the occasion of the Prophet Joseph's coming over to Manchester from Fayette, accompanied by several of the Whitmers and Hiram Page, to make arrangements about getting the Book of Mormon printed. After arriving at the Smith residence, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, joined Joseph's company from Fayette, and together they repaired to a place in the woods where members of the Smith family were wont to hold secret prayer, and there the plates were shown to these eight witnesses by the Prophet himself. The difference between the testimony given the Three Witnesses and that given to the Eight, is that the former was attended by a splendid display of the glory and power of God and the ministration of an angel, while the latter was attended by no such display, but was a plain, matter-of-fact exhibition of the plates by the Prophet to his friends; and they not only saw the plates, but handled them and examined the engravings upon them.

The testimony of the Eight Witnesses now follows:

THE TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNESSES

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it. Christian Whitmer Hiram Page Jacob Whitmer Joseph Smith, Sen. Peter Whitmer, Jun. Hyrum Smith John Whitmer Samuel H. Smith

According to the testimony of Mrs. Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Eight Witnesses went to that particular place in the woods because "it had been revealed to Joseph that the plates would be carried thither by one of the ancient Nephites." [^1]She also explains that on the evening of the eventful day on which the Eight Witnesses were shown the plates, "we held a meeting in which all the witnesses bore testimony to the facts as stated above." [^2]

An examination of the testimony of the Three Witnesses reveals that they make no mention of the sacred relics the Lord promised to show them (D&C 17:1), other than the gold plates of the Nephite record. The Almighty also promised them a view of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, and the miraculous directors (Liahona) which were given to Lehi. That they were shown these sacred relics by the angel there can be no doubt. In an interview of David Whitmer by Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith at Richmond, Missouri, in September, 1878, Elder Pratt asked him when he saw the plates. In his answer, David Whitmer said these things among others:

It was in June, 1829—the latter part of the month, and the eight witnesses saw them, I think, the next day or the day after (i.e. one or two days after...). We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, the plates containing the records of the wickedness and secret combinations of the people of the world down to the time of their being engraved, and many other plates ... there appeared as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the Sword of Laban, the Directors i.e., the ball which Lehi had-and the Interpreters [Urim and Thummim]. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God. [^3]

We have seen that, including the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord provided at least twelve good, honorable witnesses to bear testimony concerning the gold plates of the ancient Nephite people. The credibility of these men is as good as that of so-called experts" in bearing testimony to the reality or existence of the plates and the engravings upon them. And had the Lord provided an additional twelve men as witnesses, it is doubtful that the world would receive their testimony any more than it does that of the original Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses. It is an impressive fact that not one of these witnesses ever denied his original testimony as printed in the various editions of the Book of Mormon during his lifetime. It is all the more impressive when we consider that each of the Three Witnesses was later cut off the Church in Joseph Smith's lifetime. Not only that, but of the Eight Witnesses, John Whitmer was later excommunicated, and Hiram Page and Jacob Whitmer became inactive; in effect, they severed their connections with the Church. Had Joseph Smith been an impostor, it is more than likely that one or more of these men who were cut off the Church, or left it of their own accord, would have denounced Joseph Smith's account of having the gold plates. But none did. Each held to his original testimony until the day of his death.

In 1877 Elder Orson Pratt of the Twelve, a man who was acquainted with all of the Book of Mormon witnesses, and a man with a fine, analytical mind, gave a sermon concerning the Three Witnesses. Among other things he said this:

Now let us inquire what grounds there are to suppose that they were impostors. Forty-six years have passed away since this angel appeared and showed the plates to these individuals. Has anything transpired during this time that would give us any grounds to suppose that they were impostors? For instance, has either of these witnesses, or the translator of the engravings on the plates, ever, under any circumstances, denied his testimony? No.... Now did either of these three men, or did the translator of the Book of Mormon, ever deny the truth, as Peter [the ancient apostle] did? Did they ever in any way deny the divinity of the Book of Mormon? Never, no never.... Martin Harris did not follow up this people to the State of Missouri, neither did he follow us up to the State of Illinois; but we often heard of him, and whenever we did so, we heard of him telling in public and in private of the great vision that God had shown to him concerning the divinity of the Book of Mormon. A few years ago he came to this territory, an old man between eighty and ninety years of age, and spoke from this stand, in the hearing of the people.... Did he continue to bear testimony all that length of time-over forty six years of life? Did he, at any time during that long period, waver in the least degree from his testimony? Not at all.... David Whitmer, a younger man than Martin Harris, probably, some seventy years of age-I do not recollect his age exactly. Where does he live? In the western part of Missouri. Does he still hold fast to his testimony? He does. Many of the Elders of this Church, in going to and fro among the nations, have called upon him from time to time, and they all bear the same testimony-that Mr. David Whitmer still, in the most solemn manner, declares that he saw the angel and that he saw the plates in his hands. [^4]

In the same sermon, Elder Pratt also made this logical statement concerning the experience of the Three Witnesses;

After seeing the plates, the engravings upon them, and the angel, and hearing the voice of the Lord out of heaven, every person will say that there was no possibility of either of these men being deceived in relation to this matter. In other words, if it were to he maintained that in their case it was air hallucination of the brain and that they were deceived, then with the same propriety might it be asserted that all other men, in every age, who profess to have seen angels, were also deceived-and this might be applied to the Prophets, Patriarchs, Apostles, and others who lived in ancient times, who declared they saw angels, as well as to Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and David Whitmer. But, says the objector, "No, those who testify that they saw angels anciently were not deceived, but they who come testifying about such ministrations in the latter days might be deceived. "Now, let me ask, is there anything logical in such reasoning as this? If these, in the latter days, who testify to having seen angels, were deceived, all who testify to the same things in former days might have been deceived on the same grounds. [^5]

We have now presented the main facts concerning the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses and their testimony about the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. It is not our purpose in this chapter to give a full account of the lives of each of the Witnesses; but we shall, herewith, for convenience' sake, present a brief account of each.

The Three Witnesses

Oliver Cowdery

This man who, at the time the Church was first organized, became the "second Elder of the Church," next in authority to Joseph Smith, was born in the town of Wells, Rutland County, Vermont, October 8, 1806. When he was three years old, his parents, who were farming people, moved to Poultney, Vermont. There he grew up, assisting his father on the farm, until 1825, when the family moved to the western part of the state of New York. Here he worked for a while as a store clerk and then in 1828 began to teach school. While boarding at the home of Joseph Smith, Sr., he was told about the great spiritual experiences of young Joseph Smith, Jr., and of his efforts to translate the plates of the Book of Mormon. Oliver became so interested that he determined to visit the Prophet in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

On April 5, 1829, accompanied by Samuel Smith, Oliver reached Harmony, and became the Prophet's scribe as he translated the characters on the ancient Nephite plates. As the work progressed, Oliver received the gift of translation, but it was withdrawn. (See D&C 8, 9.) On May 15, 1829, along with Joseph Smith, he received the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood under the hands of John the Baptist on the banks of the Susquehanna River. Each baptized the other for the remission of sins and ordained each other to the Aaronic Priesthood as directed by the angelic messenger.

Shortly after their reception of the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, Joseph and Oliver, as predicted by John the Baptist, were visited by Peter, James, and John who conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood (the exact date of this occurrence is uncertain). Oliver, shortly after, made arrangements with David Whitmer to permit Joseph Smith to continue his work of translation at David's father's home at Fayette township, New York. In a grove near the Whitmer home in the early part of June, 1829, the Three Witnesses had their important vision, as we have already narrated.

Joseph and Oliver finished the task associated with the translation of the Book of Mormon late in June, 1829. After arrangements had been made for the manuscript to be published, Oliver made a printer's copy of it and supervised the details of publication.

When the Church was organized on April 6, 1830, Oliver was one of the six original members and was ordained by Joseph Smith to be the second Elder of the Church. He preached the first public discourse given by any member of the Church on April 11, 1830. He then became a missionary of the Church, even undertaking a mission under the Lord's direction to the Lamanites on the western border of the United States. He was accompanied by Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and Ziba Peterson. The little party reached Independence, Missouri, early in 1831 after an arduous journey, mostly on foot. They were later joined by Joseph Smith and several companions. Here Jackson County was designated as the gathering place of the Saints, and a site was dedicated for the building of a temple.

In August, Joseph, Oliver, and several companions returned to Kirtland, Ohio, where, the day after his arrival, Oliver was ordained a High Priest by Sidney Rigdon.

In November, 1831, Oliver, along with John Whitmer, took a manuscript containing the revelations given by the Lord to Independence, Missouri, where they were to be published by William W. Phelps. Here on January 22, 1832, Oliver was married to Elizabeth Ann Whitmer. Elizabeth was seventeen years of age on that date; Oliver at the time was twenty-five years old.

In the summer of 1832 Oliver was appointed by the Prophet as one of the High Priests to preside over the Saints in Jackson County. When, in July 1833, trouble broke out between the old settlers in that county and the Saints, Oliver was sent to Kirtland to inform the First Presidency of the difficulties. While there he was appointed to take charge of a publication known as the Evening and Morning Star.

Oliver was selected to be a member of the first High Council of the Church when it was organized in Kirtland, on February 17, 1834. On the evening of November 29, 1834, Joseph and Oliver covenanted together to pay a tithe of their means to the poor of the Church; this was the first introduction of the tithing principle among the Latter-day Saints.

In February, 1835, Oliver, as one of the Three Witnesses, assisted in choosing twelve men from the Elders of the Church, to be members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. He also took part in the school of the prophets in Kirtland, studying Hebrew along with Joseph Smith and other Elders. On September 14, 1835, he was appointed as Church Recorder, an office he had previously held from April 1830 to June 1831.

Elder Cowdery took a prominent part in the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in March 1836. It will also be remembered that in that temple on April 3, 1836, he and Joseph Smith beheld in vision the Savior, Moses, Elias (Noah), and Elijah. They also received, on that occasion, the keys of the gathering of Israel, the keys of the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, and the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood under which the hearts of the fathers are turned to the children, and the children to the fathers.

In September, 1837, Oliver was appointed to be the assistant-counselor to the President of the Church. But despite his great privileges and experiences in the Church, late in 1837 and early in 1838 Oliver practically rejected Joseph Smith as Prophet and leader of the Latter-day Saints. His attitude was such that the High Council at Far West, Missouri, took action against him on April 11, 1838, and the next day excommunicated him from the Church.

For a period of ten years (1838-1848) Oliver practiced law in Ohio and Wisconsin. In due time he had a change of heart towards the Church; in October 1848, along with his wife and daughter, he arrived at Council Bluffs, Iowa, where he requested Elder Orson Hyde, who was presiding over the branch of the Church there, to give him the privilege of again being baptized into the Church. At a special conference of the members held on October 21, Oliver's request was granted, and shortly afterwards he was baptized by Elder Hyde.

It was Oliver's intention to cross the plains with the Saints, but first he wanted to visit with his wife's family in Richmond, Missouri. There he was the guest of his father-in-law, Peter Whitmer, for several pleasant months. But he contracted a severe cold in 1849 that led to his being infected with "consumption," which brought about his death on March 3, 1850. David Whitmer was present at the time and testified that Oliver died a very happy man.

David Whitmer

The second witness of the Book of Mormon, David Whitmer, was born near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, January 7, 1805. While David was yet an infant, his father, Peter Whitmer, moved his family to Seneca County in western New York. Their home was located about twenty-five miles from the Prophet Joseph Smith's home at Palmyra. David Whitmer lived in this area until 1831.

David's father, Peter Whitmer, was a hard-working, God-fearing man, a strict Presbyterian who brought up his seven children with rigid sectarian discipline. The names of his five sons-Peter, Jacob, John, David, and Christian-are well known to Latter-day Saint students of Church history. As we have already noticed, Peter Whitmer's daughter, Elizabeth Ann, married Oliver Cowdery. His other daughter, Catherine, married Hiram Page.

David seems to have learned about Joseph Smith and the plates of the Book of Mormon from Oliver Cowdery in 1828 when on a business trip to Palmyra. And later it was Oliver Cowdery who persuaded David to come to Harmony, Pennsylvania, and take Joseph, Emma, and himself to his father's (Peter Whitmer's) home, where they could escape persecution and finish the translation of the Nephite record. Here, in the latter part of June, 1829, the translation was completed. In later years David wrote these words: "I, as well as all of my father's family, Joseph's wife, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris were present during the translation."

A short time before the translation was completed, the Three Witnesses were given their great vision which we have already described.

The organization of the Church took place at the Peter Whitmer home (Fayette, Seneca County, New York) on April 6, 1830, and David was one of the original six members. It should also be mentioned that sometime during the year 1830, David was married to Julia A. Jolly, a young woman who lived in the neighborhood of the Whitmer family.

During the summer of 1831, David and other members of his father's family moved to Ohio, which had become the Church headquarters. At a Church conference held at Orange, Ohio, on October 25, 1831, David was ordained a High Priest by Oliver Cowdery.

In the spring of 1831, David, with his own family and with members of his father's family, settled near Independence, in Jackson County, Missouri. Unfortunately, in 1833 they and the other Saints in the county were expelled by a vicious mob of the old settlers, who seemed to fear that the Mormons would gain political control of the county.

Following his expulsion from Jackson County, David, with many of the Saints, crossed the Missouri River and settled in Clay County. In the summer of 1834 he was made president of the High Council, organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In February, 1835, David Whitmer, as one of the Three Witnesses, together with the other two, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, chose twelve men from the Elders of the Church to be members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles.

During the summer of 1837, David Whitmer visited the headquarters of the Church in Kirtland, Ohio. While there he showed signs of disaffection, and finally completely rejected the leadership of Joseph Smith. On his return to Missouri he was excommunicated from the Church by the High Council at Far West, on April 13, 1838. Five charges were preferred against him: (1) not observing the Word of Wisdom; (2) un-Christian-like conduct; (3) writing letters unfavorable to the cause and to the character of Joseph Smith; (4) neglecting his Church duties; and (5) signing himself President of the Church of Christ in an insulting letter to the High Council after he had been cut off from the Presidency. [^6]

David Whitmer subsequently moved to Richmond, Ray County, where he spent the rest of his life, well respected by his neighbors as an honest and reliable citizen. On every occasion that presented itself he affirmed his testimony, as printed in the Book of Mormon, concerning the great vision of the Three Witnesses. He died January 25, 1888.

Martin Harris

The third of the Three Witnesses, Martin Harris was born on May 18, 1783, at Easton, Albany County, New York. When he was ten years old, he and his family moved to the western part of New York, near what was later to be called Palmyra. Here he remained until 1831, acquiring a farm of his own in the meantime and becoming a prosperous, dependable citizen. When the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., moved to Palmyra in 1816, Martin frequently hired young Joseph Smith, Jr., to work on his farm.

Martin Harris Married his cousin, Lucy Harris, a Quaker, and by her had three children. In later years they were divorced.

Since Martin was an intimate acquaintance of the Smith family, he was quickly informed of young Joseph Smith's visions and of his reception of the ancient Nephite plates of gold. He took a sincere interest in Joseph's spiritual activities and, in the fall of 1827, presented him with fifty dollars to assist "in doing the Lord's work."

In the month of February, 1828, Martin visited the Prophet in Harmony, Pennsylvania, where the work of translating the Book of Mormon was in progress. While there, Joseph Smith gave him several lines of characters which he had copied off the plates and sent him (see 2 -Nephi 27:15) to New York City to get the opinions of scholarly men regarding their genuineness. His experiences with Dr. Charles Anthon and Dr. Mitchell are too well-known to repeat here. Suffice it to say that Martin Harris was satisfied with what he heard from these learned gentlemen.

On his return to Harmony, Martin acted as the Prophet's scribe until, on June 14, 1828, the 116-page translation of the Book of Lehi had been written (see Preface in First Edition of Book of Mormon). At this point Martin repeatedly importuned the Prophet to give him permission to let the writings home and show them to his wife and other relatives. Finally, the Lord gave Joseph permission to let Martin take the manuscript, but under severe restrictions as to who should see it.

Martin Harris did not keep his solemn promises. He exhibited the writings promiscuously, and through his carelessness they were lost or destroyed. Despite the severe rebukes administered to Martin Harris by the Prophet and the Lord (see D&C 10), he still continued to be friendly to Joseph.

Martin Harris was, as we have already related, a witness to the great vision in which an angel showed the plates and during which God declared that the translation of the plates made to that point was correct. So impressed was Martin that later he was willing to mortgage 240 acres of his farm for $3,000 in order to pay for publishing 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon. He was finally reimbursed in full for this outlay of money, but he gave material assistance when it was greatly needed.

It has been asserted that Martin Harris was baptized on the day the Church was organized (April 6, 1830), but statements made by the Prophet would seem to indicate that he was baptized a short time after that. [^7]

Early in 1831 Martin Harris left Palmyra and went to Kirtland, Ohio, where the headquarters of the Church were located. In June of that year he accompanied the Prophet and other Elders to Missouri, where Jackson County was designated as the gathering place of the Saints and where the site for the building of a temple was selected and dedicated.

When Martin returned to Kirtland in the fall of 1831, he proceeded to make that location his permanent home. In February, 1834, he was made a member of the Kirtland High Council, and a year later he assisted Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer in selecting members of the first quorum of Twelve Apostles, a task assigned to the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. As long as the Saints remained in Kirtland, he seems, with some exceptions, to have been active and faithful to the Church and to the Prophet; but when the majority of the members moved away in 1838, Martin remained behind and gradually lost connection with Joseph and later with Brigham Young. The spirit of apostasy darkened his mind, and in the last week of December, 1837, he was excommunicated from the Church. [^8]

After the death of the Prophet in 1844, Martin Harris came under the influence of James J. Strang, an apostate from the Church who claimed to be Joseph Smith's true successor. Martin even went to England as a missionary for the Strangites, but the mission was a failure, and he returned to Kirtland.

In 1837, a year after the death of his first wife, from whom he had been divorced several years, Martin Harris married Caroline Young, daughter of John Young and a niece of Brigham Young. They had five children. Caroline, a staunch member of the Church, tried her best through the years to persuade her stubborn husband to move west with the Saints. But his association with apostate groups prejudiced him against Brigham Young, and he refused. Finally, Caroline and her children left Kirtland and arrived in Salt Lake City September 1, 1859, where they were warmly welcomed into her father's home.

The years following Caroline's departure saw Martin's fortunes wane. He lived in Kirtland with a sick daughter (of his first marriage) and her two children in a destitute condition. My good old friend, William H. Homer, told me many years ago of his visit (1869) to Martin Harris after a mission to Great Britain. Martin bore strong testimony to him concerning the divine mission of Joseph Smith and the truth of the Book of Mormon. Brother Homer persuaded Martin Harris to come west; the old man said he didn't have the means, but expressed a great desire to see his wife and children again. When Brother Homer reached home, he reported to President Brigham Young his visit to Martin Harris. President Young was greatly interested, and later Elder Edward Stevenson was authorized to collect money by subscription to bring Martin Harris to Utah. On August 30, 1870, Martin arrived in Salt Lake City in company with Elder Stevenson. He visited President Young, and the two became reconciled. Martin Harris bore his testimony in the Salt Lake Tabernacle concerning the Book of Mormon and its divine authenticity.

Martin Harris was rebaptized by Elder Edward Stevenson and confirmed a member of the Church by Elder Orson Pratt on September 17, 1870.

The remaining years of the life of Martin Harris were spent at the home of his son, Martin, Jr., who later sold his farm in Smithfield and moved to Clarkston, Cache County. Here, on July 10, 1875, Brother Harris passed away, bearing testimony of the Book of Mormon to the last. He was buried in the Clarkston cemetery. There the Church erected a suitable monument to him, which was dedicated by President Heber J. Grant on July 10, 1925.

The Eight Witnesses

Christian Whitmer

The eldest son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Mary Musselman, Christian was born January 18, 1798, in Pennsylvania. His family moved when he was quite young to Seneca County in western New York.

He and his wife were baptized April 11, 1830, by Elder Oliver Cowdery, just five days after the Church was organized. As early as June, 1830, he held the office of Teacher in the Church and was ordained an Elder in 1831. In that year he moved with the Whitmer family and the Saints generally from the state of New York to Ohio and then, the following year, to Jackson County, Missouri, where, at a council meeting held September 15, 1832, he was appointed to preside over the Elders in that place. In a council of High Priests held August 21, 1833, he was ordained a High Priest by Simeon Carter. He, along with the other Saints, suffered mobbings and persecutions, and was driven out of Jackson County in November, 1833. He settled in Clay County, where he was chosen as one of the High Councilors of the Church in Missouri, July 3, 1834. This position he occupied until his death, which occurred in Clay County, November 27, 1835.

He was a faithful and true witness to the divinity of the Book of Mormon to the end of his life. He left no children. After his death his wife returned to her parents in New York, where she married again but was later divorced. She died in Seneca County, New York.

Jacob Whitmer

The second son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Mary Musselman, he was born in Pennsylvania, January 27, 1800. Jacob moved with his parents to Seneca County in western New York when a boy. On September 29, 1825, he married Elizabeth Schott, and they became the parents of nine children.

Jacob and his wife became convinced that the principles taught by Joseph Smith were true, and the two of them were baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake, April 11, 1830, shortly after the Church was organized. With the other members of the Whitmer family he moved to Ohio in 1831, and subsequently settled in Jackson County, Missouri, from whence he was expelled by a mob in 1833. He was also identified with the Church in Clay and Caldwell counties. In Caldwell County he acted a short time as a temporary High Councilor and also as a member of the building committee for the erection of the Lord's House at Far West.

Jacob Whitmer did not remain faithful to the Church; he became inactive, in effect severing his connection with it in 1838, after which he settled near Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, where he remained until his death on April 21, 1856.

One of Jacob's sons, David P. Whitmer, was a prominent lawyer and served one or more terms as mayor of Richmond. In 1888 two of Jacob's children, Mrs. Mary Ann Bisbee, and John C. Whitmer, were still living near Richmond, Missouri. John had in his possession the original Church record which his uncle John Whitmer had refused to give up to the Church Authorities. He also presided over the so-called "Whitmer Faction," or the Church of Christ, which accepted some of the doctrines taught by Joseph Smith.

John C. Whitmer gave the following testimony to the late Elder Andrew Jenson in September, 1888, concerning his father (Jacob Whitmer):

My father was always faithful and true to his testimony in regard to the Book of Mormon, and confirmed it on his deathbed. [^9]

Peter Whitmer, Junior

The fifth son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Mary Musselman, Peter Whitmer, Jr., was born in Fayette, Seneca County, New York, September 27, 1809. When Joseph Smith came to the Whitmer home in June, 1829, to continue his translation of the Book of Mormon, young Peter Whitmer became his zealous friend and assistant. Peter earnestly desired to know what the Lord wanted of him and what would be of most worth into him. The Prophet Joseph Smith inquired of the Lord and received the revelation (D&C 16) in which Peter was instructed that the thing most worthwhile to him would be "to declare repentance mile this people, that you may bring soul unto me." At about this time he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake.

Peter Whitmer, Jr., was one of the six original members of the Church when it was organized on April 6, 1830, at his father's house. And like the other five he had to be baptized as a new member.

In September, 1830, he was called by revelation to preach the gospel, together with Oliver Cowdery (D&C 30:5-8), and in the following month he was chosen by revelation to accompany Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, and Ziba Peterson on a mission to the Lamanites (D&C 30). They started for the West soon afterwards and had an arduous journey, fraught with hardship and much suffering. They raised up a large branch of the Church in Kirtland, Ohio, after which they traveled nearly one thousand miles through mud and snow, mostly on foot, to Jackson County, Missouri, where they arrived in the early part of 1831. While Parley P. Pratt and Oliver Cowdery were beginning their mission among the Lamanites across the borders, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and a missionary companion found employment as tailors in the town of Independence, Missouri. They remained there until the arrival of Joseph Smith and a member of the brethren the following July. Subsequently Peter took an active part with the Saints in Jackson County, where he was ordained a High Priest October 25, 1831, by Oliver Cowdery. He suffered together with the rest of the Saints during the Jackson County persecutions in 1833, and was among those who found a temporary home in Clay County.

Ill for a number of years, Peter Whitmer took a turn for the worse and died on a farm about two miles from Liberty, Clay County, on September 22, 1836. He was buried by the side of his brother, Christian, who had died November 27, 1835. Peter left a wife and three children, all daughters, one of them being born after his death. Like all the other witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Peter Whitmer, Jr., remained faithful to his original testimony concerning it.

John Whitmer

The third son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Mary Musselman, John was born August 27, 1802. He was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake in June, 1829, soon after Joseph Smith's arrival at his father's home from Harmony, Pennsylvania.

John Whitmer, along with his brothers, David and Peter, became the Prophet Joseph Smith's zealous friend and assistant during the time that Joseph was translating the Book of Mormon. Like his brother, Peter, he became anxious to know from the Lord what would be of the most worth to him. The Prophet inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim and received a revelation (D&C 15) in which it was made known to John that the thing which would be of most worth to him was to "declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me." John assisted the Prophet in his early work of building up the Church and accompanied him on his first missionary trips to Colesville, Broome County, New York. Here a good-sized branch of the Church was built up in the midst of considerable persecution. He was also at the little sacrament meeting in Harmony, Pennsylvania (August, 1830), when the Prophet received the revelation concerning the Sacrament (D&C 27).

A number of revelations were given the Prophet in which the name of John Whitmer figured. In a revelation given at Fayette, New York, he was called to labor in a region near the home of brother named Philippians Burroughs (D&C 30:9-11) in the interest of Zion; and on March 8, 1831, he was chosen to labor as a historian for the Church (D&C 47). Again in November, 1831, he was called (D&C 69) to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Jackson County, Missouri, with the revelations which he had previously assisted the Prophet Joseph Smith in copying and preparing for printing. He was also one of seven High Priests sent from Kirtland, Ohio, to stand at the head of the Church in Jackson County, Missouri; and at the time of the Missouri persecutions he was one of the members of the committee who negotiated with the mob and agreed that the Saints should leave Jackson County. His name was also attached to petitions addressed to Governor Dunklin of Missouri, praying for redress and protection against mob violence. In Clay County he was active in behalf of the Church, and his name appears in connection with several important documents and in the correspondence of the Church at that time.

On July 3, 1834, John Whitmer was ordained one of the assistant-presidents of the Church in Clay County, his brother David being ordained president on the same occasion. Some time afterwards John paid a visit to Kirtland, Ohio. Here he acted as a High Councilor and took an active part in the affairs of the Church as one of the presiding officers from Missouri. He was present at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple and received his blessings and anointings under the hands of the First Presidency, after which he returned to Missouri. At a meeting of high priests held in Far West, Missouri, April 7, 1837, he was appointed to act as a member of a committee for the sale of town lots in Far West.

At a conference held in Far West, November 7, 1837, objections were made to John Whitmer as one of the assistant-presidents of the Church in Missouri, but after he had made a confession to some charges against him he was temporarily sustained in his position. On February 5, 1838, however, he was finally rejected, together with his brother, David Whitmer, and William W. Phelps, the other two presidents of the Church in Missouri. John was excommunicated from the Church by the High Council at Far West, March 10, 1838, "for persisting in unChristian-like conduct." [^10]

After his excommunication from the Church, John Whitmer refused to deliver the Church documents in his possession to the proper authorities, which gave occasion for a sharp letter from Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. [^11]The Church never did obtain the records; they fell into the hands of John C. Whitmer (a nephew of John Whitmer), who in 1888 was residing in Richmond, Missouri.

When the Saints had to leave Far West, John took advantage of the cheap rates at which their land could be bought, and purchased most of the old townsite. When he died at his residence at Far West, July 11, 1878, he was known as an important farmer and stock-raiser.

Despite the fact that John Whitmer never again joined the Church, he was always true to his testimony concerning the Book of Mormon. His nephew, John C. Whitmer, of Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, testified that he bore testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon until the time of his death. This testimony was corroborated by many others who visited him prior to his passing.

John Whitmer had four children, three sons and one daughter. One son died when he was ten years old, and another was killed in the Civil War. His one remaining son, Jacob D. Whitmer, resided on the old Far West site and owned one of the best farms in the region, including the Temple Block, which he inherited from his father. John's only daughter also lived in Far West, on the old homestead, a little east of Jacob D. Whitmer's residence.

Hiram Page

This witness to the Book of Mormon was born in Vermont in 1800. He studied medicine while a young man and later traveled extensively in the state of New York and in Canada as a physician. He finally located in Seneca County, New York, where he became acquainted with the Whitmer family and married Catherine Whitmer, daughter of Peter Whitmer, Sr., and Mary Musselman, November 10, 1825.

Hiram and his wife early accepted the gospel as revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith and were baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake, April 11, 1830. Unfortunately, Hiram acquired a stone through which he had "revelations" at variance with the teachings of the Church. The Prophet speaks of this incident as follows:

Brother Hiram Page had in his possession a certain stone, by which he had obtained certain "revelations" concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the Church, etc., all of which were entirely at variance with the order of God's house, as laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our late revelations. As a conference meeting had been appointed for the 26th day of September [1830], I thought it wisdom not to do much more than to converse with the brethren on the subject, until the conference should meet. Finding, however, that many, especially the Whitmer family and Oliver Cowdery, were believing much in the things set forth by this stone, we thought best to inquire of the Lord concerning so important a matter; and before the conference convened, we received the following: [At this point the revelations in D&C 28, 29 are given.]

At length our conference assembled. The subject of the stone previously mentioned was discussed, and after considerable investigation, Brother Page, as well as the whole Church who were present, renounced the said stone, and all things connected therewith, much to our mutual satisfaction and happiness. [^12]

The Lord had revealed to the Prophet that only he was to receive commandments and revelations for the Church. This rule has continued in the Church to the present time; only the President of the Church has authority to receive or issue revelations for the Church as a whole. Hiram Page was told that Satan intended to deceive him. (See D&C 28:2, 11-13.)

In 1831, Hiram Page removed to Kirtland, Ohio. Here he remained until the following year, when he settled near Independence in Jackson County, Missouri. During the persecutions of the Saints in Jackson County in 1833, he assisted three other brethren in getting writs from judge John F. Ryland against mob ringleaders, but the writs seem not to have accomplished any good. After the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, Hiram settled in Clay County and in 1836 became one of the founders of Far West, Caldwell County.

Hiram Page became inactive in the Church; in effect he severed his connection with the Church in 1838 during a period of apostasy. He subsequently removed to Ray County, where he died August 12, 1852, on his farm fourteen miles northwest of Richmond. He was the father of nine children, only four of whom were still living in 1888 when the late Elder Andrew Jenson visited the region. His eldest son, Philander Page, testified to Elder Jenson in September 1888, as follows:

I knew my father to be true and faithful to his testimony of the divinity of the Book of Mormon until the very last. Whenever he had an opportunity to bear his testimony to this effect, he would always do so, and seemed to rejoice exceedingly in having been privileged to see the plates and thus become one of the eight witnesses. I can also testify that Jacob, John and David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery died in full faith in the divinity of the Book of Mormon. I was with all these witnesses on their deathbeds and heard each of them bear his last testimony. [^13]

John C. Whitmer, a relative of Hiram Page by marriage, testified in Elder Jenson's presence to the following:

I was closely connected with Hiram Page in business transactions, and other matters, he being married to my aunt. I knew him at all times and under all circumstances to be true to his testimony concerning the divinity of the Book of Mormon. [^14]

Joseph Smith, Senior

The first Presiding Patriarch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he was born July 12, 1771, in Topsfield, Essex County, Massachusetts. He was the second of the seven sons of Asahel and Mary Smith.

The Smith family moved to Tunbridge, Orange County, Vermont, in 1791, where Joseph Smith, Sen. assisted his father in clearing a large farm of a heavy growth of timber. On January 24, 1796, he married Lucy, daughter of Solomon and Lydia Mack, and by her he had ten children: Alvin, Hyrum, Sophronia, Joseph, Samuel, Ephraim, William, Catherine, Don Carlos and Lucy.

At the time of his marriage, Joseph Smith, Sr., owned a substantial farm in Tunbridge. In 1802 he rented it and engaged in the mercantile business but lost everything he had because of the dishonesty of a shipmaster and agent. He was consequently obliged to sell his farm in order to pay his debts. Following this episode Joseph, Sr., and Lucy moved several times in a small area, but in 1805 were in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, where Joseph the Prophet, their third son, was born December 23.

About the year 1815 Joseph and Lucy moved to Palmyra, New York, and bought a farm but lost it because they could not pay the last installment of the purchase price on time. Afterwards they moved in succession to Manchester and Waterloo, New York, where they lived until their removal to Kirtland, Ohio.

Joseph, Sr., was the first person who heard his son Joseph's testimony concerning the appearance of the angel Moroni, and he exhorted him to be faithful and diligent in obeying the instructions he had received. Later he was shown the plates of the Book of Mormon by his son in June, 1829, along with seven others, as we have already related. He was baptized April 6, 1830, the day the Church was organized.

In August, 1830, in company with his son, Don Carlos, he took a mission to St. Lawrence County, New York. On his route he touched at several Canadian ports, where he distributed a few copies of the Book of Mormon; and he also visited his father, brothers, and sisters residing in that county. He bore testimony to the truth, which resulted eventually in all the family coming into the Church except his brother Jesse and his sister Susan.

He moved his family to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1831. Here he was ordained Patriarch and president of the High Priesthood, under the hands of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams on December 18, 1833. On February 17, 1834, he became a member of the first High Council which was organized in Kirtland.

In 1836, accompanied by his brother, John, he traveled 2400 miles in Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania, Vermont, and New Hampshire, visiting the branches of the Church in those states, and bestowing patriarchal blessing on several hundred persons. He preached the gospel to all who would listen and as a result baptized many. He and his brother returned to Kirtland on October 2, 1836.

During the persecutions in Kirtland in 1837, he was made a prisoner but soon obtained his liberty, and after an arduous journey in the spring and summer of 1838, he arrived at Far West, Missouri. After his sons Hyrum and Joseph were thrown into Missouri jails by the mob, he fled from under the exterminating order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, and made his way in midwinter to Quincy, Illinois. From there he moved to Commerce in the spring of 1839 and thus became one of the founders of Nauvoo.

The exposures suffered by Joseph Smith, Sr., undermined his health and brought on consumption (tuberculosis), of which he died on September 14, 1840, at the age of 69 years. He is said to have been 6 feet 2 inches tall, very straight, and very well proportioned. His weight was about 200 pounds, and he was very strong and active. In his younger days he had considerable local fame as a wrestler. While at Quincy, Illinois, his benevolence was such that he fed hundreds of the Saints who were fleeing from the Missouri persecutions.

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith January 19, 1841, the Lord speaks of Joseph Smith, Sr., as being one "who sitteth with Abraham at his right hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine." (D&C 124:19)

Hyrum Smith

Second child of Joseph Smith, Sr., and Lucy Mack, Hyrum Smith was born at Tunbridge, Vermont, February 9, 1800. He of course took part in the fortunes of the Smith family as it moved about from Vermont to New York, and on November 2, 1826, he married Jerusha Barden, by whom he had six children: Lovina, Mary, John, Hyrum, Jerusha, and Sarab. Hyrum's wife died on October 13, 1837, while he was absent at Far West, Missouri. He married Mary Fielding during the same year, and by her he had two children, Joseph F. (who became, in 1901, the sixth president of the Church) and Martha.

Like his brother, Joseph, Hyrum spent his early years in agricultural pursuits, and nothing of particular note characterized that period of his life. He was a believer in the prophetic mission of his brother Joseph and was baptized by him in Seneca Lake in June, 1829. Hyrum was also one of the eight to whom the Prophet showed the plates of the Book of Mormon. When the Church was organized on April 6, 1830, he was one of the original six members and was baptized again as a member on the same day.

On June 5, 1833, Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon began to dig a trench for the walls of the Lord's house in Kirtland, Ohio, and on June 6th he was counseled, as a member of a committee, to obtain materials and begin immediately the building of the temple. [^15]And on June 21st Orson Hyde and Hyrum gave testimony against the notorious "Doctor" Hurlburt, a subsequent bitter anti-Mormon. [^16]

Hyrum was appointed second counselor to President Joseph Smith on November 7, 1838, at a conference assembled in Far West, Missouri, in the place of Frederick G. Williams, who was rejected.

Like most of the Saints in those days, Hyrum was the victim of mob violence. On November 1, 1838, he, along with other brethren including his brother Joseph, was court-martialed by officers of militia and sentenced to be shot the next morning on the public square of Far West. Luckily, because of the courage of Brigadier-General A. W. Doniphan, the sentence was not carried out. [^17]

On January 19, 1841, Hyrum was called by revelation to be Patriarch to the whole Church, to which office he had been appointed by his father, by blessing and also by birthright, and was likewise appointed a prophet, seer, and revelator with all the gifts and authority once conferred upon Oliver Cowdery (D&C 124:91-96, 124). Hyrum was associated with his brother Joseph in most of the events and difficulties of the Church, up to the time of his death. He was beloved, not only by the Lord (D&C 124:15), but also by all the Saints. There was a very great bond of love and tenderness between him and the Prophet, his brother.

He and Joseph were arrested at Far West, Missouri, and imprisoned at Liberty. Finally, as Latter-day Saints know so well, they were assassinated by a mob at Carthage, Illinois, June 27, 1844. Hyrum was the first to fall by a bullet from the mob.

Samuel H. Smith

Fourth son of Joseph Smith, Sr., and Lucy Mack, Samuel H. Smith was born March 13, 1808, in the town of Tunbridge, Orange County, Vermont. With his father's family he moved in 1815 to Palmyra, Wayne County, New York, where in his early years he assisted in the family farming operations.

As a young man he joined the Presbyterian Church, to which sect he belonged until he visited his brother Joseph in Pennsylvania, where the Prophet was engaged in translating the Book of Mormon. During this visit in May, 1829, Joseph explained to him the gospel, his work of translation, and the great latter-day work the Lord was commencing. Samuel was not easily persuaded of these things, but eventually received a testimony that Joseph's words were true.

On May 15, 1829, the day that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist, they overheard Samuel engaged in secret prayer as they were returning from the river to the house. After they had confronted Samuel, they persuaded him to be baptized, since they now had authority to perform the ordinance. He was the third person to be baptized in this dispensation. Shortly after this event he was one of the eight men selected by Joseph Smith to see and handle the plates of the Book of Mormon.

Samuel was one of the six original members of the Church when it was organized on April 6, 1830. He was also baptized a member the same day and was ordained to the Priesthood.

On June 30, 1830, Samuel undertook a mission for which he was set apart by the Prophet, He took with him copies of the Book of Mormon which he undertook to sell, but he seems to have had little success. In December of the same year he was sent to preach in Kirtland, Ohio, and the regions nearby.

On June 7, 1831, Samuel was called by revelation (D&C 52:30) to accompany Reynolds Cahoon on a mission to Missouri. They went to Jackson County, where they continued their work until their return to Kirtland in September following. Soon after they took a mission into the southern townships and counties of Ohio. Elder Cahoon returned after laboring about six weeks, but Samuel continued preaching and comforting the Saints throughout the winter.

In a revelation given January 25, 1832, (D&C 75:13) Elder Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith were called on a mission to the "eastern countries." Starting in March, they traveled and preached the gospel in Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and Maine. They returned to Kirtland in December of the same year.

February 17, 1834, Samuel was ordained and set apart as one of the High Council in Kirtland, in which office he officiated until he went to Missouri in 1838.

Samuel married Mary Bailey on August 13, 1834, and of this union four children were born: Susannah B., Mary B., Samuel Harrison B., and Lucy B. Samuel's wife was born in Bedford, Hillsborough County, New Hampshire, December 20, 1808. She died January 25, 1841.

In 1838 Samuel traveled with his brother Joseph from Kirtland to Missouri. He experienced the mobbings of that year in Far West and Adam-ondi Ahman, Missouri. His family also suffered from exposure when they were driven out of the state by mob action.

Samuel went to Quincy Illinois, and was there to assist his father and mother in crossing over the river on their arrival. He rented a house for them, into which he also invited four other homeless families of Saints.

In April, 1841, he was sent to preach the gospel in Scott and adjoining counties in Illinois. On May 3, 1841, he married Levira Clark, daughter of Gardner and Delecta Clark. This wife was born in Livonia, Livingston County, New York, July 30, 1815.

In the month of November, 1841, Samuel went to Nauvoo with his family. He remained there during the winter and also the summer of 1842, working mostly for his brother Joseph and harvesting crops in the country.

Samuel moved to his brother William's tavern in Plymouth in the fall of 1842. In the summer of 1843 he came often to Nauvoo. In the fall he chopped wood, made fences for his farm and cleared off the timber, and preached the gospel in the region round about as the opportunity presented itself.

During the spring of 1844, Samuel cultivated his farm, and in June, when he heard of the imprisonment of his brothers Joseph and Hyrum, he set out on horseback to see them. He was pursued by mobsters on the way but was able to elude them and arrived in Carthage shortly after the tragedy. The following day he traveled to Nauvoo in company with the bodies of his martyred brothers.

Unfortunately, some two weeks after the death of his brothers, Samuel contracted a severe illness and died July 30, 1844, age thirty-six years.

In his obituary notice, published in the Times and Seasons, it was said, among, other complimentary things, that "If ever there lived a good man upon the earth, Samuel H. Smith was that person."

---
Notas:
[^1] One of the last Jaredite prophets, possibly Ether himself, transmitted the Urim and Thummim at the Lord's behest to one of the Nephite prophets about the time of the last battles of the Jaredites. We remember that Ether hid the record that he had written about his people in such a manner that a branch of the Nephite people found them (Ether 15:33); the sacred interpreters might also have been hidden in such a manner that an inspired Nephite prophet would find them.
[^2] During a period of apostasy, early in Jaredite history, the Lord may have taken the Urim and Thummim from that people and delivered them to Abraham, who received them while still residing in Ur of the Chaldees. (Abraham 3:1) From Abraham the instruments were probably transmitted to his righteous posterity throughout the long history of Israel until about the time of the Babylonian Captivity. We know that Moses and Aaron had them (Exodus 28:30; Leviticus 8:8) and that they were transmitted to others. (See Numbers 3:1-4; Numbers 20:22-29; Numbers 27:21; see also 1 Samuel 28:6.) In post-exilic times the Old Testament plainly indicates that the Urim and Thummim had been lost to the tribe of Levi. (Ezra 2:63; cf. Nehemiah 7:65.) There is a Jewish tradition found in the Babylonian Talmud, Sota, 48, a, to the effect that the Urim and Thummim were lost at the time of the destruction of the Temple. Since this is about the time that the Nephites left Jerusalem, we suggest the possibility that Father Lehi took them with him or that Nephi secured them along with the Brass Plates. If one of them did secure the instruments, we see that the Nephites had the sacred interpreters during all the years of their long history.
