Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

I

The Small Plates of Nephi

This division comprises the Books of 1 Nephi, 2 Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Omni.

Chapter 8

The First Book of Nephi

Let us first make an analysis of the literary structure and contents of First Nephi. The First Book of Nephi is the first of six books which comprise the Small Plates. Its author is Nephi, the great son of that Lehi who led the Nephite people out of Jerusalem in or about the year 601 B.C. The book contains, in its present English dress, twenty-two chapters. First of all, let us examine the caption at the head of the book. It reads:

The First Book of Nephi His Reign and Ministry

The mention of Nephi's "reign" is surprising because it suggests that he was a king as well as a prophet. This supposition is correct, but our conjectures are not confirmed until the tenth chapter is reached. Immediately under the caption, one notices printed in italics a superscription which gives a brief summary of the contents of the book. This is part of the original text, as one may notice by examining the last line of it, which reads, "I, Nephi, wrote this record." Doubtless this superscription was written by Nephi after he had completed the body of the text. His habit of writing superscription containing brief summaries of the text set a precedent which was followed, as we shall see, by certain other Nephite historians. Jacob, Nephi's brother, is the only other historian mentioned in the Small Plates of Nephi to follow the precedent, but that is because the writings of the other seven are so small in amount.

It is interesting to observe that Nephi apparently did not begin his record on the Small Plates-or on the Large Plates either, for that matter-until his people had reached this continent. (See 1 Nephi 19:1-5.) Moreover, in the first chapter of 1 Nephi he tells us that he is making an abridgment of the record of his father; after that, it is his intention to make an account of his own life:

Behold, I make an abridgment of the record of my father, upon plates which I have made with mine own hands; wherefore, after I have abridged the record of my father then will I make an account of mine own life. (1:17)

Now, what part of 1 Nephi is the abridgment of Lehi's work, and where does Nephi's own record properly begin? It appears to me that the abridgment is found within the first nine chapters. Nephi's own record seems to begin with Chapter 10:

And now I, Nephi, proceed to give an account upon these plates of my proceedings, and my reign and ministry; wherefore, to proceed with mine account, I must speak somewhat of the things of my father, and also of my brethren. (10:1)

Even in Chapters 1-9 Nephi freely interjects his own observations as he proceeds to abridge his father's work; Chapters 6 and 9 are good examples.

From a literary point of view, one may be tempted to classify the First Book of Nephi as an autobiography. In a rather loose sense, it may be classified as such, but technically it would be better to call it a memoir. Let us regard it as part of "Nephi's Memoirs." The book may be conveniently studied according to the following scheme of analysis:

I. History of the Nephites from the time they leave Jerusalem until they reach the seashore and are commanded to build a ship in which to leave for promised land. (Chs. 1-17)

A. Lehi's vision. He predicts destruction of Jerusalem and departs into wilderness with family. His sons return to Jerusalem for Brass Plates. Lehi examines them and predicts their preservation. (Chs. 1-5 )

B. Nephi's intent in writing his record. He writes what is pleasing to God. (Ch. 6 )

C. Lehi's sons again return to Jerusalem and bring Ishmael and his family. Nephi's brethren rebel against him. Lehi's dream of the tree, river, and iron rod. (Chs. 7-8)

D. Nephi describes two sets of records named after himself: the Large Plates; the Small Plates. (Ch. 9)

E. Great visions and prophecies of Lehi and Nephi: Babylonian captivity, Israel's dispersion and gathering, the Spirit of the Lord, the Savior and his ministry, land of promise, future appearance of Savior to Nephites, Gentile nations, great and abominable church, American history foreseen, Bible and Book of Mormon, mission of John the Revelator, interpretation of Lehi's dream. (Chs. 10-15)

F. Lehi's sons marry Ishmael's daughters. Journey in wilderness continued with aid of miraculous director (Liahona). Ishmael dies. Voice of Lord heard. At seashore Nephi commanded to build ship. His brothers confounded. (Chs. 16-17)

II. Nephites sail for promised land. Nephi's records, prophecies, and teachings. (Chs. 18-22)

A. Difficulties during voyage to promised land. The arrival. Nephi's record of people. Prophecies of Zenock, Zenos, and Neum. Writings in book of Moses. (Chs. 18-19)

B. Nephi quotes and expounds Isaiah 48, 49. Prediction of Gentile nation on promised land. Gentiles to nourish Lehi's descendants. Fate of those who fight against Zion. Satan to lose power. (Chs. 20-22)

What was Nephi's purpose in writing this book? His intent, as the following passage from the book testifies, was primarily spiritual:

I desire the room that I may write of the things of God. For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved. (6:3,4)

Attention should also be called to another passage in which Nephi states, in a somewhat different way, his purpose in writing the book. He says:

Nevertheless, I have received a commandment of the Lord that I should make these plates [Small Plates], for the special purpose that there should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people. Upon the other plates [Large Plates of Nephi] should be engraven an account of the reign of the kings, and the wars and contentions of my people; wherefore these plates are for the more part of the ministry; and the other plates are for the more part of the reign of kings and the wars and contentions of my people. Wherefore, the Lord hath commanded me to make these plates for a wise purpose in him, which purpose I know not. (9:3-5, italics ours. Cf. Words of Mormon 3-7.)

It will be observed from these passages that Nephi's main purpose in writing 1 Nephi was to bring men to God by telling them about the "good news" of the ministry. He also knew that God wanted him to write for another reason, for a "wise purpose," which was not revealed to him at the time. We, of course, now know what the "wise purpose" was. When Martin Harris obtained the 116 pages of matter translated from the Book of Lehi (see last paragraph but one in Chapter 1), he allowed it to get into the hands of his wife and others. These people altered the text, as the Doctrine and Covenants makes clear (D&C 10:29). Therefore, the Lord commanded the Prophet Joseph Smith not to retranslate the Book of Lehi, but to translate in its stead what are now known to us as the Small Plates of Nephi (D&C 10:30-45). These plates were therefore providentially written for the purpose of taking the place of the material which was destined to fall into the hands of Martin Harris.

Early in this chapter we mentioned the superscription printed in italics in which Nephi gives a brief summary of the contents of the First Book of Nephi. We may notice at this point some additional items of interest about the superscription. The first of these concerns the names of the members of Lehi's family that left Jerusalem with him to go into the wilderness. His wife, Sariah, and four sons, Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi, are the only ones mentioned, but he seems to have had two daughters, wives of Ishmael's sons, who, for the time being, remained in Jerusalem. Of these we shall say more later in this chapter. The second point of interest is that twice Nephi refers to the "land of Jerusalem." What does he mean by this? According to ancient custom, which we shall discuss at greater length when we come to Alma 7:10, the expression has reference to the city of Jerusalem and the adjacent territory under its control. The third interesting point is that Nephi for some reason fails to mention the trip that he and his brother made from the Red Sea to Jerusalem to bring away Ishmael and his family. The trip is, however, taken for granted, as the context shows.

Coming now to the main text of the book, we find Nephi recording the fact that in the beginning of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, many prophets appeared among the Jews, calling upon them to repent or otherwise the city of Jerusalem would be destroyed (1:4). It will be recalled from Old Testament history that Palestine was at that time under the political domination of Nebuchadnezzar (better Nebuchadrezzar) the Babylonian king, and that Zedekiah became king of Judah as a result of the defection of Jehoiakim, who rebelled against Babylonian authority. It seems that Jehoiakim ruled over Judah three years under Babylonian auspices before he turned against Nebuchadrezzar (2 Kings 24:1). Before the Babylonian king could arrive on the scene, Jehoiakim died a natural death, and his son, Jehoiachin, then eighteen years old, ascended the throne (2 Kings 24:6-8). He reigned three months only; when Nebulchadrezzar joined the besieging army at Jerusalem, Jehoiachin surrendered, along with his mother, his wives, his officers, and the chief men of the land. These were all taken captive to Babylonia, with "the poorest sort of the people of the land" remaining behind (2 Kings 24:11-16). In the place of Jehoiachin, Nebuchadrezzar set his (Jehoiakin's) uncle, Mattaniah, upon the throne and changed his name to Zedekiah. According to most historians, this event took place in the year 597 B.C., but it is clear from certain statements made in the Book of Mormon (see 1 Nephi 19:8) that the date must have been 601 B.C.

Nephi's statement concerning the coming of many prophets into the city of Jerusalem is borne out by this Old Testament passage:

And the Lord, the God of their fathers, sent to them by His messengers, sending betimes and often; because He had compassion on His people, and on His dwelling-place; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised His words, and scoffed at His prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against His people, till there was no remedy. (2 Chronicles 36:15-16)

It is clear, from Nephi's account, that his father Lehi was one of the "many" prophets or messengers who were sent to warn the people in Jerusalem about their wickedness and abominations (2:1). The Lord manifested to him great things of spiritual import, including a vision of God, his angels, a messenger of transcendent luster (the pre-existent Christ?) followed by twelve others, the coming destruction of Jerusalem, and the resulting Babylonian captivity. (See 1:5-18.) When Lehi warned the inhabitants of Jerusalem concerning their wickedness and their imminent danger, and had manifested the coming of a Messiah, they mocked him and attempted to slay him (1:19, 20; cf. 1 Chronicles 36:16; Jeremiah 26:8-11). As a result, the Lord warned him in a dream to take his family and depart into the wilderness (2:2). Leaving his great estate-he seems to have been a rich man (3:16, 22)-he departed with his family into the wilderness and encamped in a valley by the mouth of a river which emptied into the Red Sea. We are told that they took nothing with them except provisions and tents. It may reasonably be assumed that they rode on beasts of burden such as asses and camels, but nowhere in Nephi's record is anything said about their means of transportation. As for a route to the Red Sea, they had two choices: they could go either directly south of Jerusalem by the road through Hebron and Beersheba and thence through the great wilderness to the northern tip of what is now the Gulf of Aqaba, or they could go directly east across the Jordan until they struck the ancient "King's Highway" and then proceed south, or nearly so, until the Gulf of Aqaba was reached. Lehi probably used the western route. It should be remembered that the Gulf of Aqaba, which is approximately one hundred miles long and fifteen wide, was anciently regarded as part of the Red Sea. The northern part of this gulf was well-known to the Israelites. Their ancestors under Moses had encamped near Ezion-geber (Numbers 33:35), which in Solomon's time became his Red Sea naval base and the center of iron and copper smelting. (Cf. Deuteronomy 8:9; 1 Kings 9:26.) Not far away was situated the town of Elath (or Eloth) on the east border of the wilderness of Paran. (Deuteronomy 2:8; see also 2 Samuel 8:14; 2 Kings 14:22; 2 Chronicles 26:2.) The journey from Jerusalem to the Red Sea could well have occupied ten or twelve days' time, if we assume that Lehi and his party rode on camels and spent little time resting by the way. It is interesting to observe here that the Great American explorer of Palestine, Dr. Edward Robinson, traveling by camel and taking the western route in the opposite direction, occupied nine days in making the journey. He left 'Akabah, a station not far from the northern tip of the Gulf of Aqaba, on the afternoon of Thursday, April 5, 1838, and arrived in Jerusalem at 6 P.M., Saturday, April 14th. (Robinson, Biblical Researches in Palestine, 1:255-325 ) The distance as the crow flies is approximately 155 miles.

Nephi indicates that once having reached the wilderness near the Red Sea, his father traveled three more days in the wilderness before encamping in the place mentioned above-that is, in a valley by the mouth of a river which emptied into the Red Sea (2:5-8). Lehi names the river after his eldest son, Laman, and the valley after Lemuel, the next oldest (2:9, 10, 14). There are two places we know of, either one of which might well correspond to the description given of Lehi's encampment. The first is a place called Maqna or Mukna, about seventy miles down the east coast of the Gulf of Aqaba; the second is east of the mouth of the gulf, at a place called Ainunah. Ainunah is also about one hundred miles in a direct line south and east of the northern tip of the gulf. It is almost directly south of a mountain known as Jebel Ainunah (Spring Mountain). Maqna would be my choice, if one had to be made, of the most likely spot where Lehi's family encamped. Wherever it was, Lehi built an altar of stones and offered sacrifice to the Lord.

While Lehi was dwelling in the valley of Lemuel, his two eldest sons, Laman and Lemuel, murmured bitterly against him because they had been obliged to leave their rich inheritance in Jerusalem. Not only that, but they contended that their father was a foolish visionary, and they found it impossible to believe that Jerusalem could be destroyed. But Lehi was filled with the spirit, and he rebuked his sons with such power that their very frames shook. (See 2:11-14.) These truculent sons were to cause him much sorrow during the remainder of his life, but at this time they did as he commanded them. At this point the record indicates that, like most desert dwellers, Lehi lived in a tent.

A number of the rare visits made by the Lord to persons upon the earth have been to young men-perhaps we had better say to boys. The visit of God the Father and the Son to the boy prophet, Joseph Smith, is well-known to us; the appearance of the Lord to Jeremiah, with whom Father Lehi was probably well acquainted, is significant (Jeremiah 1:4-10); and Mormon as a lad of fifteen years was a recipient of the Lord's kindness (Mormon 1:15); so also Jacob (2 Nephi 11:3). To these instances (there may have been others) we must add the visit of the Lord to Nephi. Lehi's son tells its of the circumstances under which our pre-existent Lord made the visitation to him:

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceeding young, nevertheless being large in stature, and also having great desires to know of the mysteries of God. wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father; wherefore, I did not rebel against him like unto my brothers. (2:16)

Nephi found the Lord while he was yet a boy, even as Joseph Smith, the boy Prophet of this age, found him. These facts should make a lasting impression upon the young people of our time. Through faith, prayer, good works, and patient persistence, men may even now enjoy the personal blessings of the Lord. But few are willing to pay the price which is necessary.

Nephi's words concerning the Lord found lodgment in the heart of Sam, his next oldest brother, but Laman and Lemuel would not hearken. Being grieved because of the hardness of their hearts, Nephi cried unto the Almighty in their behalf. Again the Lord answered him:

And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto me, saying: Blessed art thou, Nephi, because of thy faith, for thou hast sought me diligently, with lowliness of heart. And inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land which I have prepared for you; yea, a land which is choice above all other lands. And inasmuch as thy, brethren shall rebel against thee, they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And inasmuch as thou shalt keep my commandments, thou shalt be made a ruler and a teacher over thy brethren. For behold, in that day, that they shall rebel against me, I will curse them even with a sore curse, and they shall have no power over thy seed except they shall rebel against me also. And if it so be that they rebel against me, they shall be a scourge unto thy seed, to stir them up in the ways of remembrance. (2:19-24)

Notice the Lord's emphasis on the attributes that characterized Nephi: faith, diligence, and lowliness of heart.

During the Nephite sojourn in the valley of Lemuel near the Red Sea, Father Lehi was commanded by the Lord in a dream to send his sons back to Jerusalem for the purpose of obtaining the Hebrew scriptures written on plates of brass. These were in the hands of a powerful and refractory man whose name was Laban. The distance back to Jerusalem was about 225 miles in a straight line, most of which was through a hot and forbidding desert. The eldest sons of Lehi murmured at the task assigned to them, but Nephi, in his characteristic manner, said these noble words to his father:

I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them. (3:7)

When Nephi and his brothers with their tents arrived in Jerusalem, Laman was chosen by lot to go to the house of Laban and attempt to persuade him to deliver up the scriptures written on the Brass Plates. But the angry Laban drove him away and tried to slay him. This action so discouraged the brothers that they were about to return to the tent of their father in the wilderness; but Nephi, with a courageous spirit, turned to them and said:

As the Lord liveth, and as we live, [notice the characteristic Oriental exclamation] we will not go down unto our father in the wilderness until we have accomplished the thing which the Lord hath commanded us. Wherefore, let us be faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord; therefore let us go down to the land of our father's inheritance, for behold he left gold and silver, and all manner of riches. And all this he hath done because of the commandments of the Lord. (3:15-16)

The scriptures we have quoted reveal the reasons why Nephi may be called "faithful." He was not faithful in a blind, servile way; his faith in God was accompanied by a physical courage that was remarkable. Obstacles, big or little, did not hinder him from accomplishing the task at hand, especially if it was the Lord's work. History, I believe, will reveal that the great spiritual leaders in all ages had both physical and moral courage. God's great leaders are valiant men. Such was Nephi; he was indeed "large in stature." (2:16)

Nephi also reminded his brothers that their father knew that Jerusalem must be destroyed because its inhabitants were wicked and had rejected the words of the prophets. Not only that, but the records they were to obtain would preserve for their children the language of their fathers, as well as the admonitions of the holy prophets given under the spirit and power of God.

As a result of Nephi's leadership, the brothers decided to go to their father's estate and gather up gold, silver, and other precious things for the purpose of offering them to Laban in return for the Brass Plates. But their scheme did not work. Laban coveted the riches and thrust out the brothers from his presence; and he sent his servants to slay them and obtain their property. In their haste to elude Laban's servants, Lehi's sons left their riches behind and barely escaped with their lives into the wilderness, where they hid in the cavity of a rock. The anger of Laman and Lemuel at this turn of events was turned against their father and their younger brothers, more especially Nephi, and they beat him with a rod. But an angel of the Lord rebuked the two older men and informed them that the party was to go back to Jerusalem again, where the Lord would deliver Laban into their hands. Even after this manifestation, Laman and Lemuel began to complain again, questioning how the Lord could deliver into their hands a powerful man like Laban (3:31).

Nephi admonished his brethren with illustrations of the Lord's power, (see Exodus 14:21-31) and they followed him to the walls of Jerusalem, where they arrived at night (4:1-5). After his brothers had hidden themselves, Nephi slowly made his way into the city towards the house of Laban. He tells us that he was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand what he should do. As he came near Laban's house, he beheld a drunken man upon the ground. It was Laban. As Nephi drew forth this man's fine steel [^1] sword, he was constrained by the Spirit to slay him. He resisted the urgings of the Spirit, but probably reflected in his mind that the man was a murderer at heart, if not in deed, and had confiscated his (Nephi's) father's property. The Spirit said to him these words:

Slay him, for the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands; behold the Lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes. It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief. (4:12-13)

On further reflection, Nephi realized that his family could not keep the commandments of God according to the law of Moses without the Brass Plates upon which the law was written and which remained in Laban's possession. He therefore heeded the voice of the Spirit and slew Laban as he was commanded (4:14-18). Taking Laban's garments and armor, with which he clothed and girded himself, he proceeded to the wicked man's treasury, where the precious plates were kept. Laban's servant, Zoram, had the keys to the treasury. Nephi commanded him to go with him to that place; his imitation of Laban's voice, together with his wearing of the latter's clothing, armor, and sword, put Zoram completely off guard. Nephi obtained the Brass Plates and bade Zoram to follow him to his brethren waiting outside the walls. Zoram followed without question, supposing that his master was talking about the "brethren of the church." (4:26 ) This phrase is interesting in that it reveals that Laban was apparently active in the Jewish church of the time, a church that was worldly and corrupt, and administered by men who did not hesitate to oppose the prophets of God or even to slay them. When Nephi and Zoram approached Laman, Lemuel and Sam outside the walls, Nephi's brethren were thoroughly frightened, as well they might be, since he was in Laban's clothing and armor. The three brothers fled but came back when Nephi called to them. Now it was Zoram's turn to take fright and attempt to flee. But Nephi seized him and completely explained their mission to him and the Lord's will towards them. Zoram was promised safety and a place with them if he would only make an oath to tarry with the party. Nephi made oath to Zoram that he need not fear, and Zoram in turn made an oath to the brethren (4:33-37). When Zoram had made the oath, Nephi writes that "our fears did cease concerning him." This description of oath-making and of complete faith in a party once the oath has been taken is typically Oriental. (Cf. Genesis 24:1-9.) It is one of the many signs in the Book of Mormon that we are dealing with a genuine record. The writer has seen oath-making and its effects many times in Palestine. Even today a true Oriental would completely understand Nephi's purpose in demanding an oath of Zoram; he would also appreciate Nephi's trust in Zoram once the oath was made.

The episode involving Nephi's slaying of Laban has occasioned much speculation and discussion on the part of Book of Mormon readers. Some have asserted that Nephi was not led by the Spirit, that the Lord would not command such a thing. To this I can only point out that those who take this point of view are assuming a great deal. They profess, in so doing, that they know more about the Lord than did Nephi, who was a witness of him (2:16). Moreover, they make the Book of Mormon conform to their own images, even as certain Bible critics in the past have amended or twisted the plain meaning of scripture to make it comport with their ideas of what it can or cannot say.

Nephi, his brethren, and Zoram made the long trek back to the tent of Lehi, where they were joyously welcomed, having safely completed their mission. Sariah had complained in the meantime to her husband, Lehi, because she had supposed that her sons had perished in the wilderness (5:2). Lehi admitted to her that he was a visionary man, but he asserted that through his visions he would be saved from perishing in Jerusalem with his brethren. Not only that, but he was assured of a land of promise, and he comforted his wife with the added assurance that the Lord would deliver his sons out of the hands of Laban. When they returned, Sariah was fully convinced that her husband had been guided by the Lord in fleeing into the wilderness and in sending her sons to obtain the Brass Plates (5:8).

When the little party had offered sacrifice and burnt offerings to the Lord and had expressed their thanks to him, Father Lehi proceeded to give the Brass Plates a thorough examination. It is now a well-established fact that writing on metal plates was not an uncommon practice in the ancient world. [^2] We are on firm ground in believing that the Hebrew scriptures may have been written on a set of metal plates, as the Book of Mormon asserts. In his search of the Brass Plates, Lehi discovered that they contained the "five books of Moses" as well as a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of Zedekiah's reign; many of Jeremiah's prophecies were also found engraved on the sacred plates. Let us quote Nephi's exact words:

And after they had given thanks unto the God of Israel, my father, Lehi, took the records which were engraven upon the plates of brass, and he did search them from the beginning. And he beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents; and also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah; and also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the the mouth of Jeremiah. And it came to pass that my father, Lehi, also found upon the plates of brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph: yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved by the land of the Lord, that he might preserve his father, Jacob, and all his household from perishing with famine. (5:10-14)

Lehi also discovered the genealogy of his fathers upon the brass records; he therefore knew that he was a descendant, through Manasseh, of Joseph who was sold into Egypt (5:14; Alma 10:3).

The statements of Nephi regarding the contents of the Brass Plates are extremely important to us in the light of present-day critical views respecting the Old Testament. Most contemporary Old Testament scholars severely question or deny completely that Moses wrote, or supervised the writing of, the first five books of our Bible. But the Book of Mormon affirms the truth of the old Hebrew tradition that Moses wrote the first five books of the Old Testament, or the Pentateuch, as we call it (1 Nephi 5:11; 1 Nephi 17:26-28; 2 Nephi 2:15-19; 2 Nephi 3:4-10; Mosiah 12:28-13:33; etc.). The Nephite record (together with the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price) shatters-for the Latter-day Saints at least-current "critical" views regarding the date, authorship, and composition of the Pentateuch. Even the Book of Deuteronomy, which many critics single out as being written in the days of Josiah (c. 621 B.C.), is of Mosaic origin in the light of the Book of Mormon. (See, e.g., 1 Nephi 22:20, 21; 3 Nephi 20:23; cf. Deuteronomy 18:15, 18, 19.)

Many other interesting problems arise as a result of Nephi's words concerning the Brass Plates. One wonders how Jeremiah's prophecies found their place on the Brass Plates in view of the fact that Laban, their former keeper, was a wicked man. How did Jeremiah, or his scribe, Baruch (Jeremiah 36:4), or some other representative of the prophet gain access to the plates in Laban's treasury, in view of the difficulties which Nephi and his brothers had in getting at them? Were they aided by Zoram, the servant of Laban? We shall have to wait for more light before these questions can be answered, unless it be assumed that Jeremiah had access to the plates when Laban's father had charge of them. Another problem arises as a result of the discovery of the law in the temple during the days of Josiah, the king of Judah. Here is the biblical account of the discovery:

And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah [c. 621 B.C.], that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the Lord, saying: 'Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the money which is brought into the house of the Lord, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the people; and let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of the Lord; to repair the breaches of the house; unto the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons; and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house. '-Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hands; for they dealt faithfully. And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe: 'I have found the book of the Law in the house of the Lord.' And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan, and he read it. And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought back word unto the king, and said: 'Thy servants have poured out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of the Lord.' And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying: 'Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book.' And Shaphan read it before the king. And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the Law, that he rent his clothes. And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying: 'Go ye, inquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found; for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written concerning us.' (2 Kings 22:3-13)

As a result of the finding of this book, King Josiah instituted a great reform. (See 2 Kings 22:14-23:25.) Now the question arises, what was the nature of the book of the law, to which Josiah and his fathers had failed to give heed? Many conservative scholars have held that it included the entire Pentateuch, whereas most of the critical scholars have held it to be the Book of Deuteronomy. In view of the fact that King Josiah's reforms included in their scope a wider legislation than that found in Deuteronomy, it would seem probable that the book found in the temple included not only Deuteronomy but others, if not all, of the books of the Pentateuch. As students of the Book of Mormon we ask ourselves, how does it happen that the Jews in the days of Josiah-at least up to 621 B.C.-were without the book of the law, inasmuch as the Brass Plates containing it were in the hands of Laban or one of his predecessors? Are we to suppose that the keepers of the Brass Plates deliberately withheld the book of the law from the Jews? Such an action would seem strange in view of the fact that certain individuals were allowed access to the plates in order to write the prophecies of Jeremiah. Perhaps the book of the law was some other book than we have supposed, but that seems quite unlikely. At present we are unable to answer with complete certainty the questions I have asked. But they are interesting questions, and someday we shall probably obtain the answers to them.

Nephi makes another statement about the Brass Plates that arrests our attention. He says, "And Laban also was a descendant of Joseph, wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records." (5:16; italics ours.) These words would seem to indicate that the recording of the Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates had been begun many generations before Laban's time, how many we know not. Furthermore, it would seem probable that the records would be kept in the senior tribe of Israel-that is to say, in the tribe of Ephraim. (See Genesis 48:5, 13-20; 1 Chronicles 5:1-2.) Laban may well have been a descendant of Joseph through Ephraim. We may properly ask ourselves how it happened that Laban-and Lehi's family for that matter-inasmuch as they were descendants of Joseph through Manasseh, happened to be living in Jerusalem. The tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, as the reader is well aware, had been allied generations before with the Northern Kingdom of Israel, not with Judah in the south. A reasonable answer to our question would be this: the Northern Kingdom of Israel fell to the Assyrians when its capital of Samaria capitulated to Sargon II in 721 B.C. The forebears of Laban may have fled to Jerusalem to prevent the sacred records from falling into alien hands. Lehi's grandfather or greatgrandfather may also have left his northern home for Jerusalem in order to prevent his children from intermarrying or making religious compromises with the foreigners brought into the land by the Assyrians. Such a course may well have been taken by many devout families. (See 1 Chronicles 9:3.)

If the Brass Plates had been kept by Laban's ancestors in the tribe of Ephraim as early as the United Kingdom under Saul, David, and Solomon, it would be of great interest to know their history and that of any other sacred records subsequent to the division which took place after Solomon's death; it will be remembered that the Northern Confederation of Tribes followed Jeroboam (1 Kings 11:29-12:24). What happened to the keeping of sacred records when the Israelites became sharply divided on political grounds, so much so that the two nations were enemies? When we ask the question, we remember the religious effects of the American Civil War upon the North and South. The prophets in both nations probably paid little attention to the political lines of division, but it is improbable that all of them had their words recorded in the scriptures of both nations. From the time of the division until the fall of the Northern Kingdom in 721 B.C., the Brass Plates may well have been the official scripture of the ten tribes. It is probable that some prophets wrote on these plates, but their writings may not have been recorded on the records kept in Judah. Were Zenos, Zenock, Neum, and Ezias (1 Nephi 19:10; Helaman 8:20) among them? They were all Hebrew prophets known to the Nephites, but their names do not appear in our current Old Testament. It is also possible that the writings of some prophets in Judah were not placed on the Brass Plates during the period under consideration, but of this we have no way of knowing. But after the fall of Samaria in 721 B.C., it is very probable that most Jewish prophetical writings were engraved on the Brass Plates-assuming, of course, that Laban's immediate forebears came down to Jerusalem as we have already conjectured. It is a fact of considerable importance in Biblical studies that the Book of Mormon indicates the presence on the Brass Plates of more scripture than that contained in our Old and New Testaments put together (13:23-26). Considering the fact that these plates recorded Hebrew scripture written only before the year 601 B.C., we have ample testimony to the loss of much scripture between that date and the present time.

When Lehi had searched the Brass Plates, he was filled with the Spirit and began to prophesy that the day would come when they should be made known unto all kindreds, tongues, and people who were of his seed (5:17,18). Moreover, he prophesied that the Brass Plates should never perish or be dimmed by time (5:19). We know, therefore, that many unknown texts of the Hebrew scripture will be restored to the world. Moreover, texts in our present Old Testament which are known to be corrupt (e.g., Hosea) will be restored in their original purity. To those of us who are interested in the study of the Bible, this is a comforting and even a thrilling prospect.

Following his account of the acquisition of the Brass Plates, Nephi writes concerning his purposes in making a record (6:1-6). What these purposes were we have already indicated. (See p. 95.) In the next chapter of his history, Nephi tells us about another important episode involving an additional journey to Jerusalem from the wilderness home of his family. It appears that the Lord again spoke to Lehi, counseling him that it was not meet for his family to continue in the wilderness alone, but that his sons should obtain wives and raise up seed unto Him in the promised land (7:1). At the Lord's instance, Nephi and his brethren were again commanded to make the long and difficult journey to Jerusalem in order to recruit Ishmael and his family for the ends desired. We know little concerning Ishmael except that his family (in addition to his wife,) consisted of two married sons with their households and five daughters (7:6). The tradition in the Church that Ishmael was an Ephraimite is based on a discourse delivered by Apostle Erastus Snow, in Logan, Utah, May 6, 1882. Elder Snow said:

The Prophet Joseph informed us that the record of Lehi, was contained on the 116 pages that were first translated and subsequently stolen, and of which an abridgment is given us in the First Book of Nephi, which is the record of Nephi individually, he himself being of the lineage of Manasseh; but that Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters. . . . (Journal of Discourses, 23:184.)

This statement not only implies that Ishmael was an Ephraimite, but in connection with Nephi's statements (7:6), it strongly points to the fact that Father Lehi had daughters-at least two-who had married the sons of Ishmael. [^3] In other words, Lehi was the father-in-law of Ishmael's sons. This fact would clearly account for the casual and taken-for-granted attitude of Nephi when he mentions Ishmael and his family:

And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him [Lehi] that I, Nephi, and my brethren, should again return unto the land of Jerusalem, and bring down Ishmael and his family into the wilderness. (7:2)

Notice that no explanation is given as to who Ishmael was. The reader might well expect an explanation from Nephi concerning Ishmael's identity, particularly if he had no close family relationship to Lehi. None is forthcoming, which fact points strongly in favor of Joseph Smith's explanations as delivered by Elder Snow. Some words of my colleagues Dr. Hugh Nibley, are apropos at this point:

Lehi, faced with the prospect of a long journey in the wilderness, sent back for Ishmael, who promptly followed into the desert with a large party; this means that he must have been hardly less adept at moving about than Lehi himself. The interesting thing is that Nephi takes Ishmael (unlike Zoram) completely for granted, never explaining who he is or how he fits into the picture-the act of sending for him seems to be the most natural thing in the world, as does the marriage of his daughters with Lehi's sons. Since it has ever been the custom among desert people for a man to marry the daughter of his paternal uncle (bint 'ammi"), it is hard to avoid the impression that Lehi and Ishmael were related. [^4]

When Nephi and his brethren arrived in Jerusalem, they found Ishmael and his household prepared to listen when the Lord's desires were explained to them (7:4-5). Unfortunately, the rigors of the journey and the prospect of leaving comfortable estates must have preyed upon the minds of some of the party, because Nephi relates that Laman, Lemuel, two of Ishmael's daughters, and the two sons of Ishmael and their families rebelled against the others in the little party (7:6). In the light of what has already been explained concerning the family relationships of Lehi and Ishmael, it appears that at least two daughters of Lehi must be counted among the rebellious ones. Nephi was grieved that the murmurers wanted to return to Jerusalem, and he reproved them, more particularly Laman and Lemuel, for their shortsightedness and for the fact that he, their younger brother, had to set an example for them (7:8). He called their attention to the great things that the Lord had shown them and exhorted them to be faithful:

How is it that ye have forgotten that ye have seen an angel of the Lord? Yea, and how is it that ye have forgotten what great things the Lord hath done for us, in delivering us out of the hands of Laban, and also that we should obtain the record? Yea, and how is it that ye have forgotten that the Lord is able to do all things according to his will, for the children of men, if it so be that they exercise faith in him? Wherefore, let us be faithful to him. And if it so be that we are faithful to him, we shall obtain the land of promise; and ye shall know at some future period that the word of the Lord shall be fulfilled concerning the destruction of Jerusalem; for all things which the Lord hath spoken concerning the destruction of Jerusalem must be fulfilled. (7:10-13)

Nephi, evidently through the Spirit, reminded his brethren that the Jews had cast Jeremiah into prison (7:14). This may be the incident referred to in Jeremiah 37:15, and Nephi's reference to it should enable us to give the approximate year in which Ishmael and his household joined Father Lehi's family in the wilderness. I say "should enable us," provided the verse in question is not part of a badly disarranged text, because the text of Jeremiah has given some scholars the "impression of an arbitrary and a confused disarrangement." [^5]

A careful examination of Jeremiah 37:3-39:7 gives the distinct impression that Jeremiah was cast into prison during the lull in the siege of Jerusalem-that is to say, while the Chaldean army was away for the purpose of facing an Egyptian force which was approaching. (See especially 37:5-15.) The siege lasted eighteen months, and the city must have fallen in 590 B.C.-that is, during the eleventh year of Zedekiah's reign (Jeremiah 30:1,2). It is not unreasonable to surmise, therefore, that Jeremiah had been cast into prison during the year 591 B.C., or during the early months of 590 (Book of Mormon chronology). Then we could say that Ishmael and his family must have joined Father Lehi's party at that time. Unfortunately, this logical method of dating Ishmael's arrival in Lehi's camp does not comport with other data in the Book of Mormon. In the first place, when Nephi was chiding his brothers during the return from Jerusalem, he seems not to have been aware that the city had been under siege (7:13). And in the second place, the Nephite party was in the wilderness a total of but eight years (17:4). In fact, they arrived in the Land Bountiful at the seashore about 593 B.C., which was some time before the siege of Jerusalem began. Consequently, we are forced to the conclusion either that something is wrong with the account of Jeremiah as it stands, or that Nephi was referring to an earlier imprisonment of Jeremiah of which we know nothing-that is, one prior to 593 B.C. This fact shows us how, on occasion, the Nephite record may be used to check biblical data. It is obvious that further research on Jeremiah's imprisonment may prove of considerable interest and historical value.

Returning again to Nephi's account of the journey from Jerusalem, we find that the rebuke administered by him to his brothers so enraged them that they bound him with cords and sought to leave him in the wilderness to be eaten by wild beasts (7:16). But Nephi's prayers and faith gave him strength to burst the bonds and face his brethren again. They sought to lay hold of him a second time but members of Ishmael's family pleaded successfully in Nephi's behalf (7:19). The little party proceeded on to Lehi's tent after Laman and Lemuel had expressed their sorrow for their sins and had received Nephi's forgiveness (7:20-22). There they gave thanks to the Lord and offered sacrifice and burnt offerings to him.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, Who are called by the name of Israel, And are come forth out of the waters of Judah, [or out of the waters of baptism] Who swear by the name of the Lord, And make mention of the God of Israel, Yet they swear not in truth nor in righteousness. And again: Hearken, O ye house of Israel, All ye that are broken off and are driven out, Because of the wickedness of the pastor [shepherds] of my people; Yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, Who are of my people, O house of Israel. Listen, O isles [or coastlands] unto me, and hearken ye people, from far: the Lord hath called me from the womb; From the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.
[^2] Nevertheless, they call themselves of the holy city, but they do not stay themselves upon the God of Israel, Who is the Lord of Hosts, Yea, the Lord of Hosts is his name. And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; In the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, And made me a polished shaft: In his quiver hath he hid me;
[^3] Behold, I have declared the former things from the beginning [from of old]; And they went forth out of my mouth, and I showed [announced] them; I did show them suddenly. And said unto me: Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
[^4] And I did it because I knew that thou art obstinate, And thy neck is an iron sinew, And thy brow brass; Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain [and vanity]; Surely my judgment [right, due] is with the Lord, And my work [wages] with my God.
[^5] And I have even from the beginning declared to thee; Before it came to pass I showed them thee; And I showed them for fear lest thou shouldst say- Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, And my molten image hath commanded them. And now, saith the Lord-that formed me from the womb that I should be his servant, To bring Jacob [Israel] again to him- (Though Israel be not gathered), Yet shall I be glorious [honored] in the eyes of the Lord, And my God shall be my strength.
