Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 9

The First Book of Nephi (Continued)

After Nephi records the bringing of Ishmael and his family to the tent of his father, Lehi, on the borders of the Red Sea, he relates as an afterthought that Lehi's party had gathered all kinds of seed, grain, and fruit (8:1). This was, of course, in preparation for the time when they would arrive at the promised land. Later, Nephi was to explain that they had brought their seed "from the land of Jerusalem." (18:24)

Nephi now tells of a dream or vision which his father had that caused him to rejoice because of his two younger sons, but that gave him grave forebodings concerning Laman and Lemuel (8:2-4). Stripped to its essentials, this dream tells how Lehi, led by a man in a white robe, traversed for many hours a dark and dreary waste. After praying earnestly for the Lord's mercies, he beheld, in a large and spacious field, a tree whose fruit could make one happy. The fruit was sweeter than any he had ever tasted, and its whiteness exceeded anything that he had ever seen. It filled his soul with such great joy that he wanted his family to partake of it, for it was desirable above all other fruit. Casting his eyes about in search of them, he discovered a river of water near the tree, at the head of which his wife, Sariah, and his sons, Sam and Nephi, seemed undecided where to go. They came readily when Lehi beckoned to them, and partook of the fruit. Upon further search, Lehi beheld Laman and Lemuel, his eldest sons, but they refused to come and eat of the fruit. Then Lehi noticed a rod of iron extending along the river bank and leading to the tree where he stood. Beside the iron rod was a straight and narrow path, leading also to the tree. It also led by a fountain into a field, large and spacious "as if it had been a world [i.e., a scene of life and action]." (8:20 )

Numberless concourses of people were attempting to press forward and gain the path leading to the tree. Mists of darkness arose, and many were lost. Others pressed forward, caught hold of the iron rod, and were led to the tree, where they partook of its fruit.

Then they cast their eyes around as if ashamed. Lehi was thereby led to notice on the other side of the river a large building high above the earth. In it were numerous people in fine dress, mocking and pointing their fingers toward those who were eating the fruit of the tree. Many of the partakers, who became ashamed, fell away into forbidden paths and were lost.

At this point (8:29) Nephi drops the direct quotation of his father's words and tells the rest of the dream in his own way. He says that other multitudes pressed forward, caught hold of the iron rod, and eventually partook of the fruit of the tree. Throngs made their way to the great and spacious building; still others were drowned in the fountain; and many were simply lost from view, wandering in strange roads. Great were the number who entered the strange building and pointed the finger of scorn at those who were partaking of the fruit. However, Lehi was greatly disturbed over the fact that his sons, Laman and Lemuel, partook not of the fruit.

The symbolism of this dream must not be pressed too far, but the moral and religious implications of it are fairly obvious and certain. We are indebted to Nephi for the excellent interpretation of the most important parts. (See 11:21-36; 12:16-18; 15:21-36.) The dream seems to have a twofold application; first, it was given to Lehi as a warning that his eldest sons, Laman and Lemuel, would eventually depart from the faith and ways of their father (8:17,18,35,36); second, it is of such general worth that all of us may profit by its spiritual symbolism.

The man in the white robe who led Lehi through the dark and dreary waste would seem to symbolize a messenger from God who is able to guide and direct man. The dark and dreary waste probably represents the world, with its doubts, uncertainties, and errors. The tree, whose fruit was sweet and agreeable, represents the tree of life or the love of God, which spreads itself abroad in the hearts of men. It is desirable above all things and most joyous to the soul. The river which Lehi saw represents the depths of hell. Nephi says that his father was so anxious about other things that he did not behold the filthiness of the water (15:27). Moreover, the river represents the awful gulf which separates the wicked from the tree of life and the saints of God. The rod of iron represents the word of God. If one holds to it, he will never perish; neither can temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower and blind him or lead him away to destruction. The numberless concourses of people pressing forward toward the straight and narrow path leading to the tree seem to represent the people of the world whose intentions and desires are good. The mist of darkness which arose after they had gained the path symbolizes the temptations of the devil, which blind the eyes and harden the hearts of men, and lead them away into broad roads to perish. The people who attain the tree, partake of the fruit, and then cast their eyes about as if ashamed, represent those persons who have considerable spiritual insight and ability but who lack stability and strength of character. They allow the wicked and unscrupulous to sway them from the plain course of duty and righteousness. The great and spacious building on the other side of the river typifies the pride of the world. The multitude within the building in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers at those who were partaking of the fruit of the tree represent the wicked world and the folly thereof. They include, according to Nephi, the house of Israel gathered together to fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb (11:35). He also informs us that the fall of the great and spacious building represents the destruction of all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people that shall fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

Lehi's dream and its symbolism are impressive. They convey important spiritual lessons to us and should be taught and appreciated more than they are.

When Lehi had told his dream, he exhorted Laman and Lemuel to heed his words in order that they might not be cast off from the presence of the Lord. He not only preached to them with the tender feelings of a parent, but also prophesied unto them many things (8:37,38).

Nephi is careful to describe (Ch. 9) the purpose and functions of two sets of gold plates made by him. We have already mentioned these sets, known respectively as the Small Plates of Nephi and the Large Plates of Nephi (pp. 16, 17). Here we need but emphasize three points concerning them: (1) they seem to have been made after Nephi had reached this continent (19:1-5); (2) the Large Plates were made first (19:1-2; 2 Nephi 5:29-33), and upon them it was the intention to engrave the secular history of the people (9:4); nevertheless, when the Small Plates were filled (Omni 30), much sacred history was written on the Large Plates (see 3 Nephi 5:10); (3)the Small Plates were reserved for the sacred or ecclesiastical history of the Nephite people, but they were limited to the relatively small output of nine writers and were filled about 130 B.C.; moreover, they were made for a "wise purpose," (9:5) which we have already discussed (see p. 17). They were probably made about twenty years after the Large Plates (571 B.C.; cf. 2 Nephi 5:28-31).

With Chapter 10 of 1 Nephi we begin the consideration of writings which Nephi calls "my proceedings, and my reign and ministry." (10:1; see p. 94.) And, in fact, within Chapters 10-15 we find the spiritual core of the book.

Nephi begins his own account by telling about several important prophecies made by his father Lehi following the episode of the dream concerning the tree, the river, and the iron rod. Lehi predicted again the destruction of the great city of Jerusalem, along with many of the Jews. Others of the Jews would be carried captive into Babylon, but in the due time of the Lord they would be brought back out of captivity to possess again the land of their inheritance (10:3). He also predicted that the coming of the Messiah to be a Savior to the world would take place six hundred years from the time of his (Lehi's) leaving Jerusalem (10:4; cf. 19:8; 2 Nephi 25:19; 3 Nephi 1:1). Lehi also foretold the coming of a prophet (John the Baptist) to prepare the way of the Lord (10:7-8). This prophet would baptize in Bethabara beyond Jordan; he would baptize the Messiah, among others, with water. The mention of "Bethabara" at this point is interesting, because the Book of Mormon verifies the reading of the Received Text of John 1:28 instead of the one accepted by scholars which is based on textual criticism and which reads "Bethany." John would also behold and bear record, so Lehi explained, that he had baptized the Lamb of God, who should take away the sins of the world. Lehi bore testimony concerning the preaching of the gospel among the Jews, and also concerning their dwindling in unbelief. They would slay the Messiah, who in turn would rise from the dead and manifest himself unto the Gentiles by the Holy Ghost (10:11). Israel he compared to an olive tree whose branches should be broken off and be scattered upon all the face of the earth. It was therefore expedient that the little group which he headed should be led with one accord into the land of promise in fulfillment of the word of the Lord. But after the house of Israel should be scattered, they would be gathered together again; that is to say, after the Gentiles had received the gospel in its fulness, the natural branches of the olive tree, or the remnant of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to a knowledge of the Messiah, their true Lord and Redeemer (10:14).

Father Lehi's words concerning the great spiritual manifestations given him at various times so impressed Nephi that he strongly desired to see, hear, and know of these things, "by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God to all those who diligently seek him. . . ." (10: 17 ) He also said other things about God and the Holy Ghost, even bearing testimony that the Holy Ghost gave him authority to speak as he did.

Notice carefully that Nephi wanted to know "by the power of the Holy Ghost." This statement is important in connection with his recital of a manifestation vouchsafed him involving the "Spirit of the Lord." While pondering in his heart, he says that he was "caught away in the Spirit of the Lord [cf. Ezekiel 37:1], yea, into an exceeding high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never had before set my foot." (11:1) The Spirit asked Nephi concerning his desires, and upon receiving an answer he proceeded to test his faith by asking if he believed that his father, Lehi, saw the tree (8:10-12) of which Lehi had spoken (11:2-4). Nephi replied that he believed all the words of his father. The Spirit commended Nephi for his belief in the Son of God and promised him that he would be shown all the things which he desired (11:6). In accordance with this promise, the Spirit began its fulfillment by showing Nephi the tree of which his father had tasted the fruit. The young prophet then desired to know the interpretation of what he had seen:

And he [the Spirit] said unto me: What desirest thou? And I said unto him: To know the interpretation thereof-for I spake unto him as a man speaketh; for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and he spake unto me as a man speaketh with another. (11:10-11; italics mine.)

The Spirit left Nephi's presence, and an angel came in his stead to continue the vision. But the identity of the Spirit of the Lord may be a question of great importance in the reader's mind. Who was this personage who talked face to face with Nephi "as a man speaketh with another"? There have been and are differences of opinion regarding this question. Some persons regard the Spirit of the Lord as the pre-existent Christ (cf. Ether 3:14-17); others look upon Nephi's visitor as the Holy Ghost in person. The writer identifies himself with the latter group. If Nephi talked with the Holy Ghost in person, we may regard 1 Nephi 11:1-12 as the classical passage in all scripture which identifies the Holy Ghost as a male personage with when man may speak face to face. Can the differences of opinion regarding the identity of the Spirit of the Lord be resolved? Surely, it is important that this be done if it is at all possible. I have pronounced opinions on the matter but cannot hope to convince all Book of Mormon students that those opinions are correct.

First of all, let the reader remember that Nephi desired to "see, hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost. . . ." (10:17) In fact, he seems to have meditated upon the powers and functions of the Holy Ghost at considerable length before the desired manifestation was given him (10:17-22). Second, it should be observed that Nephi said he was caught away "in the Spirit of the Lord." (11:1; italics mine.) Apparently the same expression with the phrase "of the Lord" deleted is used in the chapter in relation to Mary, the mother of our Lord, and to the Twelve Apostles of the Savior:

And it came to pass that I [Nephi] beheld that she [Mary] was carried away in the Spirit ... (11:19; italics mine.)

And I also beheld twelve others following him. And it came to pass that they were carried away in the Spirit from before my face, and I saw them not. (11:29; italics mine.)

The references to the Spirit in both instances seem obviously to point to the Holy Ghost, not to the pre-existent Christ (cf 11:19 with Matthew 1:18). Third, it may be pointed out that the phrase "Spirit of the Lord" occurs forty times in the Book of Mormon, and in not a single passage where it occurs can there be pointed out a clear-cut example favoring the interpretation that it represents the pre-existent Christ instead of the Holy Ghost. On the other hand, there are many occurrences of the phrase that can refer only to the Holy Ghost. Let us look at a few. It is obvious on examination that in no instance where the phrase was written down after the appearance of the resurrected Christ on this continent does it refer to his pre-existent person. There are three illustrations of this kind: "the Spirit of the Lord did not abide in us" (Mormon 2:26); "the Spirit of the Lord hath already ceased to strive with their fathers" (Mormon 5:16); "I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased striving with them" (Moroni 9:4). The references here must be to the Holy Ghost. Let us look at another use of the phrase as Nephi describes the course of his vision. In 13:12-15 he speaks of the coming of a Gentile (Columbus) to this land, together with other Gentiles who were to come at later times. Verse 15 reads, "And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles. . . ." It seems quite evident to me that the "Spirit of the Lord" as used in this verse is synonymous with the phrase "Spirit of God" as found in verses 12 and 13. Whatever else these phrases may mean, it is certain that the personage of the pre-existent Christ cannot be meant, because the vision of Nephi in this context envisioned the latter days which were to be long after Christ's resurrection. If it be contended that the phrases do not refer to the Holy Ghost (doubtful in view of 10:11) we shall have to say that they refer to the power that emanates from Deity as a whole. A few other illustrations where the phrase "Spirit of the Lord" clearly represents the functions of the Holy Ghost are given herewith: "the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy" (Mosiah 4:3); "the Spirit of the Lord did no more preserve them; yea, it had withdrawn from them because the Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy temples." (Helaman 4:24; cf. Romans 8:9,11; 1 Corinthians 3:16.) Finally, it should be observed that when Nephi unquestionably refers to the pre-existent Christ, he never calls him the "Spirit of the Lord." For example, when the prophet had his first visitation from the Lord, he said, "I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me . . ." (2:16 ) He didn't say, "I did cry unto the Spirit of the Lord." At a later time, when referring to the prophet Isaiah, Nephi said, "He verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him." (2 Nephi 11:2; italics mine.) In other verses of the same chapter he refers to the coming Redeemer as the Christ.

We may conclude that inasmuch as there is no single instance in the Book of Mormon where the phrase "Spirit of the Lord" can be clearly and unequivocally equated with the pre-existent Christ, it is far more reasonable, in view of the evidence here presented, to believe that the phrase refers to the Holy Ghost. Such is the writer's personal opinion, at any rate.

The angel who took charge of Nephi's vision following the departure of the Spirit of the Lord now showed him great and important things pertaining to the coming of our Lord in the flesh. Nephi first saw the beautiful and fair virgin who was destined to become the mother of the Son of God (11:15-18). He saw her carried away in the Spirit; later she appeared again bearing a child whom the angel denominated "the Lamb of God, yea even the Son of the Eternal Father!" (11:19-21) The angelic messenger then showed Nephi the Son of God in his ministry among men. He perceived that many fell down at our Lord's feet and worshipped him. The rod of iron, seen by Lehi, was also shown to Nephi. It led to the fountain of living waters, which, like the tree of life, represented the love of God. He also beheld the work of the prophet (John the Baptist) who was to prepare the way before the Savior, including his mission of baptizing the Lamb of God. So vivid and detailed was the vision that Nephi was permitted to see the Holy Ghost come down out of heaven (the sign of a dove attending) [^1]and abide in the baptized Messiah (11:27). He saw the power and glory of the Lord as he went forth among men-followed by the Twelve-preaching, healing the sick, and casting out devils and unclean spirits (11:28-31). Then appeared the drama of our Lord's judgment and crucifixion for the sins of the world. Following the Savior's death, Nephi saw the multitudes of the earth gathered together to fight the apostles of the Lamb. In the vision Nephi saw the multitude gathered together in a large and spacious building like the one which his father, Lehi, saw. The angel said to him by way of explanation:

Behold the world and the wisdom thereof; yea, behold the house of Israel hath gathered together to fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb. (11:35)

Nephi bore record that the great and spacious building was the pride of the world and that it fell, and great was the fall thereof. The angel spoke again:

Thus shall be the destruction of all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, that shall fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb. (11:36)

In the next part of the vision, Nephi looked upon his descendants and those of his brethren in the land of promise. He beheld them in multitudes locked in battle, with consequent slaughter and destruction (12:2). Many generations of conflict passed before his eyes, and he beheld many cities. Then he was permitted to view the terrible destruction and loss of life at the time of Christ's death.

In fact, the scenes of terror and death so well described in Chapters 8-10 of 3 Nephi passed before his eyes (12:4,5). Moreover, he saw the appearance of the Savior upon this continent and the ministry of the Twelve who were ordained and chosen to assist him. The function of the original Twelve who were chosen in Palestine to be judges of the twelve tribes of Israel and of the Nephite Twelve was explained to him. The Nephite Twelve in turn were to be the judges of his seed (12:9,10). After the appearance of the Savior upon this land, Nephi was shown the three generations of his people who would pass away in righteousness; many of the fourth generation he also saw pass away in righteousness. Then followed great battles and the eventual destruction of his descendants at the hand of the descendants of his brethren (12:11-19). The victors in turn fought among themselves for generations and dwindled in unbelief to become dark, loathsome, filthy, and full of idleness and abominations. In the course of this portion of his vision, Nephi had explained to him the meaning of many things that his father, Lehi, had seen in vision (12:16-19).

In Nephi's next vision-the last-he was shown the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles. Among the nations of the Gentiles he saw the foundation of a great and abominable church. The devil was the instigator of it, and Nephi was made to understand that gold, silver, fine clothing, and harlots were the desires of the abominable institution (13:1-9). He also perceived that the Gentiles were separated from the seed of his brethren (the Lamanites) by many waters. The wrath of the Lord was upon them, and the young prophet beheld that their privacy upon this land was broken by adventurous explorers from among the Gentiles. It is apparent that Nephi foresaw the coming of Columbus (13:12), and other bold spirits who afterwards voyaged to this hemisphere. He saw the Lamanites scattered before the Gentiles; he also noticed how the latter were blessed and how they prospered in their new inheritance (13:15). The power of the Lord was with the humble Gentiles, and he was privileged to see the struggle of the American colonists against the "mother Gentiles" (Great Britain) and their subsequent victory against all oppressors (13:16-19). Nephi beheld a book among the prospering Gentiles, and the heavenly visitor who attended him explained it as a limited "record of the Jews" which originally had "contained the plainness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; . . . "(13:20-24 ) These scriptures, so the angel explained, had gone forth from the Jews in their purity unto the Gentiles. After they had gone forth from the Jews, "by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb" to the Gentiles, Nephi perceived the foundation of a great and abominable church, which has already been mentioned. This great church is quite obviously, so it seems to me, the apostate successor of the true church which had originally been set up by Christ and his apostles. With the passing of the apostles near the end of the First Century A.D., only a hollow shell of the church, bereft of all real authority and known as the Christian Church, remained. All of its offshoots are necessarily apostate. Many good people remain in the mother church and in her offspring, but the Lord has pronounced these man-made organizations an abomination in his sight.

Nephi was told that when the book in the possession of the Gentiles-our Bible-had passed through the hands of the great and abominable church, many plain and precious things had been taken away from it (13:26-29). The excision of these plain and precious things, once easily understood and clear to mankind, has caused men in our day to stumble and be led astray.

The heavenly messenger showed Nephi that the Gentiles upon this land, who were to be lifted up above all other nations, would not be allowed to utterly destroy the Lamanite remnant. Nor would the Gentiles be left in blindness because of the mutilation of the Bible by that abominable church whose formation he had seen (13:32). Nephi saw plain and precious writings of the gospel, which had been hid up by his seed, restored in due time to the Gentiles. He also beheld the Bible come forth from the Gentiles to the Lamanites as well as other books to the convincing of Jews, Gentiles, and Lamanites that the records of the Hebrew prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true. These last records will establish the truth of the Bible and "make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved." (13:40) The scriptures will be brought together as one; the Lord will manifest himself unto all nations, both Jews and Gentiles, and the last shall be first, and the first shall be last.

It was manifested to Nephi that in the latter days, when God's work should again be set up in the earth, the stumbling blocks of the Gentiles would be taken away and they would be a blessed people with Israel upon this land forever, if only they would hearken to the Lamb of God (14:1,2). God's people would be saved from the great pit dug for them by the great and abominable church. That pit, instead, would be filled by those who had dug it. If the Gentiles repented, all would be well; but if they turned against the Lord, matters would go hard with them. Nephi's attendant described the unrighteous dominion of the great and abominable church that should exist in the latter days, and its attempts to fight against the saints of God. In the great struggle, the Lord would be with his people, and divine wrath would rest upon the great and abominable church, whose foundation is the devil. Moreover, the Lord would fulfill the covenants which he had made with his people who are of the house of Israel (14:5-17). The mission of John the Revelator in writing many of the great and important events concerning the future, even to the end of the world, was explained to Nephi, and he was forbidden to write certain things which he saw, because of the Lord's will that his apostle should write them (14:18-28). Nevertheless, Nephi was satisfied because he had seen the things which his father saw. It is an interesting fact that Nephi wrote down but a small part of the things shown him. Thus ended the great visions shown to the young Nephite prophet by the heavenly messenger.

When Nephi returned to his father's tent after having been carried away in the spirit, he found his brethren disputing one with another concerning great things which his father had taught them (15:1-3). Being hard of heart, they did not look unto the Lord as they should have done for the interpretations which they needed. Nephi was grieved because of their hardness of heart and also because of the eventual destruction of his people which he had seen in vision. After he had strengthened himself, Nephi asked his brethren concerning the cause of their disputations. They mentioned four matters taught by their father which had given them difficulty: (1) he had compared the house of Israel to the natural branches of an olive tree and had spoken about the Gentiles (15:7; cf. 10:12-17); (2) he had spoken of a tree which he had seen in a dream (15:21; cf. 8:10-12); (3) he had told about a rod of iron that led to the tree (15:23; cf. 8:19,20); and (4) he had mentioned having seen a river of water (15:26; cf. 8:13,14). Nephi resolved each of these problems for the benefit of his brethren and added, besides, many wise words of counsel to them. Thereupon the brethren humbled themselves before the Lord, and Nephi had joy and great hopes for them (15:8-16:5).

The Lord now commanded Lehi to depart from the camp in the valley of Lemuel on the border of the Red Sea, cross the river Laman, and journey into the wilderness (16:9-12). Before setting forth, however, Nephi took one of the daughters of Ishmael to wife; his brothers also married daughters of Ishmael, and Zoram married the eldest daughter of Ishmael. On the morning of the day they set forth, Lehi found in his tent door a round brass ball of curious workmanship, containing within it two spindles. One of these pointed the direction in which they were to travel. This divine instrument or compass, called by the Nephites Liahona (guidance is the Lord's?) or director, worked according to their faith and gave directions to them in their travels (16:16, 26-30; 18:12,21; 2 Nephi 5:12; Mosiah 1:16; Alma 37:38-45). The little party, provided with seeds and provisions, set forth into the wilderness with their tents and traveled four days in a nearly south-southeast direction until they came to a place they called Shazer (Hebrews to spin, to twist; 16:11-14). After slaying game for food with their bows and arrows, they continued their journey in the same general direction near the fertile parts of the wilderness by the borders of the Red Sea. After many days of travel, during which time they slew wild animals to provide themselves with food, they finally pitched their tents again in order to rest themselves and hunt for food for their families (16:15,17). The Liahona or director constantly gave them directions which kept them in the more favorable parts of the wilderness.

It was at this point in their journey that Nephi broke his fine steel bow, and the bows of his brethren lost their springs (16:18,21). Because they were thus deprived, their families suffered for lack of food and because of their other deprivations in the wilderness, Laman and Lemuel set up a great outcry; and even their father began to murmur against the Lord. Nephi's stalwart character was shown during this difficult period. He spoke much to his disgruntled brethren, made bows and arrows of wood, and asked his father where he should obtain food. Father Lehi inquired of the Lord, who told him to look upon the things miraculously written upon the ball. A chastened Lehi gave Nephi directions to go to the top of a mountain, where he slew wild beasts and brought them back to the hungering families, who humbled themselves before the Lord and gave him thanks (16:22-32). The little party again journeyed in the same general direction and finally pitched their tents in a place called Nahom (Hebrews growl, groan). It was here that Ishmael died and was buried (16:33-34). The death of Ishmael, together with the afflictions of an inhospitable wilderness, again stirred the ire of most of the members of the party against Lehi and Nephi. There was even talk of slaying the two of them. But the voice of the Lord came to their assistance by chastening the recalcitrants, who turned away their anger and repented of their sins. The Lord then blessed them with food (16:34-39).

The Nephites now took up their desert journey again and struck out in a nearly eastward direction. They suffered much affliction, and in the midst of their trials their wives bore them children. Nephi tells us that the Lord had advised them not to make fires for the purpose of cooking their food, because he would make it sweet. Consequently, they lived upon raw meat and thrived upon it. The women became strong "like unto men" and began to bear their travels without complaint (17:2,12). Lehi's son sums up his conclusions concerning God's care in these words:

And thus we see that the commandments of God must be fulfilled. And if it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them; wherefore, he did provide means for us while we did sojourn in the wilderness. (17:3)

We are told that the little party sojourned a total of eight years (until 593 B.C.) in the wilderness, having come, finally, to a land which they called Bountiful because of its richness in fruit and wild honey. From here they could behold the sea, which they denominated Irreantum-"many waters" (17:4, 5).

I think it highly probable that their seashore habitat was on the eastern side of the Arabian Peninsula, possibly in the Oman or Hadramaut region. Mountains were evidently nearby, because the voice of the Lord commanded Nephi to go "into the mountain" where the Almighty commanded him to build a ship and gave him all necessary directions for completing the project which would enable the party to cross the seas to the promised land (17:7-16; 18:2-4).

Nephi's brethren jeered at him for believing that he could build a ship which would carry them over the seas. But their noble brother answered them with an effective reference to the history of Israel's past. God, he reminded them, had brought Israel out of bondage in Egypt and had led them across the Red Sea and the Jordan into the land of promise, where they had dispossessed the wicked inhabitants of the land (17:23-32). The Lord leads away the righteous into precious lands and destroys the wicked (17:38). The Almighty favors the righteous:

Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God. (17;35)

This is the answer of the Book of Mormon to those who believe that the instructions of Moses unto his people to destroy the morally bankrupt Canaanites (Deuteronomy 9:1-3; Deuteronomy 12:1-3) are "low religion."

Nephi gave other vital instructions concerning God's goodness and power to his brethren and chastised them vigorously because of their wickedness. He even accused them of being murderers in their hearts, like onto the Jews who had sought to take away the life of their father (17:39-47). They attempted to put their hands upon Nephi, but he commanded them not to do it because of the consuming power of God within him. Finally, after Nephi had reminded them that with God's help he could build a ship, he stretched forth his hand toward his brethren, and they were powerfully shaken (17:49-54). They humbly acknowledged the power of the Almighty which was within their brother and were about to worship him, but he forbade it, saying that they should worship the Lord and honor their father and mother, that their days might be long in the land which their God should give them (17:55).

We shall now deal with the second division of the Book of First Nephi, which comprises Chapters 18-22.

The Lord taught Nephi the technicalities of building a ship, which was not constructed after the manner common to men (18:1,2). In the course of construction, Nephi went often to the mount to pray and was shown great things by the Almighty. When the construction was finished, Nephi's brethren perceived that the workmanship of the ship was unusually good; therefore, they again humbled themselves before the Lord.

The divinely led party now entered the ship, which they had thoroughly provisioned and prepared for the long voyage (18:5-6). Once out to sea, Nephi's brethren conducted themselves in a manner which was violently out of harmony with God's kindness and providence. They, together with their wives, began to dance, sing, and speak rudely. When Nephi remonstrated with them, they tied him up with cords. The divine compass or Liahona ceased to work, and a terrible storm arose, which lasted for four days before they loosed Nephi (18:9-16). The cords had caused his wrists and ankles to swell and become sore, but he refused to complain in the midst of his adversities. Nephi's wife and children, together with his father and mother, and his little brothers, Jacob and Joseph, also suffered much because of the evil conduct of their brethren (18:17-19). On being released, Nephi took the compass, which worked for him. He prayed to the Lord, and the great storm ceased. The ship responded to his guidance, and in due time they reached the land of promise and pitched their tents.

Questions are often asked concerning the place of their landing. In the Times and Seasons, printed apparently with the Prophet Joseph Smith's full knowledge and blessing, occurs this explanation:

Lehi went down by the Red Sea to the great southern ocean, and landed a little south of the Isthmus of Darien, and improved the country . . . [^2]

Upon landing, father Lehi's party were blessed in abundance; the seeds they brought with them from Jerusalem grew well, and they found beasts of many kinds in the forests, including the horse, the cow, the ox, the ass, the goat and the wild goat. Critics have held that the mention of these animals, some of which were domesticated the Nephites, may be used as an argument against the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. And the problem of demonstrating the use of domestic animals among ancient American peoples is the most difficult scientific problem faced by Book of Mormon scholars at the present time. [^3]Nephi also mentions that his party found useful metals such as gold, silver, and copper (18:25).

When Nephi reached this hemisphere, he was commanded by the Lord to make a set of plates upon which to engrave the record of his people. Upon these plates (the Large Plates of Nephi) he wrote the record of his father, the accounts of their journeys in the wilderness, his father's prophecies, and many of his own (19:1). At the time, he never knew that the Lord would eventually require him to make the Small Plates of Nephi. These may well have been constructed nearly twenty years later, approximately 570 B.C. (2 Nephi 5:28-32). After his mention of the plates, Nephi writes concerning the Christ and of the afflictions he should go through in his ministry. He cites the prophecies of Zenock, Neum, and Zenos, Hebrew prophets not mentioned in our Old Testament, who wrote of the scenes that should accompany the death and burial of the Savior (19:10-12). Those who should bring about the crucifixion would become wanderers and a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations. Nevertheless, the day is to come, according to the prophet Zenos, when scattered Israel will be gathered home from the four quarters of the earth, and all the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord (19:16,17). Nephi taught all these things to his brethren and also read to them many things written in the Book of Moses; but that he might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer, he quoted to them Chapters 48 and 49 of the Book of Isaiah (19:22-21:26). When he had finished reading Isaiah's prophecies from the Brass Plates, his brethren were desirous to know the meaning of them.

It is important for us to understand that before quoting Isaiah's words, Nephi had said to his brethren:

Hear ye the words of the prophet, ye who are a remnant of the house of Israel, a branch who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet, which were written unto all the house of Israel, and liken [apply, compare] them onto yourselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from whom ye have been broken off; for after this manner has the prophet written. (19:24)

At this point I shall quote the Nephite version of Chapters 48 and 49 of the Book of Isaiah as found in 1 Nephi 20 and 21 and, as far as possible, attempt to explain what the prophet meant. These chapters are in poetic form and will be printed as such. When deemed necessary, some words of the text will be clarified by inserted explanations in brackets following the word or words concerned.

1 Nephi 20 (Cf. Isaiah 48.)

Verses 1 and 2 are addressed to the religious hypocrites of Israel-these go through the forms of religion and profess allegiance to the Lord, but "not in truth nor in righteousness." In verse 1, the clause "or out of the waters of baptism" appeared in the 1840 and 1842 editions of the Book of Mormon and did not appear again until added by Dr. James E. Talmage in the 1920 edition. It was doubtless added to explain the previous clause and should be placed in brackets.

The Lord had foretold events in Israel's history long before they came to pass, lest in their hardness and obstinacy the people should claim that their idols and images had brought them to pass.

Now that the people have heard the Lord's predictions and witnessed their fulfillment, they must realize that God alone foresees and rules the destinies of nations. At this time the purposes of the Lord are declared on the eve of their fulfillment, lest the people should declare that they already knew them. Since the events have been proclaimed before they took place, men cannot claim to have predicted or looked forward to them. Israel was rebellious from the nation's infancy.

It is for the Lord's sake and for his praise that he has refrained from cutting Israel off. His people have been refined and tried by affliction in order that God's name should not be profaned and his glory given to another.

The Lord now declares to Israel that he is eternal, the first and the last; he has created the earth and the heavens, and all things obey him.

The Lord now commands all Israel to assemble and hear an important prediction. Which of the false gods ("who among them") of the nations has been able to foretell the rise of Cyrus (cf. Isaiah 44:28; Isaiah 45:1) and his conquest of hated Babylon? The Lord loves Cyrus (as is present) and through him will perform his pleasure upon Babylon and make his way prosperous. (Cyrus conquered Babylon about 539 B.C.)

Isaiah now asks his people to draw near unto him. He has not been secret or evasive in his counsel. When the Lord spoke, the prophet declared his word; the Lord God, and his Spirit, gave him authority and sent him to the people. The prophet quotes the Lord, their Redeemer, to that effect; he it is who teaches them to profit and who leads them by the way they should go. And how wonderful and prosperous would the condition of Israel had been if they had listened to the commandments of the Lord! Their peace and righteousness would have been beyond belief; their offspring would have been as the sand for number, and their name would not have been cut off nor destroyed before him.

Foreseeing the Babylonian captivity, Isaiah prophetically bids the Jewish exiles to depart from their captors with songs of praise to the Lord, who has redeemed them and led them miraculously through the desert. Notwithstanding he has done this fort his people, the Lord makes clear that there shall be no peace for the wicked among them.

1 Nephi 21 (Cf. Isaiah 49.)

The Book of Mormon version of Isaiah 49 contains notable restorations of the text that have been long lost. This fact will be noticed even in the first verse. Verses 1-13 constitute the second of a series of four distinctive "Servant Songs" in the text of Isaiah (Isaiah 42:1-9; Isaiah 49:1-13; Isaiah 50:4-11; Isaiah 52:13-53:12). Scholars have long debated the identity of the "Servant," but the early Christians and the Nephites identified him with Christ (see Acts 8:26-35; Mosiah 14, 15).

In verses 1-13, the Savior (the "Servant") speaks of his mission in connection with scattered Israel as well as being a light to the nations. He is called by God from his mother's womb (vss. 1,5); he is despondent and his work seems vain, but under God's protection his cause will be safe (vs. 4). He is charged to bring Jacob (Israel) again to God, to restore the preserved of Israel, to be a light to the Gentiles, and to be God's salvation to the ends of the earth (vss. 5,6; cf. Luke 2:32). Kings will yet respect and princes pay homage to the Servant who is despised of man abhorred by his nation (vs. 7). God, who is faithful is keeping promises, will see to it. At a time when the Lord is favorable, he will listen to the cries of his scattered people, redeem them, and give them his Servant "for a covenant of the people," i.e., one with whom the people covenant (vs. 7; cf. Isaiah 42:6). Not only that, but the Servant shall "establish" or restore to Israel its ancient heritages that have lain desolate . He will bid the scattered exiles to go forth out of captivity and darkness, and he assures their safe and agreeable return to the lands of their inheritance (vs. 9-11). Indeed, they shall come from far, some from north and west, others from the land of Sinim (vs. 12). Sinim is an unknown country, but some authorities have equated it with China! The heavens are bidden to sing and the earth to be joyful because of these glad events (vs. 13) An added clause in verse 13 of the Nephites text indicates that this singing and joy is also urged because "the feet of those [exiles] who are in the east shall be established or restored as well as those from the north, west, and Sinim mentioned in verse 12. The mountains are also urged, in verse 13, to break forth into singing. Why? Because the Lord's people shall be smitten no more; he has comforted them and will have mercy upon his afflicted ones.

Before printing verses 1-13 in poetic form, it may be well to quote 1 Nephi 22:3-5, wherein Nephi throws some light upon them, especially verse 1:

Wherefore, the things of which I have read are things pertaining to things both temporal and spiritual; for it appears that the house of Israel, sooner of later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth and also among all nations. And behold, there are many who are already lost from the knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away. And since they have been led away, these things have been prophesied concerning them, and also concerning all those who shall hereafter be scattered and be confounded, because of the Holy One of Israel; for against him will they harden their hearts, wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations and shall be hated of all men.

Verse 13, immediately above, constitutes a short lyrical hymn which concludes the passage (cf. Isaiah 44:23).

In a charming and tender poem (verses 14-21), Isaiah next announces the speedy return and increase of mother Zion's exiled children. Zion is portrayed as a deserted and forgotten wife who, through lack of faith in her Lord, laments her sad lot (vs. 14). But the Lord will show her that he has not forgotten her. Just as a mother cannot forget or show lack of compassion on a nursing child, so the Lord will not forget the house of Israel. Others may forget her, but not the Lord (vs. 15). By use of a striking metaphor, the Lord protests his love for Zion (Israel) by saying that he has engraved or tattooed her upon the palms of his hands. Indeed, the walls or plants for Zion are constantly before him (vs. 16). Zion's children are to make haste in getting away from those who would destroy her; and those enemies who, in time past, wasted her shall depart from her (vs. 17). Mother Zion is now bidden (vs. 18) to look upon her long exiled children who have gathered about her. By means of a divine oath ("as I live"), the Lord swears that Zion will clothe herself with her returning children as if studded with jewels or bridal ornaments. Her wasted and desolated lands shall even be overcrowded with inhabitants; those who swallowed her up, her "destroyers," (cf. vs. 17) shall be far away (vs. 19). Verse 20 presents some problems in interpretation when compared with the Hebrew text. As it is, it follows the King James version and seems to mean that Zion's later children shall complain that they have too little room in which to dwell; hence, they plead for more. Finally (vs. 21), Zion in wonderment and surprise can hardly believe that the returning exiles are her own children, since she was bereft of her earlier ones. She says in amazement, "I was left alone; these, where have they been?"

In verses 22 and 23, the Lord indicates his determination to champion the cause of his exiled people. He will lift up his hand (a sign of power) to the Gentiles, and set up his standard or ensign to the peoples. What is meant by a standard or ensign? Ordinarily it means a signal, flag, or sing, but here, as in Numbers 26:10, it may even mean an admonition or warning. But in 1 Nephi 22:6, the explanation is given by Nephi that "the Lord has lifted up his hand upon [note!] the Gentiles and set them up as a standard," and we shall have to leave it at that. At any rate, the Gentile peoples are to assist in bringing home the scattered exiles. Not only will the common people do this, but also their kings and queens-people in high places-shall take part in the movement, even paying servile homage to Israel in the process. Then shall Israel know that it is the Lord who has brought about this wonderful change in her fortunes. Those who are willing to wait out the Lord's purposes and designs shall not be ashamed or disappointed. At his point it may be well to quote words of Nephi that throw some light upon these verses:

Nevertheless, after they shall be nursed by the Gentiles, and the Lord has lifted up his hand upon the Gentiles and set them up for a standard, and their children have been carried in their arms, and their daughters have been carried upon their shoulders, behold these of which are spoken are temporal; for thus are the covenants of the Lord with our fathers and it meaneth us in the days to come, and also all our brethren who are of the house of Israel. And it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of Israel have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord God will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered. And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders. And it shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Israel, unto the making known of the covenants of the Father of heaven unto Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. And I would, my brethren, that ye should know that all the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel. (1 Nephi 22:6-12)

In verse 24, the Lord asks a question, the answer which would naturally be in the negative. The mighty seldom give up their prey, or deliver up their captives.

Verses 25 and 26 tell of the great judgments that God will bring upon wicked men and institutions that fight his work in the latter days. He will demonstrate that he can take away captives from the mighty, and deliver the prey of the terrible. He will contend with those who fight Israel and will save her children. The enemies of God and his people shall be caused to bring about their own terrible destruction. Isaiah's description is frightening (cf. Zechariah 11:9). And now let us present Nephi's vivid comments that apply in great part to these verses:

And the blood of that great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall turn upon their own heads; for they shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads; and they shall be drunken with their own blood. And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it. For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned. For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the Wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire. Behold, my brethren, I say unto you, that these things must shortly come; yea, even blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke must come; and it must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh if it so be that they will harden their hearts against the Holy One of Israel. For behold, the righteous shall not perish; for the time surely must come that all they who fight against Zion shall be cut off.

Having read Chapters 48 and 49 of Isaiah to his brethren from the Brass Plates, Nephi answered some of their questions concerning them. They wanted to know (22:1) whether Isaiah's words were to be understood according to spiritual things-that is, which should come to pass according to the spirit and not the flesh. Nephi explained that Isaiah had his prophecies manifested to him by the voice of the Spirit; for by the Spirit are all matters made know to the prophets, which (matters of events) are to come upon the children of man according to the flesh. Therefore, what Isaiah said had reference both to things temporal and spiritual. Nephi further explained the prophet's references to the scattering of Israel among the nations. These words of Nephi are of particular interest and deserve our careful consideration:

Yea, the more part of the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away. (1 Nephi 22:4)

Inasmuch as the tribes were led away, Isaiah had occasion to prophesy concerning them, as well as concerning those who should thereafter be scattered and confounded because of the Lord's will. For against him will they harden their hearts, and be scattered in consequence among all nations and be hated of all men (22:5).

Nephi's words in 22:6-19 have already been quoted above in connection with Isaiah's prophecies, but in verses 20-31 he continues his discussion with his brethren. He explains to them (vss. 20,21) the coming of the Savior to prepare "a way for his people" in fulfillment of Moses' words in Deuteronomy 18:15,18,19; cf. 3 Nephi 20:23. The Lord will "execute" says Nephi, "judgment in righteousness," by the righteous will have no need to fear, for they shall not be confounded. Only those who belong to the devil's kingdom-Nephi is speaking still of the latter days -need fear and tremble. He speaks of these who give way to the blandishments of false churches, power, and lusts of the flesh and who are to be brought low in the dust and to be consumed as stubble (cf. Malachi 4:1). On the other hand, the time is speedily coming when the righteous will enjoy their reward being "led up as calves of the stall" (cf. Malachi 4:2) to enjoy their bliss in the kingdom of the Holy One of Israel who "must reign in dominion, and might, and power, and great glory." (Vs. 24) The Lord-as Isaiah had prophesied-will gather his children from the four quarters of the earth; "he numbers his sheep, and they know him; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd; and he shall feed his sheep, and in him they shall find pasture." (Vs. 25)

Nephi now favors us with another of his remarkable teachings. In verse 26, he makes an allusion to the Millennial Era when Satan has no power. Other scriptures speak of Satan as being bound in the Millennium, with no power to tempt any man (see D&C 43:31; D&C 88:110; D&C 101:28). But if Satan has no power to tempt men during that peaceful era, how can they exercise their free agency? If there is no "opposition in all things" as taught by Father Lehi (2 Nephi 2:11), how can men be "enticed" by good or evil (2 Nephi 2:16)? Apparently, even during the Millennium it would seem logical to expect that men would need to have opposition and have the privilege of choosing either good or evil. We should remember that when Adam and Eve fell they became as the Gods, knowing good and evil (Genesis 3:22); hence men inevitably have to make a choice between them (i.e., good or evil). Now Nephi suggests that the reason Satan will have no power during the Millennium is "because of the righteousness of his [God's] people." His words may suggest that Satan will be present to tempt men, but their righteousness will prevent him from achieving the powers and influence he so much desires. What will happen during the Millennial Era should be compared to that which was obtained among the Nephites after the coming of Christ (see 4 Nephi 2, 3, 15-18), except that the period of peace and righteousness will for a thousand years instead of roughly two hundred. It is possible, in view of the passages cited above from the Doctrine and Covenants, that more severe restrictions may be placed upon Satan during the Millennium than were placed upon him during the Nephite golden era of righteousness.

Nephi now explains to his brethren that all of the things of which he has spoken must come according to the flesh, that is, temporally (vs. 27). All nations, kindreds, tongues, and people may dwell safely under the influence of the God of Israel if they will but repent. At this point Nephi tells his brethren that he did not dare speak further as yet "concerning these things." (Vs. 29) But he did exhort them to consider as true the things written upon the Brass Plates, for they testify that men must obeys God's commandments. Moreover, his brethren need not suppose that he and his father were the only ones who had a hand in teaching and testifying of these matters. In this vein Nephi finished the first book of his "Memoirs."

---
Notas:
[^1] Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away, Or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I sold you? Behold; for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, And for your transgressions is your mother put away. Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness. Look unto the rock from whence ye are hewn, And to the hole of the pit from whence ye are digged.
[^2] Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; When I called, yea, there was none to answer. O house of Israel, is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink Because the waters are dried up, and they die because of thirst. Look unto Abraham, your father, And unto Sarah, she that bare you; For I called him alone [as one], and blessed him.
[^3] I clothe the heavens with blackness, And I make sackcloth their covering. For the Lord shall comfort Zion, He will comfort all her waste places; And he will make her wilderness like Eden, And her desert like the garden of the Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, Thanksgiving and the voice of melody.
