Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 13

The Book of Jacob The Brother of Nephi

The Book of Jacob is the third in order as well as the third largest in the Small Plates of Nephi, containing 7 chapters which comprise about 17Â½ printed pages in our current editions of the Book of Mormon. The author of the book is Jacob, the son of Lehi just younger than Nephi. The italicized superscription at the head of the book is about the same size as that in Second Nephi and gives but a very brief synopsis of its contents. Here is the superscription:

The words of his [Jacob's] preaching unto his brethren. He confoundeth a man who seeketh to overthrow the doctrine of Christ. A few words concerning the history of the people of Nephi.

These words are part of the original text of the book and were doubtless written by Jacob.

Jacob speaks of the plates upon which he wrote in terms of his own name, as the following words testify:

These plates are called the plates of Jacob, and they were made by the hand of Nephi.... (3:14)

In connection with writing upon metal plates, it is interesting to find Jacob commenting on the difficulties incident thereto:

I cannot write but a little of my words, because of the difficulty of engraving our words upon the plates....(4:1)

Of considerable literary interest in the Book of Jacob is the remarkable allegory which is contained in Chapter 5. This is the allegory of a great Hebrew prophet called Zenos which is quoted from the Brass Plates and is known to us as the allegory of the tame and wild olive tree. It is one which concerns the Lord's doings with the house of Israel during almost all of its remarkable history.

The Book of Jacob is very miscellaneous in nature, but the following scheme of analysis may prove useful:

I. Transfer of Small Plates of Nephi; death of Nephi, and teachings of Jacob. (Chs. 1-4)

A. Nephi transfers sacred records and gives instructions concerning them to his brother Jacob. Jacob speaks about revelation, prophecy, and the Christ. Nephi anoints a man to be king, Love of people for Nephi. Death of Nephi. Nephites become hard of heart. Jacob begins to teach his people in the temple. (Ch. 1)

B. Jacob constrained to admonish his people because of their crimes. Proper and improper use of wealth. Denunciation of unchastity. Plural wives forbidden Nephites. Unrighteous treatment of wives and children condemned. Lamanites commended for fidelity to marriage vows. Men to be reconciled to Christ through his atonement. Law of Moses points to Christ. His rejection by Jews foreseen. (Chs. 2-4)

II. Jacob quotes and in part interprets writings of prophet Zenos. (Chs. 5-6)

A. Allegory of Zenos quoted. Israel compared to tame olive tree. Gentiles likened to branches of wild olive tree. (Ch. 5)

B. Jacob expounds in part the allegory of Zenos. Pruning of vineyard the last time. Warning to men not to reject the prophets or the power of God. (Ch. 6)

III. A Nephite dissenter. Nephite reformation. Lamanites reject attempts to reclaim and restore them. Plates delivered to another. (Ch. 7)

A. Sherem, an apostate, teaches false doctrine. (7:1-4)

B. Sherem attempts to shake Jacob's faith. Displeasure of God manifested. Reformation among Nephites. (7:5-23)

C. Nephites attempt to reclaim Lamanites but to no avail. Recourse to armies and fortifications. Jacob delivers records to his son Enos. (7:24-27)

Jacob first of all records that fifty-five years had passed away (B.C. 546) since Lehi had left Jerusalem and that Nephi now wanted to leave him instructions involving the Small Plates. We are justified in assuming that Nephi was now at least seventy years of age or older. He therefore instructed Jacob to take over the custody of the plates-it is so implied-and write upon them nothing but the most precious things. History was only to be lightly touched upon. Only the more sacred matters were to be written down. Jacob testified that his people had revelations of things to come; that the spirit of prophecy was among them; and that they knew of Christ and his kingdom which was to come. Moreover, his people were taught diligently to come unto Christ and partake of God's goodness (1:1-7).

Wherefore, we would to God that we could persuade all men not to rebel against God, to provoke him to anger, but that all men would believe in Christ, and view his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world; wherefore, I, Jacob, take it upon me to fulfil the commandment of my brother Nephi. (1:8)

The prophet tells as that when Nephi realized he must soon pass away, he anointed a man to be king and a ruler over his people in his stead. He points out the great love which his people had for Nephi and the reasons for that love. One of these reasons is sufficient for us—that he "labored in all his days for their welfare." (1:10) In order to keep his name in honorable remembrance, the people proposed that all kings who should reign in his stead should have the title "Nephi" applied to them in succession, such as second Nephi, third Nephi, and the like (1:11). In due time Nephi died. We have already paid tribute to his greatness.

It is interesting to notice that the people in Jacob's day were known as Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites and Ishmaelites, but the prophet tells us that hereafter he proposes to distinguish them simply as Lamanites (who seek to destroy the people of Nephi) or as Nephites (those friendly to the people of Nephi). (1:13-14)

Jacob is one of the greatest teachers in the Book of Mormon. Of particular interest to us is a sermon he gave in his people's temple. He prefaces this sermon by telling us that in the reign of the second king the people began to grow hard of heart and to be lifted up in pride because of their gold and silver. Even worse, many of them began to take plural wives as did David and Solomon of old (1:15-16). In response to the Lord's command, Jacob addressed his sermon against these sins of his people; he reminds us that he and his brother Joseph had been duly consecrated as priests and teachers of his people. He didn't want the sins of his people to be answered upon his head or that of his brother. They therefore magnified their office as priests and teachers unto the Lord." (1: 17-19)

When Jacob began to teach his people in the temple, he was very sober in spirit. He stated that he wanted to rid his garments of the sins of his people and declare unto them God's word. He reported that he had been diligent in his office and calling, but that he was weighed down with more desire and anxiety for their welfare than he had hitherto been. Jacob's soul shrank from testifying unto his people concerning the wickedness of their hearts. He was especially concerned with using "much boldness of speech" before the men in the presence of their wives and children. His subject was a delicate one, since it included a discussion of the marriage relations of the men and their wives (2:1-7). This feeling of tenderness and delicacy may well be taken to heart by all readers of the Book of Mormon. Jacob refrained from enlarging the wounds of the women and children who had been concerned about the unchastity of their menfolk. Nevertheless, the great character of Jacob is revealed by his determination to make known to the men who were present their wickedness and abominations, and the way they were betraying their wives. He reminded them that the words which he was declaring unto them were given at the express command of God (2:8-11). Jacob got unto the real spirit of his address by first specifically denouncing the pride and stiffnecked attitude of those who had been blessed with riches. These men had persecuted their less fortunate brethren because they supposed that their wealth made them better (2:12-13). God condemned them, so he said, for these actions, and if they persisted, his judgments must speedily come upon them. Jacob exhorted his brethren strongly and finally uttered this classic on the right use of wealth and the attitude one should have toward his less fortunate neighbor:

Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good-to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. And now, my brethren, I have spoken unto you concerning pride; and those of you which have afflicted your neighbor, and persecuted him because ye were proud in your hearts, of the things which God hath given you, what say ye of it? Do ye not suppose that such things are abominable unto him who created all flesh? And the one being is as precious in his sight as the other. And all flesh is of the dust; and for the selfsame end hath he created them, that they should keep his commandments and glorify him forever. (2:17-21)

These are indeed wonderful words and are a great credit to the Nephite scriptures.

Jacob next pointed out that he must charge them with even grosser crimes. They were excusing themselves in committing whoredoms because of the scriptures which were written concerning David and Solomon of old. It was true that David and Solomon had many wives and concubines, but the Lord had expressly told the Nephites that none among them should have any more than one wife; and they should have no concubines. (2:22-27)

There are those who claim that the Book of Mormon, Jacob specifically, forbids the practice of plural marriage. In justification of this view they point to these words of Jacob:

Behold, David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord, (2:24)

Offhand, these words seem to bear out the claim as made. But it should be kept in mind that Jacob was emphasizing the failings of his own people and therefore had a tendency to press the misdemeanors of David and Solomon. The acts of David and Solomon in taking wives and concubines were not abominable to the Lord until they broke his law governing plural marriage. When David had Uriah murdered and took over this loyal man's wife Bathsheba, the Lord was of course indignant and commanded his servant, Nathan the prophet, to rebuke him. Could Jacob have been ignorant of these words of Nathan to David?

And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that were too little, then would I add unto thee so much more. (2 Samuel 12:8. Jewish Publication Society translation.)

I doubt it. Nor is Jacob very likely to have been ignorant of these words condemning Solomon for taking foreign wives who turned his heart to other gods, as found in the Book of Kings:

Now king Solomon loved many foreign women, besides the daughter of Pharoah, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites; of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of Israel: 'Ye shall not go among them, neither shall they come among you; for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods'; Solomon did cleave unto these in love. (1 Kings 11:1-2. Jewish Publication Society translation.)

This passage is self-explanatory. We conclude, then, that Jacob was simply, denouncing plural marriage among the Nephites; his references to David and Solomon had to do with their violations of the principles of plural marriage as understood by the ancient Hebrews. He used these violations to drive home the lesson he was giving to his own people, "For, " said he, "If I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things. " (2:30; italics mine.) That people have to be given permission by the Lord before they may enter into plural marriage is the plain teaching of Jacob.

The prophet pointed out the sorrow and mourning that had come to the Nephite women and children because of the iniquities of their menfolk in violating the Lord's express command (2:31-34). Then he added:

Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you. And because of the strictness of the word of God, which cometh down against you, many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds. (2:35)

In this manner, Jacob rebuked the Nephite men. There is no better defense of women and the home to be found in all scripture except the words of Jesus himself in the New Testament. It will be observed from Jacob's words that the Nephite prophets looked upon family life as being among the most important of human institutions. They believed in happy families. They affirmed that between man and wife and children there should be mutual trust, love, and happiness. This teaching of Jacob could well be taken to heart by the present generation.

In Chapter 3 we find Jacob speaking, first of all, words of comfort and consolation to the pure in heart of his audience (3:1-2). Then he turned again to the impure of heart and pronounced a woe against them unless they repented. If they did not, the Lamanites would destroy them, and the righteous would be led out from their midst (3:3-4). It may be well to ask ourselves whether this prophecy was not fulfilled in the days of the elder Mosiah when the Lord commanded him to leave the main body of the Nephites and flee into the wilderness with any others who would go with him. (See Omni 12, 13.) My own opinion is that it was, and that the main body of Nephites was destroyed at about that time. Mosiah and his small band of followers united with a much larger body of Mulekites in the land of Zarahemla (Omni 14-19; Mosiah 25:1-3). Nephite history from that point is the history of the united body of Nephites and Mulekites, the Mulekites predominating in numbers.

Jacob advised the sinners in his temple audience that the Lamanites, filthy and cursed as they were, were more righteous than they, because they had not forgotten the Lord's commandment to the effect that they should have only one wife and no concubines. Moreover, the Lamanites did not commit whoredoms. For these reasons the Lord would bless them and not destroy them; and some day they would become a blessed people (3:5-6). This observation of Jacob's is important for us today; the implication is that the Nephite nation was destroyed because its people did not keep these important commandments. It is a striking fact that the Nephite people, unto whom the word of God came in such great abundance, a people who had prophecy, revelation, and visions, should have been destroyed; and that the Lamanites, on the other hand, who had few of these blessings, were permitted to destroy the Nephites and have this land to themselves.

The following of Jacob's observations and exhortations with respect to the Lamanites are of great religious interest and value:

Behold, their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and their husbands and their wives love their children; and their unbelief and their hatred towards you is because of the iniquity of their fathers; wherefore, how much better are you than they, in the sight of your great Creator? O my brethren, I feel that unless ye shall repent of your sins that their skins will be whiter than yours, when ye, shall be brought with them before the throne of God. Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, which is the word of God, that ye revile no more against them because of the darkness of their skins; neither shall ye revile against them because of their filthiness; but ye shall remember your own filthiness, and remember that their filthiness came because of their fathers. Wherefore, ye shall remember your children, how that ye have grieved their hearts because of the example that ye have set before them; and also, remember that ye may, because of your filthiness, bring your children unto destruction, and their sins be heaped upon your heads at the last day. (3:7-10)

In his final remarks in the temple, Jacob urged his people to awake from "the slumber of death," avoid serious sins, and save themselves from becoming angels to the devil, in which state they would stiffer the pains of the second death (3:11-13).

Jacob's temple sermon is a remarkable document and deserves careful study.

In Chapter 4, Jacob continued his teachings in a somewhat different vein and under different circumstances. He affirmed that his people had a hope in Christ. He stated that the faithful of his people believed in Christ at that early time and worshiped the Father in His name. It was for that intent that they kept the law of Moses, since it pointed their souls to God. The Nephites searched the prophets and had many revelations and the spirit of prophecy. Under these conditions they obtained a hope, and their faith became so firm that they could command in the name of Jesus and the very trees, mountains, and waves would obey them (4:6). Nevertheless, the Lord showed them their weaknesses and caused them to know that it was only by his grace and great condescension that they could have power to do these marvelous things. Jacob emphasized how great and marvelous are God's works. He pointed out that it was impossible for man to find out all his ways, that the mysteries of God could not be plumbed by man. As we have seen, no man knows of his ways unless they are revealed to him. Therefore, the revelations of God should not be despised (4:8). Men were advised not to counsel God, but to take counsel from him. God's justice, mercy, and blessings were extolled by Jacob. He advised men to be reconciled to him through the atonement of Christ. He counseled those who prophesy to do so to the understanding of men. He said that the Spirit speaks of things as they really are and as they really will be for the salvation of the souls of men (4:10-13).

The prophet went on to relate that the Jews were a stiffnecked people, that they despised plain words, killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Because of their spiritual blindness the Lord took away the plainness of his word from them and delivered unto them many things that they could not understand. Consequently, many of them stumbled. Through the spirit of prophecy, Jacob was led to predict the fact that the Jews would reject the Messiah, "the stone upon which they might build and have a safe foundation." (4:14-16 )

Chapter 5 of Jacob is almost entirely devoted to a quotation of an allegory by an ancient Hebrew prophet named Zenos. We do not know when this prophet lived. He is not named in the Old Testament, but an account of him was contained upon the Brass Plates. Moreover, he seems to have been one of the favorite prophets of the Nephites, because he is mentioned or quoted a number of times. (See 1 Nephi 19:10, 12, 16; Jacob 5; Jacob 6:1; Alma 33:3, 13, 15; Alma 34:7; Helaman 8:19; Helaman 15:11; 3 Nephi 10:16.)

The allegory of Zenos is known as the allegory of the tame and the wild olive tree. The situation that caused Jacob to quote the allegory is this: as we have seen, he had predicted that the Jews through their stumbling would reject the stone (Christ) upon which they might build and have a safe foundation (4:15-16). Then he said:

And now, my beloved, how is it possible that these, after having rejected the sure foundation, can ever build upon it, that it may become the head of their corner? Behold, my beloved brethren, I will unfold this mystery unto you; if I do not, by any means, get shaken from my firmness in the Spirit, and stumble because of my overanxiety for you. Behold, my brethren, do ye not remember to have read the words of the prophet Zenos, which he spake unto the house of Israel, saying: (4:17-5:1)

Then follows the text containing the words of Zenos.

In the allegory, Israel is compared to a tame olive tree, which grew old and decayed. The master of the vineyard then pruned, dug about it, and nourished it. After a time a few young, tender sprouts appeared, but the "main top" began to perish. The master then instructed his servant to graft in branches of a wild olive tree in place of the young sprouts, which would be planted in parts of the vineyard unknown to the servant. The main branches of the tame olive tree would be thrown into the fire and burned. The servant did as he was instructed, because his master hoped to save the roots of the tame olive tree by the grafting process (5:2-14).

The tame olive tree of course represents the house of Israel, which had become unproductive of good fruit. The branches of the wild olive tree represent the Gentiles, who were grafted in. (See Romans 11:17-24.) The young sprouts of the tame olive tree which were planted in various parts of the vineyard, represent groups of Israelites led by the Lord to different parts of the world. The Nephites were one such group. These "sprouts" were planted by the Lord in order to preserve some of the natural branches of the tame olive tree.

According to the allegory a long time passed, and the Lord of the vineyard and his servant went again to labor in the vineyard (5:15). They found that the grafted wild olive branches were yielding good fruit. Not only that, but as a result the roots of the natural tree had been strengthened. Then the Master and servant went into the "nethermost part of the vineyard" (5:19) to see whether the tender sprouts had brought forth fruit. Apparently four shoots had been planted (5:20-25). The first, which had been planted in poor ground, had brought forth much fruit (vss. 20-22). The second, in a still poorer spot of ground, had also yielded much fruit (vs. 23). The third, too, had borne fruit (vs. 24). The last sprout, planted in a good spot of ground, brought forth partly good fruit and partly wild (bad) fruit (vs. 25). The Master told the servant to burn the branches that had not produced good fruit. But the servant begged the Master to wait a while until after they had pruned the tree and dug around it. So the two of them nourished all the fruit of the vineyard (5:26-28).

Another long period of time passed by, and the Lord went with his servant to labor again in the vineyard, because "the time draweth near, and the end soon cometh." (5:29 ) This time they found that the natural roots with the grafted wild branches had produced much fruit, but none of it was good (vs. 32). Nevertheless, the roots were good (5:36). The Lord of the vineyard and his servant then went into the nethermost parts of the vineyard, where the sprouts from the tame tree were planted. Here they found that their branches had all become corrupt (5:38-39). Strangely, only three sprouts are mentioned, the "first," the "second," and the "last," whereas in 5:20-25 four branches seem to have been planted. Still, we must not press the allegory too far.

The Lord of the vineyard wept when he perceived that all of the trees of the vineyard had become corrupt. He seems to have been especially concerned with the last sprout that had been planted in a good spot of ground, choice above all other parts of the vineyard (5:41-43). He said:

And thou beheldest that I also cut down that which cumbered this spot of ground, that I might plant this tree in the stead thereof. And thou beheldest that a part thereof brought forth good fruit, and a part thereof brought forth wild fruit [cf. 5:251; and because I plucked not the branches thereof and cast them into the fire, behold, they have overcome the good branch that it hath withered away. (5:44-45)

It seems quite obvious that the sprout just spoken of, planted in the choicest part of the vineyard, has reference to the Nephite branch of Israel. That which "cumbered" the spot before the Nephites came refers of course to the Jaredites, who ripened in iniquity. The part of the sprout which brought forth good fruit (5:45; cf. 5:25) has reference to Nephi's descendants, whereas the part which produced wild (bad, rotten) fruit doubtless means the Lamanites. The wild branches finally overcame the good ones (5:45), as the Book of Mormon history testifies.

The allegory thus far testifies that all branches of the house of Israel, as well as the Gentiles who were grafted in, had all become corrupt and of little or no value to the Lord of the vineyard.

In Jacob 5:47 the Lord testified that he had done everything possible to promote the welfare of the trees in the vineyard; he said it grieved him to have to hew them down and cast them into the fire. This statement refers to the Lord's attempts throughout history to redeem his people by the ministry of the prophets or otherwise. But his people would not receive him; consequently it became necessary to destroy them.

The servant pleaded with the Lord of the vineyard to spare the vineyard a little longer (5:50). The Master concurred in this request and made the following proposal: the branches of the sprouts planted in the far parts of the vineyard were to be taken and grafted back into the natural olive tree whence they came. The branches of the natural olive, whose fruit was most bitter, should be plucked off to make room for them. The tree under this treatment would not perish, and the roots would be preserved for the Lord's purposes (5:51-53). The meaning of 5:54 is not absolutely clear, but it seems to the writer that certain Gentile or wild branches grafted on the natural olive are to be grafted into the roots of the sprouts carried to the far parts of the vineyard. These branches possibly represent the Gentiles of the latter days who, if repentant, may be joined and numbered with the house of Israel. (See 3 Nephi 16:13, 15; 3 Nephi 21:5-6.) In this way the Lord of the vineyard hoped to preserve the roots of the sprouts and have them bring forth good fruit.

The grafting operations proposed by the Lord of the vineyard were carried out. The servant was commanded not to pluck the wild branches of the trees, except the most bitter. The trees were to be nourished and trimmed; only the branches which were ripened, and which must perish, were to be plucked and cast into the fire (5:55-58).

Because the Lord had preserved the natural branches and roots, he instructed his helper to call other servants in order to prepare the way for the production of the good natural fruit (5:60-61). These servants were to prune the vineyard for the last time. They were given instructions to graft in the branches so that the last would be first and the first, last. In the last days the Gentiles were to have the gospel first, then the Jews (1 Nephi 13:42; see also Matthew 20:16; Matthew 11:25-26; D&C 88:51-62). Moreover, a good balance was to be kept between the branches and the roots; the trees were to be well kept, and the branches containing evil fruit were only gradually to be disposed of (5:64-66).

The servants who came to assist in the pruning of the vineyard for the last time were few in number. This fact has reference to the workers of the Church in the latter day, as Nephi had predicted (1 Nephi 14:12. See also D&C 101:55, 60; D&C 103:21; Jacob 6:2). The workers did as their Lord commanded with all diligence. The allegory records that the natural branches grew, flourished, and produced good fruit (5:72-75). The corrupt branches were finally eliminated, and the trees became one, like unto one body. Obviously the allegory means that Israel and the Church in the last days would be effective in doing the work of God, thus enabling the Lord to lay up fruit for a long time (the millennial era) until the day when some more evil fruit would appear and be eliminated 5:76-77; 6:2-3; D&C 29:22; D&C 43:30-33).

This allegory of course reflects the dealings of God with Israel throughout its history. We are especially interested in verses 50-77, which contain allusions to God's work in our generation, but present some difficulties.

After quoting the allegory of Zenos, Jacob prophesies to his brethren that the words of Zenos concerning Israel would all be fulfilled (6:1). When the Lord sets his band the second time to recover his people-here Jacob alludes to Isaiah 11:11—the servants of the Lord will go forth to nourish and prune his vineyard; after that, the end will soon come (6:2). In this prophecy it is obvious that Jacob has reference to the work of the elders of our Church.

Jacob tells how blessed the house of Israel, both roots and branch, has been; moreover, God's hands still reach out for his people. The prophet exhorts his people earnestly to repent and cleave unto God as he cleaves unto them. He pleads with them not to deny the word of Christ or to quench the power of the Holy Ghost and mock the great plan of redemption. The power of redemption and the resurrection will make men stand with shame and awful guilt before the bar of God if they fail to do as he suggests (6:4-9).

He pleads again for his brethren to repent, enter in at the straight gate, and continue in the narrow way until they obtain eternal life (6:11). In all solemnity the chapter ends with these words:

Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before the pleasing bar of God, which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and fear. Amen. (6:13)

It is very probable that Jacob meant to end his book at this point; the quotation seems to imply that fact. However, later events caused him to add the historical matter now found in the last chapter of his record.

Chapter 7, the last in the book, deals with Sherem, a Nephite apostate, and with the last days of the prophet. Sherem tried to lead away the hearts of the people with flattery and deception. He even attempted to swerve Jacob from the truth, by telling him that the Nephite belief in Christ and the gospel as taught by the prophet was perversion and blasphemy. Jacob confounded the man, who denied the Christ and demanded a sign of the prophet's power and authority (7:1-13). The Lord struck down Sherem, who confessed openly to the people, before he died, that he was a deceiver. He plainly acknowledged the Christ, the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of angels (7:14-20).

This incident had a profound effect upon the Nephites, and peace and love were restore to them (7:21-23).

Jacob tells us that many, attempts were made to reclaim and restore the Lamanites to a knowledge of the truth, but all to no avail. The Lamanites seemed to have an eternal hatred against their brethren. For that reason the Nephites were forced to rely upon armies and fortifications for protection; at the same time, they trusted in God to help them (7:24-25).

In his old age, Jacob delivered up the sacred records to his son Enos. He bade his readers farewell, hoping that many of his brethren would eventually read his words (7:27).

Jacob, like Nephi, was a great son of Lehi. Humility, love, and great spiritual power characterized his work. He remained a true witness of the Redeemer, whom he had beheld in his youth (2 Nephi 2:4; 2 Nephi 11:3). The solemn and sincere nature of Jacob may be judged from this:

And it came to pass that I, Jacob, began to be old; and the record of this people being kept on the other plates of Nephi, wherefore, I conclude this record, declaring that I have written according to the best of my knowledge, by saying that the time passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream, we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days (7:26.)

The reader will notice the very last words of Jacob, "Brethren, adieu [farewell]." These are to be contrasted with Nephi's "Amen" at the end of each of his books. We are indeed dealing with two distinct characters in these men. The reader of the Book of Mormon will do well to mark differences in personalities as portrayed by the volume. The Prophet Joseph Smith's use of the word "adieu" has created considerable interest among Book of Mormon students. The use of the French word should create no problem since it is widely used in English.
