Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 14

The Book of Enos, Jarom, and Omni

The Book of Enos is the fourth of the six books in the Small Plates of Nephi. It contains but one chapters as do each of the two remaining books on these plates. In the current edition of the book there are 27 verses, which occupy a trifle over two printed pages. The author is Enos, the son of Jacob and nephew of Nephi. His name is probably the equivalent of the Hebrew Enosh (e-nosh), found in Genesis 5:6 and transliterated as Enos in our familiar English version.

The Book may be studied according to this scheme:

I. Enos receives a personal testimony from God and important assurances concerning the Nephite records. (Vss. 1-18)

II. Enos tells of his work as the prophet among his stiffnecked people and about their futile efforts to restore the Lamanites. The Nephites as husbandmen. Final testimony of Enos. (Vss. 19-27)

The Book of Enos, despite its small size, is one of the most interesting books in the Nephite record. From the standpoint of its religious value, the first part of the book is of far greater importance to us than the second part. In fact, the first part contains one of the finest examples of personal religion in the Book of Mormon.

It is of more than passing significance that Enos was the fourth of a great family to receive a personal witness from the Redeemer. Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, and Enos are names to be conjured with. If Jacob had lived to read the opening lines of his son's record, he would have been proud. I suppose there is nothing in all the world that makes a loving parent more joyful than to find his sons and daughters following the path of the Master. Good teaching pays great dividends. Enos must have been profoundly impressed by his father's testimony that he had seen the Redeemer of the world, because the son also determined to find God. This Church has repeatedly emphasized to the world the fact that men may find God. Let us see how Enos found. It will be far more impressive in this instance if we let him tell his own story in his own words. Here it is:

Behold, it came to pass that I Enos, knowing my father that he was a just man—for he taught me in his language, and also in the nurture and admonition of the Lord-and blessed be the name of my God for it-and I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a remission of my sins. Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart. And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens. And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed. And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away. (Vss. 1-6)

This record of Enos is interesting in a number of ways, but the persistence of the man is especially noteworthy. In addition to being genuinely worthy, a man who wants to find God must demonstrate that he really means it. To find God, one must knock at his door repeatedly.

Enos was personally satisfied. He received a perfect assurance that God lived and that his own sins had been swept away. But like every truly great man, he was concerned about his brethren. He therefore poured out his whole soul unto God in their behalf. Again the voice of the Lord came to him with promises of blessings for them on condition that they kept his commandments. After recording this heavenly manifestation, Enos wrote:

And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto him many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites (Vs. 11)

It will be understood from this quotation why one may call Enos the "Unshakable." He had acquired an unshakable faith in God and prayed even for the Lamanites, who were enemies of his people.

Enos then prayed once more, and the Lord said to him, "I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy faith." The prophet requested the Lord to promise that if his people, the Nephites, should ever fall into transgression and be destroyed, and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, he would preserve a record of his people, the Nephites. He also prayed that this record might be brought forth at some future time unto the Lamanites, that they might receive salvation (vss. 12-13).

Enos then relates that the struggles of the Nephites to restore the Lamanites to the true faith were in vain. Not only did the Lamanites not receive the truth, but they endeavored to destroy both the Nephites and their records. Enos knew, however, that the Lord was able to preserve the Nephites scriptures, and he cried unto him to do so. Enos's faith, as we have pointed out, was unshakable, and he believed that whatsoever he asked from God he would receive if he asked in the same of Christ. And, indeed, the Lord did covenant with him to preserve the Nephite records and bring them forth in his own due time to the Lamanites. Enos knew that the Lord would keep his promise, and his soul was satisfied (vss. 14-18).

As was indicated above, this part of the Book of Enos is one of the most valuable in the Book of Mormon from the standpoint of personal religion. It is in perfect agreement with the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning God. When the Prophet went out to pray in the sacred grove, God answered his prayer even as he had done that of Enos. Moreover, many authorities of the Church since the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith have testified on numerous occasions that they have received a perfect testimony concerning the fact that God lives. If one will ask of God in faith, believing that he is, he may received a perfect testimony like that of Enos-provided, of course, that he lives a worthy life and persists in his attempts.

The second part of Enos (vss. 19-27) is interesting because of the light which the prophet brings to bear on the customs of the people and their religious activities. Enos tells us that he went among the people of Nephi prophesying to them and testifying of the things which he had seed and heard. He bears testimony to the fact that the Nephites tried diligently to restore the Lamanites to the true faith in God. But as was indicated before, their labors were in vain because of the hatred of the Lamanites. Enos states that they were wild, ferocious, and bloodthirsty, full of idolatry and filthiness. They fed upon beasts of prey, dwelt in tents, and wandered about in the wilderness with little clothing on and with their heads shaven. Their skill lay mostly in the use of the bow, the scimiter, and the axe.

The Nephites, on the other hand, were farmers. They tilled the land and raised all kinds all kinds of grain, fruit, herds of castle, horses, goats, and other animals. We are interested in the fact that the Nephites had many prophets among them; Enos says that the people were a "stiffnecked people, hard to understand. " (vs. 22) Their spiritual condition was bad, because it was only by considerable harshness, by preaching and prophesying wars, and by working hard with them that they were in fear of the Lord.

In the last few verses of the book, Enos points out that it was now 179 years since Lehi had left Jerusalem, which made the date about 422 B.C. He declared that the he must now soon go to the grave, having preached and prophesied unto his people all of his days; nevertheless, he rejoiced in the message which he had delivered. The reader will be interested in observing a few of his final words. His testimony was so strong and his works had been of such a nature that he knew he would be saved in the mansions of our Father. Here is his testimony:

And I soon go to the place of my rest, which is with my Redeemer; for I know that in him I shall rest. And I rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on immortality, and shall stand before him; then shall I see his face with pleasure, and he will say unto me; Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared for you in the mansions of my Father. Amen. (Vs. 27)

We may gain a great lesson from the testimony and the works of this man. When men are in the service of God to the end of their days, they can go into the grave with an absolute assurance that they will be rewarded by him. Enos seems to have been sealed up unto eternal life.

The Book of Jarom is the fifth book of the Small Plates of Nephi. It is the shortest book in the Book of Mormon, containing only fifteen verses and occupying less than one and one-half printed pages in our modern edition. Jarom [^1]the son of Enos continues the religious contribution. It does, however, contain some facts of general interest to the student of the Book of Mormon. The intent of the Book is indicated in the first two verses:

Now behold I, Jarom write a few words according to the commandment of my father, Enos, that our genealogy may be kept. And as these plates are small, and as these things are written of the intent of the benefit of our brethren the Lamanites, wherefore, it must needs be that I write a little; but I shall not write the things of my prophesying, nor of my revelations. For what could I write more than my fathers have written? For have not they revealed the plan of salvation? I say unto you, yea; and this sufficeth me. (Vss. 1-2)

These opening words have elements of humor in them to one of a Western temperament. Jarom seems against doing much writing in spite of what is said in vs. 14. Persons who do considerable writing can quite appreciate his point of view. At best, writing is hard work. Let us suppose that all the prophets mentioned in the Book of Mormon had had the same attitude toward writing as Jarom. We should now be infinitely poorer without the prophetic details we find in the writings of Nephi, Jacob, Alma, Mormon and the others. Because of his adversion to writing, Jarom has a tendency to compress Nephite history into as few words as possible and to make broad generalizations.

Jarom does tell us that much work needed to be done among his people because of the hardness of their hearts and the deafness of their ears and the blindness of their minds. "Nevertheless," he says, "God is exceeding merciful unto them, and has not as yet swept them off from the face of the land. (Vs. 3) Then he relates that there are many who have revelations among the Nephites, for they are not all stiffnecked. He points out that the Nephites endeavored to keep the law of Moses and to keep the Sabbath day holy to the Lord. Neither did they profane or blaspheme, because the laws of the land were very strict. He also tells a little about the Lamanites. They were more numerous than the Nephites; moreover, they loved to murder and would even drink the blood of beasts. They came against the Nephites many times in battle, but Nephite leadership and faith is God saved them from being slain and swept to destruction (vss. 4-7).

Jarom records that the Nephite people had multiplied exceedingly and had spread out upon the land. They became rich in gold, and in silver, and in precious things, and engaged in fine workmanship in wood, buildings, machinery, and the working of iron, copper, brass, and steel. They made tools of all kinds to till the ground, as well as weapons of war with which to fight the Lamanites (vs. 8). He also relates that the prophets constantly exhorted the people not to fall into transgression and be destroyed from the face of the land, according to the warnings of the Lord. The prophets, priests, and teachers labored teachers labored diligently, he says, exhorting the people with all possible patience to keep the law of Moses and think of the intent for which it was given, and persuading them to look forward to the coming of the Messiah and to believe in him. Finally, Jarom informs us that he delivered the plates into the hands of his son, Omni. This was about the year B.C. 362 (vss. 10-15).

Omni is the sixth and last of the books of the Small Plates of Nephi. It occupies approximately two and one-half printed pages, and its thirty verses are written by five authors: Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, and Amaleki. The book is obviously named after the first of these writers, who was the son of Jarom. The first eleven verses, which were written by the first four named above, are of relatively little importance, but the last nineteen verses, written by Amaleki, are of considerable interest and significance. The book breaks down into the following scheme of analysis:

I. Writings of Omni. (Vss. 1-3)

II. Writings of Amaron, son of Omni. (Vss. 4-8 )

III. Writings of Chemish, brother of Amaron. (Vs. 9)

IV. Writings of Abinadom, son of Chemish. (Vss. 10-11)

V. Writings of Amaleki, son of Abinadom. (Vss. 12-30)

A. The elder Mosiah commanded of the Lord to flee with others into the wilderness away from the main body of Nephites. (Vss. 12-13)

B. Discovery of people of Zarahemla (Mulekites) who also came from Jerusalem. Wars and contentions of these people. Their language had been corrupted. People of Zarahemla unite under leadership of Mosiah. (Vss. 14-19 )

C. Mosiah translates engravings on stone apparently written by Coriantumr (last king of Jaredites; cf. Ether 14:24; Ether 15:32) giving brief history of his people. (Vss. 20-22)

D. Death of Mosiah. Benjamin, his son, leads Nephites in battle. Amaleki to deliver plates to Benjamin. Exhortations of Amaleki. (Vss. 23-26 )

E. Amaleki tells of two expeditions to land of Nephi. (Cf. Mosiah 9:1-8.) Small Plates of Nephi filled. (Vss. 27-30)

Omni writes, as did his father, to "preserve our genealogy." He speaks of himself as a "wicked man," who had not kept the statutes and commandments of the Lord as he ought to have done. However, we should keep in mind that he had fought much with the sword in his days in order to preserve the Nephites from falling into the hands of their enemies the Lamanites. About the year 318 B.C. Omni conferred the sacred records into the hands of his son, Amaron (vss. 1-3).

Apparently Amaron wrote the five verses credited to him on the very day, some thirty eight years later (see vs. 3; cf vs. 5), that he delivered the plates to his brother, Chemish. Amaron says little of importance except that the more wicked Nephites had been destroyed in accordance with Lehi's dictum: "Inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall not prosper in the land." (Vss. 4-9; cf. 2 Nephi 1:20.)

Chemish wrote one verse only and transmitted the plates to his brother, Abinadom. Chemish simply relates the fact that he saw his brother, Amaron write what he did. As modern readers we may be somewhat amused when he says, "And after this manner we keep the records." (Vs. 9 ) Certainly Jarom, Omni, Amaron, and Chemish were a generation that didn't delight in writing.

To this list we may add Abinadom, who wrote two verses. He tells of contention between the Nephites and Lamanites, and of the fact that he knows of no additional revelation or prophecy to be written. We are reminded also by him that the "record of this people is engraven upon plates [Large Plates of Nephi] which is had by the kings, according to the generations; . . . (Vss. 10-11)

The history written by Amaleki is of great importance to us. First of all, he tells of the elder Mosiah, who was warned of the Lord to leave the land of Nephi and flee into the wilderness with as many others as would hearken to him. They were led by the spirit of revelation and eventually found their way though the wilderness to a land called Zarahemla (vss. 12-13). In all probability this land was north of the land of Nephi, somewhere in Central America. Here they discovered a people who were called the people discovered that the people of Zarahemla. In due time, when these people had been taught Mosiah's language (vs. 18), the Nephite leader discovered that the people of Zarahelma had come out of Jerusalem at the time that Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away captive to Babylon (590 B.C.) We call the people of Zarahemla Mulekites after the name of Mulek (Helaman 6:10), a son of Zedekiah not named in the Old Testament. Young Mulek and his associates had been led by the Lord across the waters to this north continent. I think it highly probable that a man by the name of Zarahemla had been the leader of these people, because it was often the practice in ancient times to name a land after its most prominent inhabitant. Hence, the land of Zarahemla. The Mulekites had brought no records with them, and their language had become corrupted. Wars had decimated them, and they denied the being of their Creator. These people rejoiced when Mosiah and his followers came on the scene-more especially so when they learned that Mosiah had the Brass Plates containing a record of the Jews. After the Mulekites had learned to converse in the Nephite language, their leader-he was also known as Zarahemla [^2]—gave by memory a genealogy of his fathers. (Cf. the South Pacific Islanders in this respect.) The people of Zarahemla and the Nephite people united together with Mosiah as their king (vss. 14-19).

I believe that we shall not be too far wrong if we assume that Mosiah and his fellow Nephites left the main body of their people and joined the Mulekites in or about the year 225 BC. When Mosiah left the land of Nephi with his followers, he was making important history as far as the Book of Mormon is concerned. This fact should be emphasized. In the first place, this migration probably fulfilled the prophecy of Jacob (Jacob 3:4) which was referred to in the chapter on that prophet's book. Second-and this is a fact not generally recognized by Latter-day Saints-Book of Mormon history after the migration of Mosiah and his people fellows their fortunes and that of the Mulekites with whom they joined. Putting it another way: from Omni 12 to the end of the Book of Mormon (Ether excepted) Nephite history is the history of the combined peoples of Mosiah and Mulek. It must be kept in mind that Mosiah and his faithful followers were a minority group of the Nephites. The main body of Nephites was left behind in the land of Nephi. The Book of Mormon is in a sense, therefore, a history of a minority group of Nephites who joined a body of Mulekites clearly superior in numbers. The numerical superiority of Mulekites to the Nephites is definitely indicated in Mosiah 25:2 and may be guessed at from Omni 17.

The paradox of "Nephite" history is that it seems to deal more with Mulekites than Nephites. We must remember, however, that the Mulekites seem to have followed Nephite culture and leadership; moreover, the Mulekite people also hailed from Jerusalem.

We may ask, what became of the main body of Nephites left behind in Nephi? The Book of Mormon says nothing specific about their fate, but if Jacob's prophecy (Jacob 3:3-4) applies to them, they were probably destroyed by the Lamanites, who must also have taken over their lands and cities. A fact indicating that it does apply is that when the expedition of Zeniff and his followers made its way to the land of their forefathers, it was found that Lamanites were in control and that the cities were in a bad state of disrepair (Mosiah 9:6-8). There were no Nephites living there.

During the days of Mosiah's kingship over the combined Nephite and Mulekite peoples, there was brought to him a large stone containing engravings. He translated these engravings by the gift and power of God (vs. 20). In all probability he used for this purpose the Urim and Thummim, which were known to the Nephites as the "Interpreters." The writings dealt with one Coriantumr, and the slain of his people. Apparently Coriantumr had been discovered by the people of Zarahemla and had dwelt with them for the space of nine "moons." (Vs. 21) We know that Coriantumr was the last king of the Jaredite people, who had lived for centuries on this continent prior to the coming of either the Nephites or Mulekites (Ether 15:1, 4, 30). It seems entirely probable that the last battle of the Jaredites took place after the Nephites and Mulekites had reached this land (possibly as late as 400-300 B.C.). In his engravings on the rock, Coriantumr recorded a few things concerning the history of his forefathers. His first parents came from the great tower known to us as Babel (vs. 22). The Book of Mormon thus affirms the Genesis account of the Tower of Babel, a narrative so widely disclaimed by modern critics.

It should be noticed that after Coriantumr's nine-month sojourn among the people of Zarahemla, he died and was buried by them. (Cf. Ether 13:21.) Knowing that Coriantumr was a battle-worn man and had been deeply wounded in the last great battles of the Jaredites (Ether 14:12, 30; Ether 15:9, 27), can we reasonably believe that in his condition he would travel about three thousand miles from a battlefield near the Hill Cumorah in New York (assuming it was there) to the land of Zarahemla in Middle America? Isn't it much more reasonable to believe that the Mulekites in the land of Zarahemla found the old man (he lived but nine months longer) a reasonably short distance from the scene of his last battle? If so, the Hill Ramah (Cumorah to the Nephites; cf. Ether 15:11; Mormon 6:2-6) around which the last great battles of both Jaredites and Nephites took place was in Middle America. This view will be developed as we come to the pertinent texts in the Book of Mormon.

Amaleki tells us that he was born in the days of Mosiah and lived to see his death (vs. 23), but he does not tell us whether he was born in the land of Nephi or in Zarahemla after Mosiah's people had joined the Mulekites. It is quite probable that he came out of the land of Nephi with Mosiah, bringing the records which had presumably been handed down to him by his father, Abinadom. He also informs us that Benjamin, the son of Mosiah, reigned in place of his father (vs. 23). He recites a story of serious war and much bloodshed between the Nephites under Benjamin and the Lamanites. However, Benjamin succeeded in driving the enemy out of Zarahemla (vs. 24).

In his old age Amaleki writes of his intention of transmitting the sacred records to Benjamin's, because he had no children of his own. He testifies of Benjamin's righteousness, and exhorts men to come to Christ and believe in the great spiritual gifts which lead to salvation (vss 25-26).

The last historical incident reposed by Amaleki deals with the attempts of certain Nephites to return to Nephi, the land of their forefathers, and possess it as their inheritance. Two separate expeditions set forth. The first was unsuccessful because its leader caused contention and all of the party except fifty were slain in the wilderness. These fifty returned to Zarahemla. Here they recruited others to a considerable number, and made their journey again into the wilderness. Amaleki tells us that he had a brother who went with this second group. He says that he heard no more concerning them (vss. 27-30). The sacred historian does not tell us the names of the leaders of these expeditions or give much detail about what happened. His account is very interestingly supplemented by the leader of the second expedition, whose name was Zeniff. Students at this point should read Mosiah 9:1-4, where Zeniff tells the story of the beginnings of both expeditions.

With Amaleki's words, the Small Plates of Nephi were filled (vs. 30). Students of the Book of Mormon should keep this fact in mind, because some have mistakenly assumed that the spiritual nature of the remainder of the Nephite record is due to the Small Plates. As a matter of fact, after the Small Plates of Nephi were filled, both spiritual and secular records were engraved on the Large Plates of Nephi.

---
Notas:
[^1] Wo unto them that decree unrighteous [wicked] decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed [And the scribes that write trouble]; And there shall come forth a rod [shoot, twig] out of the stem [stump, root-stock] of Jesse, And a branch [sprout] shall grow out of his roots. Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah? And in that day [i.e., the time of Zion's redemption] thou shalt say: O Lord, I will praise thee; Though thou wast angry with me Thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. The burden [doom oracle, prophecy, vision] of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see [i.e., as a seer]. For the Lord will have mercy [compassion] on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the strangers [and the foreigner] shall be joined [shall join himself] with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.
[^2] To turn away the needy from judgment [justice], and to take away [And rob] the right [i.e., legal rights] from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey [spoil], and that they may rob [despoil] the fatherless! Verily thus saith the Lord: it is Christ. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, The spirit of wisdom and understanding, The spirit of counsel and might, The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; For the Lord [Yah] Jehovah is my strength and my song; He also has become my salvation. Lift ye up a banner [an ensign, signal] upon the high mountain [bare mountain], Exalt the voice [i.e., cry aloud] unto them, Shake [Wave] the hand, that they may go [come] Into the Gates of the Nobles. And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise [note additions to usual text]. And the house of Israel shall possess them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and handmaids [for male and female slaves; note enlarged text]; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors.
