Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

III

The Literary Labors of Mormon

This division is the largest in the Book of Mormon and comprises the books of Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, 3 Nephi, 4 Nephi, and Mormon (Chs. 1-7).

Chapter 16

The Book of Mosiah

With the Book of Mosiah we begin a study of Mormon's abridgment of the Large Plates of Nephi. The book is of moderate size, containing twenty-nine chapters in its sixty-one printed pages. Historically it is one of the most interesting books in the Nephite record. The name given to it is that of the son of King Benjamin, the younger Mosiah. Actually we are told relatively little about Mosiah and his reign. The first six chapters in the record barely introduce us to Mosiah; these chapters are devoted mainly to the last acts of King Benjamin. The whole middle part of the book (Chs. 7-24) is devoted more especially to a discussion of the circumstances which led to the discovery of the people of Zeniff, their history, and their return to the land of Zarahemla. Only late in the book (Chs. 25-29) is there a return to the consideration of what was happening, to Mosiah and his kingdom. The last part of the book is notable for the fact that it marks a change in the form of Nephite government from a monarchy to that of a government by judges democratically elected. The book covers a period of nearly thirty-three years' history (not including the early history of Zeniff's people), from about 125 B.C. to 92 B. C. (Cf. 1;10; 6:4-5; 29:46). From the standpoint of literary forms, the Book of Mosiah is composed mostly of historical narrative, though it does contain an oration and some sermonic materials. It should also be kept in mind that in Chapters 9 and 10 Mormon has given to us an entirely original record containing the personal memoirs of Zeniff, who led away a considerable number of Nephites back to the land of their forefathers' inheritance in the land of Nephi. The reader's attention is called to the superscriptions in italics which appear over Chapters 9 and 23. These are part of the original text and mark natural divisions in the book.

The Book of Mosiah falls into four logical divisions as far as its contents are concerned:

I. The events of King Benjamin's declining years. (Chs. 1-6)

A. Benjamin counsels his three sons. Chooses Mosiah to succeed him and conveys sacred relics and records into his keeping. Mosiah charges the people to gather and listen to his father's last words. (Ch. 1)

B. Benjamin's oration. (Mosiah 2:9-3:27; Mosiah 4:4-30) Great spiritual and practical advice given to his people. (Chs. 2-4)

C. Effect of Benjamin's address. Christ is the name he wants retained in people's hearts. Name of people recorded who covenant with the Lord. Priests appointed to teach. Mosiah begins reign. Death of Benjamin. (Chs. 5-6)

II. The discovery of Zeniff's people. (Chs. 7-8)

A. Mosiah sends expedition under Ammon's leadership to discover Zeniff's people in city of Lehi-Nephi. Ammon finds them but is thrown into prison by their king. Limhi and his people overjoyed when they learn identity of Ammon and his men. (Ch. 7)

B. The story of discovery of twenty-four engraved gold plates by Limhi's people. Ammon suggests their translation by Mosiah, the seer. (Ch. 8)

III. History of Zeniff's people from time of departure until reunited with Mosiah's subjects in Zarahemla. (Chs. 9-24)

A. Zeniff's personal memoirs. Confers kingship of his people on Noah, an unworthy son. (Chs. 9-10)

B. Wicked administration of Noah and corrupt priests. Ministry of Abinadi the prophet, who courageously opposes Noah by preaching the true meaning of law of Moses and the mission of Christ. Abinadi finally burned to death. (Chs. 11-17)

C. Alma, convert of Abinadi, preaches secretly. Baptizes at waters of Mormon and organizes Church of Christ. He and followers pursued by Noah's army. Depart into wilderness. (Ch. 18)

D. Gideon's insurrection against Noah. Lamanite invasion. Death of Noah by fire. Limhi, a just son of Noah, becomes tributary monarch. Wicked priests of Noah abduct daughters of Lamanites. Lamanites plan revenge but are pacified by Limhi. Ammon and Limhi plan deliverance from Lamanites. Lamanites plied with wine. Their captives escape and return safely to Zarahemla. End of Zeniff's record. (Chs. 19-22)

E. Account of Alma's people from time they were driven into wilderness until they found their way to Zarahemla. (Chs. 23-24)

IV. Mosiah's reign from time of the return of Zeniff's people until his death. (Chs. 25-29 )

A. Mosiah's people (including Mulekites) gather together to hear records of Zeniff and Alma read. Alma authorized to establish churches and ordain priests and teachers throughout Zarahemla. Lord instructs Alma how to deal with unbelievers and evildoers. (Chs. 25-26)

B. Persecution of Church members forbidden. Equality urged among all men. Miraculous conversion of the younger Alma and the four sons of Mosiah who had endeavored to destroy the Church. They preach righteousness. The younger Alma made custodian of sacred records. Mosiah translated twenty-four plates of Ether. (Chs. 27-28)

C. King Mosiah urges representative form of government by judges democratically chosen. Death of Mosiah and elder Alma (c. 92 B.C.). (Ch. 29)

In Chapters 1-6 of the Book of Mosiah we are dealing with the events of King Benjamin's last years, more especially his last three years. (See 1:10; 6:4-5.) We have already learned that in the Book of Omni and the Words of Mormon a little is said about Benjamin's earlier life. The later years of the king's reign were peaceful, because he had already subdued his enemies and had organized his kingdom upon righteous lines.

In the opening verses (1-8) of Chapter 1, we find that Benjamin had three sons, Mosiah, Helorum, and Helaman. These sons he caused to be "taught in all the language of their fathers, that thereby they might become men of understanding. . . ." (1:2.) These words are significant. All teaching should be done with the object of making men and women of understanding. Education is of value mainly if it increases our wisdom and faith, and our understanding of the world and its people. Benjamin seems to have spent considerable time teaching his sons the scriptures which were written upon the Brass Plates. He pointed out to his boys that except for the scriptures, his people must have remained in ignorance of the great spiritual realities and the mysteries of God which were contained in them. It may be well for us to observe these words which he said to them:

I say unto you, my sons, were it not for these things, which have been kept and preserved by the hand of God, that we might read and understand of his mysteries, and have his commandments always before our eyes, that even our fathers would have dwindled in unbelief, and we should have been like unto our brethren, the Lamanites, who know nothing concerning these things, or even do not believe them when they are taught them, because of the traditions of their fathers, which are not correct. O my sons, I would that ye should remember that these sayings are true, and also that these records are fine. And behold, also the plates of Nephi, which contain the records and the sayings of our fathers from the time they left Jerusalem until now, and they are true; and we can know of their surety because we have them before our eyes. (1:5-6)

Then he urged his sons to search the scriptures diligently and profit by them. If the modern generation took as much interest in the scriptures and were as careful to teach them to their children, we might have a less chaotic world than we do. Benjamin's advice to his sons to search the scriptures diligently is sound.

King Benjamin knew his death would come shortly, and therefore made preparations to confer his kingdom upon one of his sons, probably the eldest. He called Mosiah before him and charged him to make a proclamation among all his people to gather on the morrow to the temple at Zarahemla so that he could give them his last words. He told Mosiah that he wanted to give his people a name whereby they could be distinguished above all people which the Lord had brought out of Jerusalem. His people had been diligent in keeping God's commandments, and he wanted to give them a charge and a new name in order that they might never be blotted out on God's records except through transgression. He also informed his son that if his people fell into transgression and became wicked and adulterous, they would become weak like their brethren and the Lord would no more preserve them by his matchless and marvelous powers, as he had hitherto done. Had not the Lord already extended his arm in preserving their forefathers, they would have fallen victims of Lamanite hatred (1:9-14).

After telling Mosiah these things, King Benjamin delivered to him a charge concerning all the affairs of the kingdom. Moreover, he gave him charge of the Brass Plates, the Plates of Nephi (probably Large and Small), the sword of Laban, the ball or director, and, as we shall see later, the "holy interpreters," or Urim and Thummim as we know them (1:15-16). Mosiah did as his father had commanded him, and proclaimed to all of the people in Zarahemla that they should gather to the temple on the morrow. Verse 18 is worthy of our notice because it shows us that at this time the people of Zarahemla (combined Nephites and Mulekites) were still relatively small in number. (This is probably true despite 2:2.) The fact that they could be called up overnight to come to the temple is proof of that fact.

The people of Zarahemla, together with their families (and firstlings of their flocks for sacrifice and burnt offerings), gathered together around the temple. They pitched their tents with the doors thereof facing the temple so that each family could hear the words of King Benjamin. Benjamin found that the people could not all be accommodated within the walls of the temple; therefore he erected a tower so that all could hear. Even this was not sufficient. Hence he had his words written and sent among those who could not hear (2:1-8).

The oration of Benjamin is really the only example of oration in the Book of Mormon. It is found in Mosiah 2:9-3:27; Mosiah 4:4-30.

It is highly improbable that Benjamin had received much instruction in the making of sermons or speeches. What ability he had in youth had probably been improved through long experience as a teacher of his people and as their king. Most of his speeches were doubtless of a religious nature, if we may judge the spirit of the man in his last formal speech.

The oration is remarkable in many respects. It is characterized by dignity, simplicity, sincerity, and a warm religious feeling. It seems also to have been delivered with force and persuasiveness. The combined powers of Benjamin's religious authority and kingly office undoubtedly gave his words great prestige among the people. The oration seems to me to fall into three logical divisions: (1) Mosiah 2:9-41; (2) Mosiah 3; (3) Mosiah 4:4-30.

In the first part of the first division King Benjamin enjoined upon his people the necessity of rendering service to each other and to God. In fact, "service" is the watchword of this part of the oration. The king began by skillfully pointing out how he had labored without stint to serve his people and his God (2:11-18). The rulers of all nations, not to mention the servants of the people everywhere, would do well to read Benjamin's words and take them to heart. They are part of the glory which is the Book of Mormon's. Let us reproduce at this point one of the great things which he said:

Behold, I say unto you that because I said unto you that I had spent my days in your service, I do not desire to boast, for I have only been in the service of God. And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. (2:16-17; italics mine.)

Benjamin proceeded to remind the multitudes that if he merited any thanks from them, how much more ought they to thank their heavenly King (2:19). Verse 19 is a transition. The king now pointed out that if his people would praise God and serve him with their whole souls, they would still be unprofitable servants. Mosiah 2:20-22 is a great passage and deserves our careful notice.

In the remainder of this division, Benjamin reminded the people of their debt to God and of the fact that he wanted none of their blood to rest upon him for their lack of proper instruction. He wanted to go down to his grave in peace, that his immortal spirit might join the choirs above in singing the praises of God. The king proclaimed the ascent of his son, Mosiah, to the throne and bespoke for him the people's loyalty and support, He also warned them against allowing contentions to arise in their midst; in a most solemn manner he urged them not to transgress the commandments of God and allow the spirit of evil to overcome them. They were asked to consider the blessed and happy state of those who obeyed God (2:23-41).

Benjamin wisely reserved for the second division of his oration a revelation of the highest importance. Its effects upon the people were bound to be impressive. Sometime before the delivery of his address, an angel had appeared to Benjamin with tidings of great joy, which he told the king might be shared with the people (3:2-4). The message of the heavenly visitor concerned the coming of the Savior, his work in mortality, his death and resurrection, and the subsequent effects upon mankind. The angel had also explained the reasons for the giving of the law of Moses, the power of the atoning blood of Christ in saving children who died in infancy, the natural man as an enemy to God, and the necessity of men becoming meek, humble, patient, and full of love, if they are to be saved. The divine messenger had concluded by pointing out that his words would stand as a bright testimony at the judgment day, a day in which every man would be judged according to his works, whether good or evil. Other words of warning were added (3:5-27).

The multitude fell to the earth on hearing the angel's words as delivered by King Benjamin. The sacred record says that "they had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth. And they all cried aloud with one voce, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the son of God, . . . " (4:2)

Benjamin must have been pleased at this interruption, for he knew that the words which he was delivering were having a profound effect upon his audience. And the message of the angel was like a letter from the Christ assuring his people that he would come in due time as the prophets had prophesied.

The third division of King Benjamin's oration consists of the words which he uttered after the people of his audience had received the angel's words and a comforting and peaceful testimony from the Spirit of the Lord. The speaker took advantage of the unusual opportunity afforded him by the testimony which the people had received to drive home to them the obligation of keeping the Lord's commandments. Salvation, he pointed out, comes only through the atonement of Christ (4:6-8). Benjamin then exhorted his people to believe in God, to believe in his wisdom, power, goodness, and greatness. He advised his people to keep in mind what unworthy creatures they were, to humble themselves by calling on God's name daily, and to stand steadfast in the faith. He advised them that if they did this, they would always rejoice and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of their sins. Moreover, they would not have a tendency to injure one another or to do one another harm, but would find it possible to live peacefully and to render every man according to that which is his due. He advised his people in a practical way not to suffer their children to go hungry or naked, but to teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness, to love one another, and to serve one another (4:9-15).

Benjamin's words reveal a great religious soul, and we believe that his advice is worthy of a high place in the scriptures. He concluded his speech by emphasizing the need of succoring and administering to those in need. Some of his words, simple as the. are, deserve to be framed and memorized. We call the reader's attention especially to 4:16-26. Notice that in verses 25 and 26 we are taught that even in mortality men may walk guiltless before God by retaining a remission of their sins from day to day. The atonement of Christ thus operates constantly in our behalf if we strive to keep his commandments and retain repentant hearts. This is the way in which members of our (Church become Latter-day Saints (holy people), and only in this way.

In this passage Benjamin advises his listeners to give of their substance to those in need; not even the petition of the beggar is to be turned down, with a rationalization for so doing. Whoever does so should repent, for all men are beggars and depend upon the same God for all the substance they have. Moreover, Benjamin reminded his audience that they had been begging God for a remission of their sins, and they had not begged in vain. He continued in this manner concerning the necessity of giving help to the poor as well as administering to the relief, temporarily and spiritually, of all who needed it.

He ended the oration by advising, the people not to work harder than their strength permitted; nevertheless, they were to be diligent and to see that all things were done in order. Whenever they borrowed from their neighbor, they should see to it that what was borrowed was also returned. It was not necessary to remind them of the many ways in which sin could be committed; but they were to continue in the faith of what they had heard concerning the Lord's coming and watch their thoughts and deeds to the end of their lives in order not to perish spiritually (4:27-30).

Every just person must recognize that Benjamin was a great man and that his oration, judged by religious standards, was a noble achievement. Was the oration successful? Did it change the people in any way, as a good oration should? Even the king was anxious to know, and he sent among his people to find out. They universally cried out their belief in the words which he had spoken and were willing to enter into a covenant with God to do his will the remainder of their days (5:1-5). Benjamin now told them that they should be called by the name of Christ, which name should not be blotted out of their hearts except through transgression. This name should be remembered by them, in order that they should not be found on the left hand of God. They were always to be found abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord Omnipotent, might seal them his (5:6-15). Having finished speaking to his people, the king took the names of those who had entered into a covenant with God to keep his commandments. All except little children had done so (6:1-2).

King Benjamin now consecrated his son, Mosiah, to be a ruler and a king over his people, and gave him the formal charges and instructions necessary. He also appointed priests to teach the people and keep them reminded of the sacred covenant or oath they had entered into with their God. Mosiah entered upon the throne in his thirtieth year, which was about the year 125 B.C. His father, Benjamin, lived about three years after speaking to his people and installing his son as their ruler. He thus died about the year 122 B.C. Mosiah faithfully kept the charges of his father and led his people uprightly. Not only did he have his people till the soil, but he did so himself in order to save them burdensome taxes. In this respect he followed the example of his illustrious father, who realized the dangers of grievous taxes upon a people. (6:3-7; see 2:14.) The American people today need leaders with the same spirit of Benjamin and Mosiah. The power to taxi is indeed the power to destroy.

Chapters 7 and 8 of Mosiah form a natural literary division of the book, because in them we learn about an expedition which was sent by Mosiah to find the lost people of Zeniff. This expedition was led by a man whose name was Ammon, a descendant of Zarahemla. He and his men, sixteen in all, wandered for forty days in the wilderness before discovering a strange city; outside the walls of this city (Shilom), Ammon and three of his men were taken prisoner by a king whose name was Limhi. After two days in prison, Ammon was permitted to speak to the king (7:1-13). He told who he was and informed Limhi that he had set out from the land of Zarahemla in an endeavor to find the people of Zeniff. Limhi, who was king over Zeniff's people, was overjoyed to hear Ammon's story, and soon revealed to him the sorry plight that he and his people were in. They were paying heavy taxes and were in bondage to the Lamanites. Limhi made Ammon and his men comfortable. On the morrow he called his own people to the temple and in a joyful spirit reminded them of their history and difficulties (7:14-33). Then he told them about their brethren in the land of Zarahemla and had Ammon rehearse to them what had happened to the people of Zarahemla from the time that Zeniff departed until he himself had left there. Ammon also told about King Benjamin's oration and explained the teachings thereof in detail. When this had been done, King Limhi dismissed the multitude (8:1-4). Their he had Ammon read the record of his (Limhi's) people and told how he had endeavored to find the people of Zarahemla. The king had sent forty-three of his men on an expedition into the wilderness for that very purpose. After wandering for a long time, they had come to a land that had been covered with bones of men and beasts, and with turns of buildings. They found the remains of weapons of war and twenty-four plates of gold covered with engravings. King Limhi and his people were very eager to know the contents of these records but were unable to translate them. For that reason he had asked Ammon if he could interpret languages (8:5-11). Ammon told him that he could not, but that he knew of a man who could, be cause he had an instrument through which he could look and translate by the power of God. He had reference, of course, to the fact that King Mosiah had in his possession the "interpreters" or the Urim and Thummim as we know them. Ammon went on to explain that this king was a seer and that a seer is greater than a prophet. Mosiah was therefore both a revelator and a prophet; a greater gift no man have unless he possesses the power of God. A seer may know of things which are past and of things to come. In this way God has provided a means by which man, through faith, may work mighty miracles and become a great benefit to his fellow men. Limhi rejoiced over Ammon's explanation, and remarked that the plates his men had found doubtless contained a great mystery the like of which the "interpreters" had been prepared to unfold to the children of men. And so he continued to express his joy (8:12-21).

At this point it may be well to observe that when King Limhi's men found a land covered with bones of men and beasts, ruins of buildings and remains of weapons of war (8:7-11), they had happened upon the last battlefields and refined remains of Jaredite civilization. That this is the case is made more certain by the fact that they found the twenty-four plates of Ether which were expressly hidden by that Jaredite prophet in such a way that the men of Limhi found them (8:9; Ether 15:33). Now, if the last battlefield of the Jaredites was around and about the Hill Ramah-Cumorah (Ether 15:11) in New York it would be necessary to assume that Limhi's men traveled about six thousand miles altogether in their attempts to find the land of Zarahemla, a distance completely unreasonable to assume when we consider that the elder Alma brought his group of Zeniff's people to the land of Zarahemla in twelve days (Mosiah 24:23-25). And if Alma's group had taken twenty days, to make up for any difference in position as compared with Limhi's people (cf. Mosiah 23:3), they would only have traveled about four hundred miles (at the rate of twenty miles per day) to come to Zarahemla. In view of these fact, isn't it reasonable to assume that the Hill Cumorah (Ramah to the Jaredites), around which the last great battles of the Nephites and Jaredites took place, was in Middle America, somewhere in the conservative range of 400 to 500 miles from Zarahemla?

Beginning with Chapter 9 and concluding with Chapter 24, we find a record of the people found by Ammon and his men from the time they left Zarahemla under Zeniff until the last of them returned under the leadership of Alma the elder. Chapters 9 and 10 comprise the personal memoirs of Zeniff. It appears that Zeniff was in both of the expeditions which set out from Zarahemla in the early days of King Benjamin to find the land of their forefathers. (See Omni 27-30; Mosiah 9:1-4.) In the second expedition-the first failed-he was the leader, being over-zealous to inherit the land of their first inheritance. The expedition found the land, and Zeniff tells how he and his people began to repair the walls of the cities of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom after making a covenant with the Lamanites who departed (9:5-8). It would appear that the main body of Nephites, who once occupied these towns and from whose midst the elder Mosiah had departed (Omni 12), had been dispossessed by the Lamanites and destroyed in accordance with Jacob's prophecy (Jacob 3:3-4). Zeniff's party tilled the land for upward of twelve years, when the lazy and idolatrous Lamanites determined to bring them under bondage according to their original intentions. Wars and contentions thus arose. The Lamanites were repulsed and driven out by God's help, given in answer to the prayers of Zeniff and his followers (9:9-19). In Chapter 10 Zeniff tells how he exhorted his people to put their trust in God and withstand the Lamanites face to face. Through his leadership the people were able to retain their freedom and liberty. His people were also successful in the arts of farming, spinning, and-the like. In 10:22 Zeniff writes that he conferred the kingdom upon one of his sons. So end his memoirs.

In Chapters 11-17 of the Book of Mosiah, we have a natural literary division which deals with the wicked administration of Noah, the son whom Zeniff had appointed king. The son did not walk in the ways of his father. He and his corrupt priests spurned the teachings of God and committed all manner of abominations and licentiousness among his people. Noah and his henchmen taxed heavily (one-fifth) the products and property of the people. (In our day of heavy taxation, it is interesting to observe how sensitive the Nephite prophets were to unjust taxes.) They took to themselves many wives and concubines, which act, as we learned in the Book of Jacob, was against the counsel and advice of God (Jacob 2:27, 30). Moreover, the king took the resources of the people and built elegant and spacious buildings for himself and his lewd priests; thus, they lived in luxury at the expense of the taxpayers and deceived them with lying and vain words. Noah and his people became wine-bibbers. In a contest with the Lamanites, his armies won a preliminary combat and began to boast of their prowess and delight in the shedding of blood (11:1-19).

In the midst of this wickedness came Abinadi, a courageous prophet, who did not hesitate to denounce Noah and the wickedness of his people. The prophet told the people that unless they ceased their whoredoms and abominations and repented in sackcloth and ashes, the Lord would deliver them into the hands of their enemies and bring them into bondage. But King Noah and his people, blinded as they were, hardened their hearts against the words of Abinadi and attempted to take his life. They did not succeed in doing so at that time (11:20-29).

After two years' time Abinadi came again this time in disguise-and once more boldly called the people to repentance. If they did not do so, they would be brought into bondage and be smitten or slain; the life of King Noah would be valued as a garment in a furnace. They would also be smitten with pestilence and their crops would be destroyed. If it came to the worst, they were to be utterly destroyed. But a record of them would be preserved to disclose their abominations to other nations (12:1-8). After a time, Abinadi was brought bound before the king, and his captors repeated some of the judgments with which the prophet had threatened the monarch and his people. At the same time they assured the king that both he and they were innocent of wrongdoing (12:9-16). King Noah had Abinadi thrust into prison. When the king's priests questioned him and sought to confuse him, he answered them boldly and confounded them in all their words (12:17-19). He showed them that they did not understand the scriptures or obey them. The power of God was with Abinadi, and his tormentors could not touch him, although they tried to do so. He repeated the Ten Commandments to them and proved that they had not taught them. The courageous prophet also explained that salvation could not come by the law of Moses alone. It was expedient that they should observe the law of Moses for the time being, but Moses himself had prophesied of the coming of the Messiah to redeem his people and bring about the resurrection of the dead. No man could be saved except through the redemption which he would make (12:20-13:35).

Abinadi now quoted to his audience the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, which refers to the coming of Christ and his mission. There are many authorities who do not agree that the chapter deals with Christ, holding that the figure referred to in the chapter is a purely ideal figure, not necessarily the Messiah. But the views of such authorities need not disturb us at this point, because the prophet. Abinadi in the next chapter (Mosiah 15) makes clear that the "ideal figure" is the Christ.

Mosiah 14 (Cf. Isaiah 53.)

In this chapter Isaiah seems to speak for himself and others who have seen in vision the coming of Christ and his mission. Verses 1 to 3 picture our Lord as seen by men: despised and rejected. Let us first examine verse 1.

The expected answer to the question is "no one." A key to the interpretation of the verse is to be found in John 12:37-38, where the verse is quoted:

Though he [Jesus] had done so many signs before them [the Jews], yet they did not believe in him; it was that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: ... (RSV translation.)

The Savior is to grow up as a young plant, like a root out of arid land, which symbolizes why in external appearance he was not to be particularly pre-possessing in form and appearance to other men. He is to be despised and rejected of men; he is to be a man familiar with grief and sorrow, a man shunned by others and held to be of little account.

Isaiah (and those for whom he is speaking) now describes (especially vss. 5, 6) our Lord as the Redeemer, the one who through his intense suffering made expiation for the sins of all mankind (cf. D&C 19:18). Those who malign and despise the Lord will come to realize that he pays a terrible penalty, not for any sins of his own, but for theirs. As for the first half of verse 4, the Gospel of Matthew sees its fulfillment in this incident:

That evening they brought to him many who were possessed with demons; and he cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick. This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah, "He took our infirmities and bore our diseases." (Matthew 8:16-17. RSV translation.)

Despite what he did by way of miracles, men still looked (last half of v. 4) upon our Lord askance, as one stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. The problem raised by the use of the word "Lord" in verse 6 (cf. "God" in verse 4) is discussed below in connection with verse 10.

The meek demeanor of the Savior and his uncomplaining, spirit during undeserved harsh treatment is next described.

Among scholars the next verse is notoriously difficult. I think that the first clause means that our Lord was taken away (from life) by oppression and by a miscarriage of justice. The second clause, "and who shall declare his generation," is often taken to mean "and among his contemporaries who was concerned?" I think that "generation" here means "posterity," but in a very special sense. It has reference to the "seed" or "believers" of Jesus in the sense explained by the prophet Abinadi in Mosiah 15:10-13, or by the Savior to the brother of Jared when he said, "In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters [i.e., my seed or my generation]." (Ether 3:14.) In the light of this explanation, the remainder of the verse gives sense, though authorities still find some difficulties.

Verse 9 has some technical difficulties, but the general sense of it seems clear. I think that Isaiah saw in vision the death and burial of the Savior much as described by the Gospel of Matthew (27:38, 57-60). It will be remembered that Jesus was crucified between thieves, and was buried in the tomb of a rich man, Joseph of Arimathea.

In the remaining verses Isaiah seems to give us an interpretation of the Almighty's purpose in permitting the Savior's life to be taken. The Lord's triumph through suffering is also seen in them. But at the very outset (vs. 10) Latter-day Saint scholars come up against a difficulty, a difficulty almost peculiar to our people. We hold that Jehovah, the pre-existent Savior, is the God of the Old Testament. (Cf. 3 Nephi 15:5-6.) The difficulty of which I speak is therefore manifest in the very first clause of verse 10 which reads: "Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him." The word for Lord in our present Hebrew text is Jehovah. So logically the clause seems to mean that it pleased Jehovah to bruise Jehovah, which is not the meaning we should expect. We would naturally suppose that the clause should mean that it pleased God the Father to bruise Jehovah the Son. And in Mosiah 15:7-8 the prophet Abinadi seems so to interpret Isaiah's words:

The will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father. And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men. (Cf. also 14:4, 6 for the use of "God" and "Lord.")

But how did "Jehovah" or "Lord" get into the text of the Brass Plates from which the Nephites got their text of Isaiah? It is a well-known fact that anciently writers or copyists of the scriptures sometimes interchanged the words for Elohim (God) and Jehovah (Lord). A comparison of Psalms 14 and Psalms 53 will be instructive in this respect. It seems quite obvious that these two psalms are based upon the same original, but where the term "the Lord" occurs in Psalms 14, the word "God" is used in Psalms 53. See the same interchange in this very chapter (14:4, 6). It is therefore possible that an original "Elohim" (God) in Isaiah's text was supplanted by "Jehovah" (Lord) on the Brass Plates. Whatever may be our speculations in the matter, it seems clear that Abinadi used "Lord" in the natural sense we expect as suggested above. Moreover, we should keep in mind that scriptural doctrine makes clear that Jesus is both the Father and the Son in a special sense. (Cf. Mosiah 15:1-5; Ether 3:14; D&C 93:3-4.). He may therefore speak for the Father as he does in Moses 1:6, 32, 33. With this explanation of the use of "Lord," let us present the text of Isaiah, clarifying it as best we can in the process.

In the last two verses Isaiah tells of our Lord's reward and triumph through his suffering. By reason of his suffering and death he will expiate the sins of men; in return the Almighty will give him power and dominion. (D&C 93:12-14; cf. D&C 132:19.)

Having quoted Isaiah 53, Abinadi proceeds to expound much of it in Mosiah 15:1-13. This passage should be read carefully in order to supplement the exposition of Isaiah's prophecy we have just given. In Mosiah 15:1-4, Abinadi speaks of the Redeemer as the "Father and the Son." This has troubled some readers of the Book of Mormon and needs some clarification. In verse 3 Abinadi refers to the Savior as "the Father" for the reason that "he was conceived by the power of God," implying, so it would seem, that God the Father transmitted to his son many of his own Godly qualities and powers. The prophet calls Jesus the "Son, because of the flesh," an obvious allusion to the fact that he was to come into mortality, having God as his real father. The fact that Abinadi calls Jesus the "Son," poses no problem for us, but his calling him the "Father," not to mention the fact that the Father and the Son are designated "one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth," (vs. 4) seems to present problems for many students. In the Doctrine and Covenants (93:4) our Lord explains that he is "the Father because he gave me of his fulness," that is, he became like his Father in all respects. He is therefore the Father in that sense. It should also be noticed that "he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first." (D&C 93:14; italics mine.) The Savior is also the "Father" in the sense that he is the creator of all things. Indeed, King Benjamin spoke of him as "the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things." (Mosiah 3:8; cf. Moses 1:32-33.) Our Lord is the "Father" in still another sense. By subjecting his flesh to the will of God his Father, he brought about the atonement and became the spiritual Father of all men who are willing to forsake their sins and follow him. By alluding to the words of Isaiah (Mosiah 14:8-10), Abinadi makes clear that fact. (Mosiah 15:10-12 ) The Savior himself also made it clear to the brother of Jared (Ether 3:14).

The last problem raised by Abinadi merits detailed explanation. The prophet explained, as we have already seen, that our Lord and his Father are "one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth." (Mosiah 15:4 ) The idea of Christ and the Father being one has disturbed many of our people. It sounds, some say, like sectarian doctrine. But notice that the Doctrine and Covenants also affirms the doctrine.

And that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world; and that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one. (93:2-3; italics ours. Cf. 20:38; 35:2.)

And Mormon speaks of one singing "ceaseless praises with the choirs above, unto the Father and unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are one God. " (Mormon 7:7; italics ours.) It will also be of value to quote D&C 50:43 for our purposes here:

And the Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the Father in me; and inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you. (Cf. vss. 24, 27; John 10:30, 38; John 14:10-11; John 17:20-23.)

Now, how can the Father be "in" the Son and the Son be "in" the Father and the Son be "in" a true believer? The answer must be found in the action of the Holy Ghost. Thus, just as the Spirit which emanates from Deity as a whole (the light of Christ; see D&C 84:45-46; D&C 88:11-13) to illumine all mankind must envelope and pass continuously from the source to those benefited, as in an unbroken circuit, so a higher power or Spirit may also pass in an unbroken circuit from Father to Son. In that way we can crudely illustrate how one is "in" the other. And when a converted man "receives" the Lord, he is allowed to break into the circuit and be "in" the Lord and the Lord "in" him. (See Moses 6:65-66.) At any rate, there is a physical and spiritual rapport between the Father and Son and between them and the true believer that is but vaguely understood by us. But through this rapport they become "one" in the spiritual sense. The Holy Ghost is certainly involved in the process. In his Lectures on Faith (Lecture Fifth; found in editions of the Doctrine and Covenants prior to 1921), Joseph Smith gives us this interesting and valuable explanation that bears on the problem at hand:

And he [Christ] being the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, and having overcome, received a fullness of the glory of the Father, possessing the same mind with the Father, which mind is the Holy Spirit, that bears record of the Father and the Son, and these three are one; or, in other words, these three constitute the great, matchless, governing and supreme, power over all things; by whom all things were created and made that were created and made, and these three constitute the Godhead, and are one; the Father and the Son possessing the same mind, the same wisdom, glory, power, and fullness-filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fullness of the mind, glory, and power; or, in other words, the spirit, glory, and power, of the Father, possessing all knowledge and glory, and the same kingdom, sitting at the right hand of power, in the express image and likeness of the Father, mediator for man, being filled with the fullness of the mind of the Father; or, in other words, the Spirit of the Father, which Spirit is shed forth upon all who believe on his name and keep his commandments; and all those who keep his commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fullness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one.

Thus we see that Abinadi's teachings are in perfect harmony with the Prophet Joseph Smith's instructions concerning the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

If one has read Abinadi's discourse through verse 13 of Mosiah 15, he will be prepared to understand the prophet's explanation of Isaiah 52:7-10 (cf. Mosiah 12:20-24) as given to King Noah's wicked priests. This is given in verses 14 to 31 [cf. D&C 113:7-10). In these verses Abinadi finds the opportunity to give an excellent explanation of the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of men as made possible by the atonement of our Lord.

Abinadi then stretched forth his hand and explained that every nation, kindred, tongue, and people will see eye to eye and will confess before God that his judgments are just. The wicked will be cast out and have cause to howl, weep, wail, and gnash their teeth; the Lord will not redeem them because of their refusal to hearken to his voice. Because they have subjected themselves to the devil, they have become carnal, sensual, and devilish. Indeed, mankind would have become hopelessly lost except for the redemption which the Lord would make for all. Without the Christ there could have been no redemption (speaking as though he had already come). But the individual who persists in his own carnal nature, and continues in sin and rebellion against God cannot claim this redemption. Had Christ not risen from the dead and broken the bands of death, so that the grave should have no victory and death should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection. But there is a resurrection, and the grave has no victory. The sting of death is swallowed up in Christ, who is the light and life of the world (16:1-9).

Abinadi's references (Mosiah 16:7-8) to the fact that "the grave should have no victory," and "that death should have no sting," remind one at once of Paul's words in 1 Corinthians 15:54-56. Since Abinadi lived long before Paul was born (about 150 years), the parallels between the words of the two men invite some explanation. It should be noticed at once that Paul's references to the sting of death and to victory over the grave are taken or quoted from earlier scriptures, scriptures that were doubtless available to Abinadi. Here are Paul's words:

Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? (1 Corinthians 15:54-55 )

We do not know from what prophetic book Paul quoted these words (they were available in his day), but we do know that Isaiah said that God would "swallow up death in victory," (Isaiah 25:8) and that Hosea made known the following words of the Lord: "I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction." (Hosea 13:14) We should keep in mind the possibility that both Isaiah and Hosea were quoting from or using a still earlier prophecy which contained the saying substantially as quoted by Paul.

Now, let us continue the account of Abinadi's teachings.

In the resurrection this mortal will put on immortality, and this corruption will put on incorruption and will stand before the bar of God to be judged. Men will be judged by their works, whether good or evil. If righteous, they will inherit the resurrection of endless life and happiness; if evil, they will come forth in the resurrection of endless damnation, where their carnal wills and desires have led them; being warned of their iniquities, they would not depart from them (16:10-12).

Abinadi now told his wicked audience that they ought to tremble and repent of their sins, keeping in mind that only in and through Christ could they be saved. If they taught the law of Moses, they should teach that it is a shadow of things to come-redemption comes through Christ the Lord, who is the very Eternal Father (16:13-15).

When Abinadi had finished his sayings, the king gave a command that his priests should take him and cause him to be put to death. But one of them, a young man by the name of Alma, pleaded that he be released and allowed to depart in peace. This made the king even more angry, and Alma was cast out. The king's servants sought to kill him, but he hid himself and wrote down all of the words spoken by Abinadi (17:1-4). It is very probable, then, that the account of Abinadi in the Book of Mosiah is due fundamentally to Alma's industry and foresight.

Abinadi was put into prison for three days, accused, and found worthy of death because he testified that God himself should come down among men (cf. 15:1-4). He was told that unless he recalled all of the "evil" words he had spoken against the king and his people, the sentence of death would be carried out. This Abinadi refused to do, assuring his tormentors that he would suffer death first; but if they did put him to death, they would be shedding innocent blood. King Noah was tempted to release him, because he feared his words (17:5-11).

The priests, however, stirred up the king's anger, and he delivered up Abinadi to be burned. As the flames began to scorch the prophet, he cried out:

Behold, even as ye have done unto me, so shall it come to pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer even the pains of death by fire; and this because they believe in the salvation of the Lord their God. And it will come to pass that ye shall be afflicted with all manner of diseases because of your iniquities. Yea, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven by wild and ferocious beasts. And in that day ye shall be hunted, and ye shall be taken by the hand of your enemies, and then ye shall suffer, as I suffer, the pains of death by fire. Thus God executeth vengeance upon those that destroy his people. O God, receive my soul. (17:15-19)

Thus died this great and courageous servant of God, having sealed the truth of his words by his death. His predictions of retribution upon his slayers were literally fulfilled, as Mormon was always careful to point out. The critical reader may wonder how Abinadi's final words came to be recorded. It is possible that Alma came on the scene in disguise, or it may be that one of his future converts was present and at a later time reported what happened.

Chapter 18 of Mosiah forms a little literary unit of itself. It seems to have been inserted in the record because it gives an account of certain unusual historical facts. After the death of Abinadi, Alma, the young priest of King Noah's who had believed Abinadi's words, taught secretly among the people. He taught concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the redemption which was to be brought to pass by the power and suffering of Christ (18:1-2).

Apparently a considerable number of people came to him and were instructed in private. Finally, he went forth to a place called Mormon, where there was a fountain of pure water; here he began to baptize. He baptized about two hundred and four persons (18:3-16).

The question is sometimes raised why Alma also buried himself in the water when he baptized a convert by the name of Helam (v. 14). There is no compelling reason that he should have done so, unless inspired by the Holy Spirit. He simply elected to do it in the way he did, and we shall have to leave it at that. Suffice it to say that he did not bury himself in the water in the succeeding baptisms (v. 15).

Of great interest is the fact that the baptized converts at that time were called "the church of God, or the church of Christ, from that time forward." (18:17 ) This is the first time in the Book of Mormon that any mention is made of a formal church organization among the Nephites. It is true that from the days of Lehi to the time of Abinadi there had been many inspired prophets who had the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood. Nevertheless, no formal church organization is mentioned in the Nephite record until we reach Mosiah 18:17. A good clue to the actual facts is later given by Mormon. Here are his words:

And behold, I am called Mormon, being called after the land of Mormon, the land in which Alma did establish the church among the people, yea, the first church which was established among them after their transgression. (3 Nephi 5:12 )

If I interpret Mormon's words correctly, we may assume that the Nephites probably had a church organization from the days of Nephi, who built a temple (2 Nephi 5:16) and who refers to baptism by water and the Spirit, not to mention the straight and narrow path (2 Nephi 31:6-19), until the time of the elder Mosiah (Omni 12). I take it that the "transgression" referred to by Mormon is the situation that caused the Lord to call the elder Mosiah and his followers from among the main body of the Nephites. At any rate, from the days of the elder Mosiah until Alma set it up, there had been no formal church organization among the Nephites. Alma proceeded to ordain priests, one for every fifty people who belonged to the Church. From whom did he obtain his priesthood? That he had authority from God is abundantly clear (18:13, 18). In the absence of any express statement, we may assume with some reason that it was conferred on him by Abinadi. Alma instructed the priests to teach nothing except what he or the prophet had taught concerning faith and repentance; there was to be no contention one with the other, and the Sabbath was to be kept holy. They were to labor with their own hands and not depend upon the people for their support. One day-doubtless the Sabbath-they were to teach the people and conduct worship. As for themselves, they were to gather together as often as they could and "wax strong in the Spirit" in order to teach with power and authority from God. Moreover, they were to impart of their substance to those in need (18:19-29).

King Noah finally discovered Alma's faithful converts and sent his army to destroy them. However, Alma and his people were apprised of the coming of the king's army and fled with their belongings and families into the wilderness. They numbered approximately 450 souls. What finally happened to them is told us in Chapters 23 and 24.

In Chapters 19-22 we have another logical division of the text. These chapters contain a prophetic account of how retribution came upon King Noah and what happened to all his people, not to mention his priests. As one reads these chapters, one gets the impression that at least in part they were written deliberately to show how Abinadi's prophecies came true. After Alma and his people fled into the wilderness, an insurrection broke out against King Noah. One of the insurrectionists, Gideon by name, overpowered Noah and was about to slay him upon a tower to which he had fled. Here the king perceived that the Lamanites were within their borders, and Gideon spared the craven monarch's life. The Nephite women and children and the less cowardly men who remained behind were taken captive by the Lamanites and spared on condition that they would deliver up one half of their property, deliver up King Noah, and pay tribute year by year. Limhi, a just son of Noah, was among the captured. Gideon secretly sent men into the wilderness to search for the king and the people that had escaped. And indeed, they found the people, but not the king and his priests. It was learned that these men had sworn to return to the land of Nephi and perish, if need be, in their attempts to get revenge on the Lamanites, should they find their wives and children slain. Noah resisted their desires, and in their anger they burned him to death. The king's wicked priests escaped death only by fleeing before them. The men of Gideon apprised the men of what had happened in their absence, and the whole party returned safely to the land of Nephi. The king of the Lamanites made an oath that his people would not slay them (19:1-25).

Limhi was now made king over the Nephites under the difficult terms of their captors. He had continual peace for about two years (19:26-29).

The priests of King Noah managed to flee into the wilderness and for a time escaped retribution. These priests succeeded in abducting twenty-four of the daughters of the Lamanites who came out to dance in a place called Shemlon. As a result of this abduction, the Lamanites came against the Nephites with their armies, but in the ensuing battle the Nephites bested them and captured their king, who had been left behind in a wounded condition. King Limhi pacified the Lamanites king by telling him, at the behest of Gideon the Nephite commander, about the probability of Noah's wicked priests having stolen the Lamanite daughters. Thus an extended war with the Lamanites was averted, a war which would have been disastrous to the Nephites (20:1-26).

In accordance with Abinadi's other predictions, the Nephites eventually found themselves again in great affliction because of their bondage to the Lamanites. They even took up arms, but many of them were slain. Finally, in great humility, they cried to the Lord to deliver them from bondage, but because of their previous iniquities the Lord was slow to hear their cry. Nevertheless, he gradually softened the hearts of their Lamanite captors, and by degrees they began to prosper (21:1-16). King Limhi realized the necessity of helping the many widows and children among his people in order to prevent them from starving. Their woes were great because of the great number of men who had been slain. All of the men were required to impart of their substance to prevent any unnecessary suffering. King Limhi seems to have been a man with a strong sense of social justice. He took steps in the presence of danger to keep his people together in a body as much as possible, and secured their grain and their flocks, because they had lost much to the wicked priests of Noah. They were also anxious to capture those priests because of the great destruction they had brought upon them. It was under these conditions that Ammon and his men had discovered King Limhi and his people. The king had Ammon and his men thrown into prison only because he suspected them of being priests of Noah. Ammon and his men, along with Limhi and many of his people, mourned over the death of Abinadi, over the departure of Alma and his people, and also because of the iniquities caused by Noah and his priests. Limhi and many of his people were eager to be baptized, but Ammon refrained from performing the ordinance, considering himself an unworthy servant. These people therefore waited upon the Spirit of the Lord and studied ways and means by which they could deliver themselves out of the bonds of the Lamanites (21:1-36).

Chapter 22 relates how, at Gideon's suggestion, the people prepared their women and children, their flocks and herds, to escape from the Lamanites, whose guards were to be plied with unusual amounts of wine and left in a drunken stupor. The plan worked, and the captive people were thereby enabled to escape out of the city at night while their guards slumbered; under the leadership of Ammon and his men they came back to the land of Zarahemla, joined Mosiah's people, and became his subjects. King Mosiah received them with joy and welcomed the receipt of their records, including the plates of Ether which had been found by Limhi's men.

The obvious lesson of these chapters is that God will not be mocked; when his people fail to serve him, they often find themselves in deep trouble. But after their deep and sincere repentance, he usually listens to his children and delivers them from their bondage.

We found in Chapter 18:32-35 an account of how Alma and his four hundred and fifty followers were forced to flee into the wilderness from King Noah's army. In Chapters 23 and 24, a natural literary unit, the sacred record returns to the subject of Alma and his followers, and tells of their wanderings and difficulties from the time when they fled into the wilderness until they reached the land of Zarahemla, there to join the people of Limhi in King Mosiah's realm. It appears that Alma and his people had fled an eight days' journey before reaching a beautiful and pleasant land having a supply of pure water. Here they settled, prospered, and built a city called Helam, after the name they had given the land. It was the desire of the people that Alma be their king, but he dissuaded them from their desires and taught them each to love his neighbor as himself, that there should be no contention among them. He acted as their high priest, being the founder of their church (23:1-20). We need not suppose that Alma was a high priest in the sense we understand it in the Church today; perhaps we should understand "high" priest in the sense of "chief" priest. Alma was simply their spiritual leader.

Unfortunately, trouble was in store for Alma and his faithful followers. The army of Lamanites that had pursued King Limhi and his people in the wilderness (22:15-16) became lost. However, they found the wicked priests of King Noah, who had stolen the daughters of the Lamanites (20:1-5) and had taken them as wives. The Lamanites spared these priests, whose leader was Amulon. Amulon and his brethren joined the Lamanites in searching for the land of Nephi. As the combined groups were doing so, they discovered Alma and his people in the land of Helam. They promised Alma and his brethren their lives and liberty if they would direct them to the land of Nephi. But the Lamanites did not keep their promises completely; they set up guards over the land of Helam, with Amulon as a king and ruler (23:21-39).

Amulon's influence with the king of the Lamanites increased, and some of his brethren began to teach the Lamanites the language of Nephi, but they did not teach them concerning God, the law of Moses, or the words of Abinadi. The cunning Amulon, who had known Alma as one of Noah's priests, now began to persecute him and his people. Onerous taskmasters were placed over them, and the people of Alma prayed mightily to their God for relief (24:1-13). The Lord answered them at first by making their burdens seem easy, and finally gave them permanent relief by outlining a method for their escape. Alma and his people gathered their flocks and grain together, and departed into the wilderness when the Lord caused a deep sleep to come upon the Lamanites and all their taskmasters. Alma's followers poured out their thanks to the Almighty for delivering them from bondage. The Lord effectually stopped the Lamanites from catching up with their quarry-how, we don't know-and after twelve days they arrived in the land of Zarahemla, where King Mosiah received them with joy (24:14-25).

Thus the two branches of Zeniff's original colony had returned and were united safely under Mosiah's rule.

After the return of the two bodies of people under Limhi and Alma respectively, King Mosiah gathered the people of his realm into two groups. One group, the Nephites, were not nearly as numerous as the other group consisting of the people of Zarahemla or Mulekites. To these people Mosiah read, or caused to be read, the complete records of the people of Zeniff from the time they left Zarahemla until they had returned again; the same was done with the records of Alma's people, who had broken away from Zeniff's people in the days of the wicked Noah. The reading of these records caused wonder and amazement in Zarahemla, but the people were overjoyed that their brethren had been released from bondage (25:1-10).

The people were pained at the polluted state of the Lamanites. Of great interest is the fact that the children of Amulon, and those of other wicked priests of King Noah who seem to have accompanied King Limhi, were so displeased with the conduct of their fathers that they renounced their names, took upon themselves the name of Nephi, and were numbered among the Nephites, As a matter of fact, it appears that all of the people of Zarahemla were numbered with the Nephites, because the kingdom had been conferred upon none but those who were descendants of Nephi (25:11-13).

King Mosiah seems to have recognized the great spiritual talents of Alma by having him teach his people. This he did to large audiences, and many, including King Limhi and his people, were baptized. Alma was authorized by Mosiah to establish branches of the Church, and seven were organized in the land of Zarahemla. He also ordained priests and teachers to assist in looking after the affairs of these various branches, which were prospered and blessed by the Lord (25:14-24).

Alma began to find numbers of people who would not be baptized or join the Church. Moreover, they seem to have deceived and flattered many people in the Church and caused them to commit sins. It became necessary for Alma to take action against backsliders and evildoers, because there were many witnesses to their misdeeds. Alma had been made the high priest; for that reason the king insisted that he do the judging of these people (26:1-12).

This troubled Alma no little, and he inquired of the Lord how to handle the difficulties. The Lord gave him the revelation contained in 26:15-32. He commended his servant for his righteous conduct and gave him directions relative to transgressors. The heart of the Lord's instructions regarding them follows:

Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also. Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me. And ye shall also forgive one another your trespasses; for verily I say unto you, he that forgiveth not his neighbor's trespasses when he says that he repents, the same hath brought himself under condemnation. Now I say unto you, Go; and whosoever will not repent of his sins the same shall not be numbered among my people; and this shall be observed from this time forward. (16:29-32 )

Alma thereafter judged those guilty ones according to the pattern he had received. Those who repented of their sins and confessed them were numbered with the Church, but those who would not do so were blotted out. Under Alma's leadership the Church grew and prospered (26:33-39).

There began to be so much persecution of the Church by unbelievers that Alma felt constrained to lay the problem before King Mosiah. The king consulted his priests and acted to allay the difficulty by sending a proclamation throughout the land forbidding persecution of Church members by unbelievers and enjoining equality among all people. No pride or haughtiness was to disturb their peace, and every man was to esteem his neighbor as himself; everyone, barring sickness and other extenuating circumstances, was to labor with his own hands for his support. Priests and teachers were not excepted. Mosiah's action effectively dealt with the difficulties of the Church. Peace came again in the land, and the Lord prospered his people, who had begun now to be numerous and spread abroad in the realm (27:1-7).

Among the unbelievers in the land of Zarahemla was the wicked and idolatrous Alma, one of the sons of the elder Alma. He seems to have been a suave and eloquent young man, who became a great hindrance to the Church by speaking flattery to the people and stirring up dissension. In this he was aided and abetted by the four sons of Mosiah: Ammon, Aaron, Omner and Himni. This quintet went secretly about the land seeking to destroy the Church and to lead the Lord's people astray (27:8-10).

On one occasion, as they were going about doing the devil's work, an angel of God appeared to them and spoke with a voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake. He addressed his words to Alma, who seems to have been the ringleader of the group, and reproved him by asking why he persecuted the Church of God. The divine messenger announced that he had come in response to the prayers of the Lord's people and to the prayers of the elder Alma, his father. He reminded Alma of the great things that the Lord had done for his fathers and directed him to go his way an seek no more to destroy the Church. Having given his message, the angel departed (27: 11-27).

The effect of the messenger's visit was so powerful and far-reaching that the five young men never again fought the Lord's work. The immediate astonishment and wonder of Alma was so great that he was carried dumb and helpless before his father. The elder Alma rejoiced because he knew that only through God's power had his son been made so weak and helpless. Only after fasting and prayer on the part of others for two days and two nights did Alma receive his strength. He them stood up and told how the Lord had manifested to him his displeasure and how his own soul had been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and the bonds of iniquity. From that day forth, these young men began to go about the Church preaching and zealously striving to undo the evil work they had accomplished earlier. They became instruments of God in bringing many to a knowledge of the truth (27:18-37).

After the marvelous spiritual experience which they had shared with the younger Alma, the four sons of Mosiah and a small number of their followers returned to King Mosiah and requested the privilege of going up the land of Nephi for the purpose of preaching to the Lamanites. The Nephites up to this time had had little success in imparting the truth to the Lamanites. (See Jacob 7:24-25; Enos 20.) But the sons of Mosiah were fired with a newborn zeal to serve God. They hoped that they might bring the Lamanites to a knowledge of the Lord their God, convince them of the iniquity of their fathers, and perhaps cure them of their hatred of the Nephites and create a friendly spirit between them which would prevent future contentions. They were desirous that salvation should be declared to everyone; after their experience with the angel of God, they could not bear the thought that any human soul should perish spiritually. In this manner did the Spirit of the Lord work upon them, for they had been the "very vilest of sinners." King Mosiah listened to the plea of his sons and inquired of the Lord whether he should let his sons go upon the mission they desired. The Lord answered in this way:

Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites. (28:7)

The king therefore granted the request of his sons, and they took their journey into the wilderness to preach (28:1-9). We hear no more about these missionaries until we reach Alma 17. Apparently none of them would accept the kingship, for King Mosiah had no one upon whom to confer it (28:10).

Mosiah now took the twenty-four plates of gold found by Limhi's men and proceeded to translate them and have them written down. It is clear that Mosiah's people were very eager to know about the history of the people who had been destroyed and among whose ruins records had been found. The king translated the plates by means of the two stones (holy "interpreters") which he had in his possession, and which had been prepared so that the Lord through his seers could discover to every person upon this land the iniquities and abominations of his people for the warning's sake (28:11-16).

On translating the plates, Mosiah found that they gave a history of the people (Jaredites) that had been destroyed back to the time of the Tower of Babel and from there back to the creation of Adam (28:17). Apparently Mosiah allowed that part of the record to be distributed among his people which gave a general history of the Jaredites, but certain portions of profound spiritual import were withheld, as the Book of Ether (4:1-2) makes clear. Mormon says that an account of what the plates contained was to be written hereafter, because it was expedient that all people should know the things contained therein (28:18-19). Probably for this reason Mormon's son, Moroni, was later to see to it that an abridgment (Book of Ether) was made of them in order for us to learn the high points of Jaredite history.

Apparently in part because his own sons were in distant lands engaged in the work of the ministry, but also because of his outstanding contributions to the Lord's service, King Mosiah delivered to the custody of the younger Alma all of the sacred records and relics which had been handed down to him. Alma was also commanded to keep a record of his people (28:20).

Mosiah now seemed to realize that his days were numbered, and for that reason he wanted to dispose of the question as to his successor. The people wanted Mosiah's son, Aaron, to be king, but Aaron had gone on his mission to the Lamanites, nor would he take the throne. The same was true of Mosiah's other sons, who had doubtless told their father before leaving that none of them desired the kingship (29:1-3). This fact prompted Mosiah to change the form of government, with his people's consent, and for that reason he sent written word among them giving his reasons for it. He pointed out the danger of contention for possession of the throne and of the great iniquity and destruction one wicked king could bring about. King Noah was a good example of such evil doing. When such a man is on the throne, he can be dethroned only with great difficulty and the shedding of much blood (29:4-24). Mosiah's proposal for a change is in its way a classic, and we give it at length:

Therefore, choose you by the voice of this people, judges, that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers, which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord. Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law-to do your business by the voice of the people. And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time he will visit you with great destruction even as he has hitherto visited this land. And now if ye have judges, and they do not judge you according to the law which has been given, ye can cause that they may be judged of a higher judge. If your higher judges do not judge righteous judgments, ye shall cause that a small number of your lower judges should be gathered together, and they shall judge your higher judges, according to the voice of the people. And I command you to do these things in the fear of the Lord; and I command you to do these things, and that ye have no king; that if these people commit sins and iniquities they shall be answered upon their own heads. For behold I say unto you, the sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings; therefore their iniquities are answered upon the heads of their kings. And now I desire that this inequality should be no more in this land, especially among this my people; but I desire that this land be a land of liberty, and every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike, so long as the Lord sees fit that we may live and inherit tire land, yea, even as long as any of our posterity remains upon the face of the land.(29:25-32 )

The king also told his people about the difficulties and travail which a righteous ruler experienced; this ought not to be, for every man should bear his part of the burden of government. The disadvantages of having an unrighteous king were also further elaborated on (29:33-36).

King Mosiah's proposal won the hearts of his people, and they gathered in bodies to discuss freely who should be their judges to judge them according to righteous principles. Moreover, the love of the people for Mosiah was even stronger than before when they realized the greatness of his statesmanship (29:37-40).

All of us should read soberly Mosiah's words to his people. We now have the privilege in this great land of ours to cast our votes for good men to govern the country. Like the Nephites we should be anxious to see that all men have an equal chance in the eyes of the law in this land. We ought to take advantage of the opportunity given us to cast our votes and decide whether righteous or evil men shall rule over us. In these days of severe regimentation among foreign nations, liberty and freedom should mean much to us. The great teachings of the Book of Mormon respecting good government should be appreciated by all thinking persons in this day.

The younger Alma, who may be spoken of as the Paul of the Book of Mormon, was appointed to be the first chief judge under the new form of government. He was also the high priest, since his father had conferred that office upon him and had given him charge concerning all of the affairs of the Church (29:42).

The death at age sixty-three of King Mosiah, the great seer and prophet, is recorded in the forty sixth verse of this chapter. Verses 45 and 47 record the end of the elder Alma "who was the founder of their church," at the age of 82.

It is interesting to notice the express mention of Alma the elder as the "founder" of the Nephite church. He was kept in honorable remembrance because of his activity in building up the Church among the Nephite people.

The great characters of the Book of Mosiah are obviously Benjamin, Mosiah, Abinadi the prophet, the elder Alma, and the younger Alma. The great characteristics of the younger Alma are more fully brought out in the book which bears his name. All of these men are noble characters and portray a vital and dynamic idealism of value for men in all walks of life. They all exhibit a love of righteousness, of freedom and liberty, and of the spirit of service to their fellow men. Mosiah is to be distinguished also by the fact that he urged and successfully brought about a vital change in the form of Nephite government

No special reasons are assigned for the writing of this book; it finds its justification in the way that history always vindicates the acts and words of great men.
