Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 17

The Book of Alma

The Book of Alma is by far the largest in the Book of Mormon, containing sixty-three chapters and about 164½ printed pages in the current edition. It constitutes, therefore, somewhat less than one-third of the total text in the Nephite record. The book is named after the younger Alma, but the abridgment of his part of the record occupies only the first forty-four chapters. The abridgment of Helaman's record is found in Chapters 45-62, and that of Shiblon's occupies part of Chapter 63. The Book of Alma thus breaks, down into three logical divisions according to its authorship. The text abridged by Mormon was therefore the product of a father and two of his sons, Helaman and Shiblon being sons of the younger Alma. It deals with a period of about thirty-nine years of Nephite history. (B.C. 92-53; cf. 1:1; 63:16.)

The Book of Alma contains an unusually large number of superscriptions written in italics. The reader should keep in mind that these are part of the original text. They will be found printed in italics over Chapters 1, 5, 7, 9, 17, 21, 36, 38, 39, and 45. These superscriptions are of more than passing interest. The fact that they are found over the chapters enumerated and over no others would seem to indicate that Mormon took them from Alma's original text, with the exception of that over Chapter 45. Otherwise, why do the chapters dealing with Helaman's and Shiblon's work not have any? It should be noticed that the superscription over Chapter one deals only with Alma's work; no mention is made of the writings of Helaman and Shiblon. If Mormon had written the superscription, we might have expected him to have said something concerning the content of the records made by the sons of Alma.

The Book of Alma is the great missionary book in the Nephite record. Chapters 5-26 and 31-34 are especially noteworthy as accounts of missionary labors. The significant Nephite successes in converting the Lamanites will be found reported in Chapters 17-26.

Alma is also noted, in the Book of Mormon, as a book of unusual doctrinal significance. It is likewise a book of war; many of its chapters deal with bloody struggles between the Nephites and Lamanites. This is especially true of Chapters 43-62, with few exceptions.

Some of the main types of literature in the Book of Alma are historical narrative, didactic exposition, songs of praise, prayers, war epistles, patriarchal admonition, and a prophecy of doom.

It is suggested that the Book of Alma be studied according to the following outline, based on authorship:

I. The abridgment of the younger Alma's record. (Chs. 1-44)

A. Alma chief judge for eight years. Nehor and Amlici, Nephite dissenters, meet death. Prosperity, pride and iniquity in the Church. Alma finds it expedient to deliver up the judgeship to Nephihah and confine himself to work of the ministry. (Chs. 1-4 )

B. Missionary labors of Alma in Nephite cities. Joined by Amulek. Their powerful ministry. Zeezrom, a Nephite lawyer, confounded. The plan of redemption and High Priesthood explained. Alma and Amulek imprisoned. Zeezrom repents and joins Church. Wicked city of Ammonihah destroyed. Church widely established. (Chs. 5-16 )

C. Alma meets sons of Mosiah returning from fourteen-year mission to Lamanites. An account of their wonderful experiences in converting Lamanite kings and subjects. (Chs. 17-26 )

D. Ammonites (converted Lamanites) given land of Jershon to live in. Great battles between Nephites and Lamanites. Alma's desire to cry repentance. Korihor the Anti Christ. Mission to apostate Zoramites. Alma's discourse on faith. Amulek's testimony concerning the last sacrifice and doctrine of repentance. Alma and his brethren minister to repentant Zoramites. Preparations for war. (Chs. 27-35 )

E. Alma's charge to each of his sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton. Important doctrinal teachings. Helaman entrusted with records and sacred relics. (Chs. 36-42)

F. War with Lamanites. The strategy of Moroni and Lehi, two great Nephite generals. (Chs. 43-44)

II. Abridgment of the record of Helaman, the son of the younger Alma. (Chs. 45-62)

A. Mysterious disappearance of Alma. Amalickiah's conspiracy; incites Lamanites against Nephites. Generalship of Moroni and Lehi. Morianton's rebellion. Death of Nephihah the second chief judge. Accession of his son, Pahoran. (Chs. 45-50 )

B. Pahoran suppresses Nephite dissenters. Amalickiah leads Lamanite armies. He is slain. Continued battles with Lamanites, Helaman's two thousand young men. Difficulties of Pahoran the chief judge in maintaining his government. Nephites successful in war against Lamanites. Death of Helaman. (Chs. 51-62 )

III. Abridgment of the record of Shiblon, brother of Helaman.(Ch. 63)

A. Shiblon takes over sacred records. Death of Moroni, great Nephite commander. Nephite migrations. Ships of Hagoth. Before his death Shiblon confers records into hands of Helaman II, son of his brother Helaman (63: 1-11).

B. Mormon's writings concerning scriptures in hands of Helaman. Nephite dissenters stir up Lamanites. Moronihah defeats Lamanites in battle (63:12-17).

After King Mosiah had changed the Nephite form of government, the honor of being the first chief judge fell to the younger Alma (Mosiah 29:42). This office he filled with distinction for eight years, in addition to being the high priest over the Church. Only when iniquity became rampant in the Church did Alma decide to give up the judgeship and devote himself exclusively to the ministry (4:20).

The Book of Alma opens with a tribute to the memory of King Mosiah: good men are a benediction to the race; the good that they do lives long in the hearts of their fellows. Here is the simple but effective tribute paid to the great king:

King Mosiah having gone the way of all the earth, having warred a good warfare, walking uprightly before God, leaving none to reign in his stead; nevertheless he had established laws, and they were acknowledged by the people; therefore they were obliged to abide by the laws which he had made. (1:1)

We may notice here some words of Alma which he uttered the first year of his judgeship when pronouncing judgment of death upon Nehor, a Nephite criminal. Nehor had established a church of his own, and had attempted to force his views upon the people. In so doing he slew Gideon (see Mosiah 22:3-16), an old and greatly respected man of God (1:2-9). When brought to trial, Alma said to him:

Behold, this is the first time that priestcraft has been introduced among this people. And behold, thou art not only guilty of priestcraft, but hast endeavored to enforce it by the sword; and were priestcraft to be enforced among this people it would prove their entire destruction. (1:12)

This passage is of great importance. It affirms the right of men to believe as they choose, providing they do not injure their neighbors in so doing. Alma's pronouncement to Nehor should be repeated for the benefit of men everywhere. Religious intolerance and bigotry need to be battled in every age.

Sentence of death was pronounced upon Nehor and carried out (1:13-15), but his death did not put an end to priestcraft, because so many people were worldly and went forth preaching false doctrines for riches and honor. Verses 16 to 33 of Chapter I tell of the troubles of the Nephite Church and its struggle against pride, inequality, and persecution. Despite its difficulties, the Church generally seems to have accomplished its righteous purposes. Priests, teachers, and people worked diligently together. Notice this significant statement:

And when the priests left their labor to impart the word of God unto the people, the people also left their labors to hear the word of God. And when the priest had imparted unto them the word of God they all returned again diligently unto their labors; and the priest, not esteeming himself above his hearers, for the preacher was no better than the hearer, neither was the teacher any better than the learner; and thus they were all equal, and they did all labor, every man according to his strength. (1:26)

The Book of Mormon is notable for its stress upon equality and liberty among men.

The people of the Church imparted of their substance to the poor, sick, and afflicted. Because of its steadiness, the Church prospered. In fact, the people "did prosper and become far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their church." (1:31 ) Alma pointed out by way of contrast the unenviable state of those who did not belong to the Church (1:32).

At the beginning of the fifth year of Alma's judgeship there arose another worldly and cunning dissenter of the same order as Nehor. The name of this man was Amlici. He and his followers stirred up much contention among the Nephites in their endeavor to have him made king over the people. But the voice of the people rejected him from being king (2:1-7). Nevertheless, the followers of Amlici anointed him king and proceeded to take up arms against their brethren. A civil war resulted; in the first battle, over twelve thousand Amlicite dead were counted, and about half that many loyal Nephites (2:8-19). Nephite spies sent after the fleeing foe returned to report that the Amlicites had joined a great host of Lamanites who were invading the land. Aided by the Lord, the Nephites contended successfully against their enemy. Alma, at the head of his army, fought with Amlici face to face and slew him. He and his guards were also successful in contending with the king of the Lamanites and his guards. In fact, the Nephites drove the enemy, with great slaughter, into the wilderness of Hermounts (2:29-38).

The first part of Chapter 3 deals with the manner in which the Amlicites marked their foreheads after the manner of the Lamanites. The curse which the Lord had brought upon the Lamanites is then discussed anew. Unwittingly, the Amlicites had marked themselves, thus fulfilling the words of the Lord that he would set a mark (3:16) upon those who should fight against the Nephites, Moreover, the Amlicites had apparently brought the Lamanite curse upon themselves (3:1-19). The last part of the chapter tells about another battle in which the Nephites met an army of Lamanites in the same place where they had first battled the Amlicites. Alma did not lead his army at this time because of a wound which he had suffered, but his men won another victory and drove out the enemy from his land (3:20-25).

We see that the worldly ambitions of Amlici and his friends brought about the destruction of many thousands of souls in one year. Contemplating this fact, Mormon said:

And in one year were thousands, and tens of thousands of souls sent to the eternal world, that they might reap their rewards according to their works, whether they were good or whether they were bad, to reap eternal happiness or eternal misery, according to the spirit which they listed to obey, whether it be a good spirit or a bad one. (3:26)

The wars and contentions caused by Amlici and his followers had greatly afflicted the Nephites. The loss of their brethren as casualties in battle, not to mention the destruction of flocks, herds, and crops of grain, caused great mourning among the people. But the destruction had at least one good result: it caused much soul-searching among them, because they all felt that the judgments of God had come upon them because of their wickedness and abominations. For a time the Church grew in size because of numerous baptisms performed under the hands of Alma, who was the high priest and chief ecclesiastical authority among the people. With their change in heart, the Nephites also prospered greatly, but unfortunately, their riches went to their heads and turned them to the vain things of the world. With this reversal came the inevitable pride, envyings, strife, malice, persecutions and the like which accompany wealth (4:1-9). The wickedness within the Church became a great stumbling block to those who did not belong to it. Thus the Church's progress and usefulness began to fail. Great inequalities grew up in the Church; some persons turned their backs upon the needy and persecuted their less fortunate brethren, while others, in humility and a good spirit, did their fall duty as servants of the Lord (4:10-14). The situation became so grave that Alma decided something drastic would have to be done. He therefore relinquished his office as chief judge over the people in order to give his full time to the ministry as high priest over the Church. At the commencement of his ninth year after taking office, Alma delivered his judgeship to an honorable man by the name of Nephihah (4:15-20).

Chapters 5-16 of the Book of Alma deal with the intensive missionary labors of Alma both alone and later in conjunction with Amulek, one of his converts. When Alma relinquished his judgeship, he immediately began to preach in Zarahemla, and then extended his labors to Gideon.

Alma's words to the Church in Zarahemla are quoted verbatim in 5:3-62. He began by reminding his audience how the elder Alma's followers had been delivered from bondage by the mercy and power of God. Then he asked the people whether they had sufficiently kept in their memories the captivity of their fathers and God's mercy and long-suffering towards them. The words and work of the great prophet Abinadi were recalled. Alma told how the prophet's words had wrought a mighty change in the heart of his father, the elder Alma, who in turn had preached to the fathers of those in the audience and had changed their hearts (5:3-13). Applying the lesson, Alma asked his hearers:

And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? Do ye exercise faith in the redemption of him who created you? Do you look forward with an eye of faith, and view this mortal body raised in immortality, and this corruption raised in incorruption, to stand before God to be judged according to the deeds which have been done in the mortal body? (5:14-15)

The prophet continued by asking the people whether in the judgment day, they could look up to God with pure hearts and clean hands (5:18-19). He pointed out that no man could be saved unless his garments were washed white and purified through the blood of him who should come to redeem his people from their sins. In his sermon, Alma catalogued many sins and asked his audience whether they were free from them. If not, they were not prepared to meet God. He denounced the workers of iniquity and called upon them to repent. It is important for us to call attention to the fact that Alma explained that God's arms of mercy are extended toward all sinners who repent. The invitation of God is unto all men to eat of the bread of life and drink freely of the waters of life (5:20-34).

The prophets of the Book of Mormon were not prophets of doom only. As servants of God they predicted the doom of the wicked, but they did so only when the latter had refused the invitation of the Almighty to forsake their old ways and tread a new path. It is one of the outstanding characteristics of the Nephite record to portray God's love for man. It breathes a spirit of love, tolerance, and charity for all men.

Alma emphasized to his audience that the Good Shepherd was calling them. Here are his words:

Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd. And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold; and now, who can deny this? Behold, I say unto you, whosoever denieth this is, a liar and a child of the devil. For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil. Therefore, if a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd, and he doth follow him; but whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him. (5:38-41 )

The prophet bore his testimony to the effect that God, through the revelations of the Holy Spirit, had called him to cry repentance to the people. He then warned against pride, against wearing costly apparel, and against the persecution of their humble but righteous brethren. Finally, Alma called upon his audience to separate themselves from the wicked and hearken unto the Good Shepherd, in order that their names might be written in the book of life. An invitation was also given to non-members of the Church to be baptized, that they might be partakers of the fruit of the tree of life (5:42-62). Space has prevented us from doing justice to Alma's sermon. It should be read in full to be appreciated.

The efforts of Alma in Zarahemla were by no means fruitless. He ordained priests and elders "according to the order of God" (6:1), and numbers were baptized unto repentance and received into the Church. Backsliders were taken off the Church records and were not numbered among the faithful. Having reformed the Church in Zarahemla (6:4-6), Alma proceeded to the city of Gideon, in the valley of the same name. Here he declared the word of God by the spirit of revelation and prophecy (6:7-8). The prophet expressed his pleasure in being permitted to speak to the people in person (7:1-2). He had great hopes that they had humbled themselves and were not in the sad spiritual state in which he had found their brethren in Zarahemla. Alma then bore record concerning the coming of the Redeemer to take upon himself the pains, sins, afflictions, and sicknesses of his people, and finally, death, in order to blot out their transgressions (7:7-13).

It will be convenient at this point to consider the statement made by Alma in verse 10 to the effect that the Savior should " be born of Mary, at Jerusalem which is the land of our forefathers." We all know, of course, that Jesus was born at Bethlehem (Matthew 2; Matthew 1; Luke 2:1-7), and critics have ridiculed Alma's statement as translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith. However, Alma's statement has much to commend it, historically speaking. More often than not, Nephite writers refer to the locality from whence their fathers came as the "land of Jerusalem." The phrase occurs upwards of forty-two times in the Book of Mormon. When Alma speaks of the Son of God as being born at Jerusalem, he does so because Bethlehem was adjacent to and under the control of that city. That the Nephites were justified by long custom in speaking of Jerusalem is as the land of Jerusalem is a fact that has ancient texts to speak in its behalf. And Bethlehem, the place of our Lord's birth, was indeed part of the land of Jerusalem. In his sixth letter to the king of Egypt, Abdi-Hiba of Jerusalem (c. 1375 B.C.) says:

The land of the king has fallen away to the Habiru; and now in addition to that a city of the land of Jerusalem, whose name is Bit Ninib, a city of the king . . . (Amarna No. 290, lines 12-17; translation by S. A. B. Mercer.)

Bit-Ninib as mentioned in the letter was supposed by at least one scholar to be Bethlehem. Whatever city is meant, the fact is established that in ancient times it was often the custom to speak of the "land of Jerusalem" as comprising the city and the adjacent territory under its control. Notice what Professor Martin Noth of Bonn University, a famous Old Testament scholar, says:

At that time [the Amarna age] Bethlehem which was 8 kilometres away on this side was 'a city of the land of Jerusalem,' i.e., a place subject to the rule of Jerusalem. (The History of Israel, p. 32. Harper and Brothers, New York, 1958. By permission.)

(Those who desire to pursue the subject in greater detail may consult Sperry, The Problems of the Book of Mormon , Ch. XV. In a later edition the book is published under the title, Answers to Book of Mormon Questions.)

Returning to Alma's discourse, men were to repent, be baptized, and be born again of the Spirit. Whosoever would do this, and keep God's commandments thenceforth, should have eternal life (7:14-16). Alma then asked the people whether they believed these things, and proceeded to answer his own question by saying that he knew by the manifestation of the Spirit that they did. He therefore admonished them to continue clean and blameless before God (7:17-22). The reader should especially notice these words which he added:

And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times; asking for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive. And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works. And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out. (7:23-25)

He then invoked the peace of God to rest upon them, and upon their flocks, herds, and families (7:27). Alma then returned from Gideon to his own house in Zarahemla after having regulated the Church at that place (8:1).

After resting at his home at Zarahemla, Alma departed and went over into the land of Melek. Here he preached to the people "according to the holy order of God" and began to teach the people throughout the land. Apparently he had great success, because the sacred record mentions the fact that people came to him from all parts of the land to be baptized. We may surmise that the people of Melek were in general as righteous and diligent as Alma had found the people in the land of Gideon (8:2-5).

He then departed on a three-day journey to the north and came to the city of Ammonihah. We are told that the people of this city were steeped in iniquity and resisted his words. Despite mighty prayer on Alma's part, they reviled him, spat upon him, and cast him out of the city. He therefore took his journey towards the city of Aaron (8:6-13). While on the way, as he was weighed down with sorrow, the angel of the Lord who had appeared to him at the time he was converted appeared before him again and delivered a message. He blessed Alma and commanded him to return to the city of Ammonihah and preach again to the people of that city. The angel commanded him to warn them that unless they repented they would be destroyed (8:14-17). The prophet therefore hastened back. As he was entering the city, he met a man and asked him for something to eat. Providentially, this man had had a vision of Alma in which he was instructed to receive the prophet. The man, whose name was Amulek, therefore received Alma into his house. He gave him food to eat, and Alma made known unto him who he was and the mission for which he had been sent. Alma remained with Amulek many days before preaching to the people (8:18-27). Possibly he was instructing Amulek in spiritual matters in order to bring about his conversion and cooperation in preaching to the people of Ammonihah. In due time, the Lord sent word to Alma to go forth with Amulek to prophesy unto the people and call upon them to repent. The two went forth according to the commandment and declared the word of God with much power, for both of them were filled with the Holy Ghost. Attempts were made to confine them to prisons, but because of the power of the Spirit which was with them, dungeons could not hold them. Nor could any man slay them. In this way the Lord demonstrated his power through these good men (8:28-32).

Chapters 9-14 of Alma contain the words which Alma and Amulek carried to the people of Ammonihah. Alma stood forth with great power and rebuked the people for their sins. He reminded them of God's matchless power which had been with their forefathers, and of how, except for his long-suffering toward them, they would have been destroyed and perhaps consigned to a state of misery and woe. He refreshed the memories of the people about the philosophy which Lehi had expounded to the effect that unless they kept God's commandments, they would not prosper in the land but would be cut off from the presence of the Lord (9:1-14; see 2 Nephi 1:20). The prophet said that in the day of judgment it would be better for the Lamanites than for the Nephites unless the latter repented. He told his audience that the Lamanites were ignorant because of the traditions of their fathers, but that the Nephites, on the other hand, had been blessed with the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation, the gift of speaking with tongues, the gift of preaching, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the gift of translation. Under these conditions they should have exhibited the fruits of God's blessings to them. Alma emphasized the fact that the Lord had sent him to visit his people and call them to repentance so that they would have no excuse. Not only that, but he declared that in the near future the Son of God should come and redeem those baptized unto repentance through faith in his name (9:15-17).

Unfortunately, Alma's words did not produce a repentant spirit in the people; they were wroth with him and attempted to cast him into prison. But the power of the Lord attended the prophet, and the people were not able to do what they desired (9:31-33).

When Alma had finished, Amulek stood up to bear his testimony to the people. It seems that Amulek was a son of Giddonah, who was a descendant of Nephi, the son of Lehi. He was a man of considerable wealth and reputation among the people of Ammonihah (9:34-10:4). Amulek then bore testimony to the people of how an angel of the Lord appeared to him and told him about the coming of a prophet of the Lord, a holy man. The angel had said that the prophet had fasted many days because of the sins of the people and was very hungry. Therefore, Amulek was to receive him into his house and feed him; in so doing, he and his house would be blessed. Amulek testified that what he had seen in vision was literally fulfilled, and that Alma was the man in question. This testimony of Amulek created great astonishment among the people, who sought to trap him and his companion by their cunning devices and cast them into prison or slay them. The cunning lawyers among the people of Ammonihah attempted to question Amulek in order to make him contradict the words which he had spoken. Through the Spirit, however, Amulek knew what they were attempting to do. He therefore warned them, called them a wicked and perverse generation, and condemned the lawyers for their unrighteousness (10:5-27).

The sacred record mentions one of these lawyers, a man by the name of Zeezrom. This man was one of the foremost of those who were attempting to catch Amulek and Alma in their words. The text states that he was one of "the most expert among them, having much business to do among the people." (10:31) The record tells us, most significantly, that the object of these lawyers was to get gain. Chapter 11 makes known the customs of the Nephites in paying judges (vss. 1-3). It even discusses the Nephite coinage system, which fact is very interesting (vss. 4-19). Concerning the Nephite lawyers, we find the following:

Now, it was for the sole purpose to get gain, because they received their wages according to their employ, therefore, they did stir up the people to riotings, and all manner of disturbances and wickedness, that they might have more employ, that they might get money according to the suits which were brought before them; therefore, they did stir up the people against Alma and Amulek. (11:20)

These lawyers, according to modern terminology, would be called shysters. The record tells us how Zeezrom questioned Amulek in his attempts to cause him to contradict himself (11:21). In fact, Zeezrom offered to bribe Amulek with money if he would deny the existence of a Supreme Being. Amulek, however, called him a "child of hell" and asked why he attempted to subject him to temptation. He then accused Zeezrom of loving lucre more than God. In short, Zeezrom was not successful in his attempts either to bribe Amulek or to cause him to contradict himself concerning the doctrines of the gospel. Amulek bore testimony that the Eternal Father would come into the world to redeem his people and take upon himself the transgressions of those who believe in his name, and that none other would have eternal life except them. He pointed out that those who were willfully wicked would remain as though no redemption had been made by the Savior of the world; eventually they would have to stand before God to be judged according to their works. Through the death of Christ the bands of temporal death were to be loosed and all mankind raised from the dead. Men would have a bright recollection of all their guilt. Amulek taught also that the restoration would come to all, both young and old, and that not so much as a hair of the head would be lost. Everything would be restored to its perfect frame, and men would be brought and arraigned before the bar of Christ, to be judged according to their works whether good or evil. The power of Amulek's testimony began to have its effect upon Zeezrom; the record says that he began to tremble (11:22-46).

When Amulek had finished, Alma began to bear testimony once more. He confirmed the words of Amulek, and began to speak directly to Zeezrom. He told Zeezrom that he had been caught in his lying, that he had lied not only to man but to God, for God knew all of his thoughts and had conveyed their substance unto Alma and Amulek through the Spirit. Alma testified to Zeezrom that his snares were those of the adversary, which he had laid to catch this people and to bring them into subjection. Zeezrom began to tremble even more greatly than before, because he was convinced beyond doubt that it was the power of God manifested by these two preachers (12:2-7). He then began to inquire diligently concerning the kingdom of God and about the resurrection from the dead of which Amulek had preached. Alma obliged him by expounding the words which his companion had said unto the people. He explained that it is given unto many to know the mysteries of God. Nevertheless, they are laid under a strict commandment not to impart to people more than the Lord has granted unto the children of men. Moreover, those who harden their hearts will receive a much lesser portion of God's word. He discussed with Zeezrom what was meant by being bound in the chains of hell. He also explained what was meant by the second death (12:8-16). Alma's words to Zeezrom astonished the people exceedingly; there was a chief ruler among them by the name of Antionah who came forth and said to Alma:

What is this that thou hast said, that man should rise from the dead and be changed from this mortal to an immortal state, that the soul can never die? What does the scripture mean, which saith that God placed cherubim and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of Eden, lest our first parents should enter and partake of the fruit of the tree of life, and live forever? And thus we see that there was no possible chance that they should live forever. (12:20-21 )

These questions gave Alma an opportunity to explain the Fall of Adam, the partaking of the forbidden fruit, and the bringing of the gospel to mankind from the very beginning. He therefore taught to the people the plan of redemption and told them how it was possible for our first parents to be redeemed from their sins. He also spoke of the mercy which should be extended to mankind through the Only Begotten Son, who would make it possible for people to have a remission of sins (12:22-37).

The prophet continued his discourse, and explained how the holy order of the Son of God-that is to say, the priesthood-was given to mankind; men were thus prepared to preach the gospel and bring to their fellows the truth concerning the mission of the Son of God. Alma told about the great high priest, Melchizedek, to whom Abraham paid tithes. He said some things about Melchizedek that are not disclosed in the present Book of Genesis. Melchizedek received the office of the high priesthood according to the holy order of God, taught repentance unto his people, established peace in the land of Jerusalem in his days, and reigned under his father, that is, in his father's stead (13:1-18; notice especially v. 3. Note also the doctrine of sanctification in v. 12). There were many high priests before him and many afterward, but there were none greater than he. Therefore, the scriptures have made particular mention of him. The prophet went on to explain to Zeezrom and the people how the Lord, by the mouth of angels, declares the fundamentals of repentance unto all nations, and the glad tidings of great joy to be brought to them concerning the mission of Jesus Christ. He then called upon the people to humble themselves before the Lord and call on his holy name; he told them that they were to be led by the Holy Spirit so as to become humble, repentant, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering, having faith in the Lord and a hope of receiving eternal life (13:19-30). In this way Alma spoke to the people.

When he had finished speaking, the people were all the more angry with the two preachers and were desirous of destroying them. They bound the two servants of God with strong cords and took them before the chief judge of the land. Here the people testified against them. But Zeezrom was so astonished at the words which had been spoken that his soul began to be harrowed up under a consciousness of his own guilt, and he felt the pains of hell. It must be said to the credit of Zeezrom that he was so wrought up in his mind that he began to cry unto the people in behalf of the two men who had been taken prisoners. He pointed out that he was guilty and that the two prophets were spotless before God. Then he began to plead for them, but this people reviled him in turn and asked him whether he also was possessed of the devil (14:1-7). They spat upon Zeezrom and cast him out as they also did those others who believed the words spoken by Alma and Amulek. The people even sent men to cast stones at the believers. They brought forth the holy scriptures and set them on fire. Into the fire they cast the wives and children of those who believed. Amulek was greatly moved by the pains of the women and children who were being consumed in the fire, and he said to Alma, "How can we witness this awful scene? Therefore let us stretch forth our hands, and exercise the power of God which is in us, and save them from the flames." (14:10) But Alma replied to him that the Spirit constrained him from stretching forth his hand. He informed Amulek that the Lord made known to him that he would receive the unfortunates unto himself in glory, that their blood would stand innocent before him and cry mightily against the guilty ones at the last day. Amulek was afraid that they would burn him and Alma as well, but Alma explained that their work was not yet done, that it would be against the will of the Lord for them to be burned at that time. The judge, who was after the order and faith of Nehor, came forth and smote Alma and Amulek as they stood bound, and then delivered them to the officers to be cast into prison. After they had spent three days in prison, lawyers, priests, and teachers came into the prison to see them; they questioned them concerning many things, but the two servants of God answered them nothing (14:11-18). The officials departed but came on the morrow, and the judge again smote the prisoners. The jailers withheld food and water from the two servants of God and took their clothes from them so that they were naked. Finally, the chief judge stood before them again. He said to them "If ye have the power of God deliver yourselves from these bands, and then we will believe that the Lord will destroy this people according to your words." (14:24) All present went forth and smote the, two prisoners, but when they had finished, the power of God was upon Alma and Amulek, and they rose to their feet and cried to God with such power that the prison shook, the walls fell, and all present were slain except the two missionaries. Both came forth out of the prison unharmed, because the Lord had granted them power according to their faith. When the people heard the great noise of destruction and saw that Alma and Amulek were coming forth, they fled "as a goat fleeth with her young from two lions." (14:25-29)

Chapter 15 discloses the fact that Alma and Amulek were commanded to depart from Ammonihah; this they did, and came into the land of Sidom. There they found all of the people who had left the land of Ammonihah, that is to say, those who had been cast out and stoned because they believed in Alma's words. The two missionaries then related to these people what had happened to their wives and children, and also what had transpired concerning themselves. Alma found that Zeezrom lay sick at Sidom with a burning fever, which had been caused by the great tribulations of his mind resulting from his wickedness. He supposed that the two missionaries had been destroyed in prison. Because of this and his many other sins, he felt the burning of a troubled conscience. When he heard that Alma and Amulek were present in Sidom, he sent a message to them with a request that they visit him. The two servants of the Lord went as requested and found him upon his bed, sick. Alma took him by the hand and asked him whether he believed in the power of Christ unto salvation. Zeezrom answered that he did and that he believed all the words that had been taught. He was then told that if he believed in the redemption of Christ, he could be healed. When Zeezrom indicated that he did believe, Alma cried to the Lord, and through his mighty faith in God he healed the sick man. Zeezrom thereupon leaped to his feet and began to walk, to the great astonishment of all the people. The knowledge of his healing spread quickly throughout the land. Alma then baptized Zeezrom, who began from that time forth to preach to the people roundabout (15:1-12).

Alma was so successful in Sidom that he was able to establish a branch of the Church there. He consecrated priests and teachers in the land to baptize unto the Lord all who were desirous of repenting of their sins. The unrepentant were of the profession of Nehor and did not believe in repentance from sin. The sacred record tells us that Amulek had forsaken all of his property and precious things; because he did so, he was rejected by his former friends and also by his father and kindred. Having established the Church in Sidom, Alma took Amulek and came back to the land of Zarahemla, to his own house (15:13-18).

Following the events which have been related, the sixteenth chapter of Alma tells of the eventual destruction of the city of Ammonihah, as had been predicted. The Lamanites came suddenly to the land and began to slay the people and bring about the destruction of the city. Before the Nephites could raise a sufficient army, the wicked people of Ammonihah had been destroyed. Thus we see the fulfillment of prophecy in this record.

Through the power of God, the chief Nephite army commander, Zoram, and his two sons, Lehi and Aha, were enabled to drive the Lamanites out of the Nephite lands. They inquired of Alma, who told them by the spirit of prophecy how to best the Lamanite armies. Nevertheless, the Lamanite armies were not driven out until every inhabitant that remained in the city of Ammonihah had been destroyed (16:1-9). Alma and Amulek continued their preaching unto the people. They taught in temples, sanctuaries, and synagogues which had been built according to the manner of the Jews. The two preachers of righteousness taught about the eventual coming of the Lord, his suffering and death, and his resurrection from the dead. The Church was established throughout all of the land. In this manner these two young men, as the record says, "got the victory over the devil." (16:10-21 )

Chapters 17 to 26 contain a series of faith promoting narratives that do for the Book of Mormon what the narratives concerning Daniel and his brethren do for the Old Testament. These narratives deal with the missionary activities of the four sons of King Mosiah-Ammon, Aaron, Omner, and Himni-among the Lamanites. The missionary experiences of these four men and their companions read like a series of miraculous events. The power of God was manifested in a remarkable way during their ministry among the benighted Lamanites. That power was very needful, because past attempts on the part of the Nephites to convert the Lamanites had proved mostly to be failures. (See Jacob 7:24; Enos 20.)

As Alma was journeying from Gideon to the land of Manti on the south, he was astonished to meet Mosiah's sons returning to Zarahemla from the field of their labors. Their mission among the Lamanites had lasted fourteen years. Alma extolled their spiritual growth by painting out that they had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth. They had searched the scriptures diligently, in order to ascertain the word of God. In addition to this, they had obtained, through prayer and fasting, the spirit of prophecy and revelation. When they taught, they did so with the power and authority of God, and with great success (17:1-4).

Here we have wonderful testimony to the value of the ministry as a means of spiritual growth. If our missionaries in the world would attend to their labors as sincerely and conscientiously as did the sons of Mosiah, what a work might be accomplished by them!

Chapters 17 to 20 are occupied mainly with the experiences of Ammon, the eldest son of Mosiah, whereas Chapters 21 to 25 seem to deal more particularly with Aaron and his companion Muloki. The other two brothers and their associates are mentioned only incidentally. Chapter 26 is an account of how Ammon glorified in the Lord because of the great success which he had granted to him and his brethren.

After reaching Lamanite territory, the sons of Mosiah separated themselves one from another, in order to go to different fields of labor (17:5-17). Ammon went to the land of Ishmael, where he became a servant of the king. Through a series of miraculous events, Ammon converted Lamoni, the Lamanite king, his wife, and many of the king's subjects. In fact, he established a church in the land (17:18-20:1). Ammon was warned by the Lord to go to the land of Middoni and deliver his brother Aaron and companions from prison. King Lamoni went with him, and on the way they met with the Lamanite king's father. Lamoni's father was also a king, with greater authority than his son. Despite the irascibility of the old king -indeed, he tried to slay Ammon and Lamoni-they succeeded in pacifying him and accomplishing their mission. When they reached Middoni, the king of that land, thanks to Lamoni's father (20:27; 22;2), received them peaceably and released Aaron, Muloki, and Ammah, who had suffered much tribulation in their ministry thus far (20:2-30; cf. 21:1-14). After being delivered, Aaron and his brethren began to have better success in their missionary labors (21:15-17). Ammon and King Lamoni returned to the king's territory, where the monarch built many synagogues, made his people free agents, and assisted Ammon in his labors (21:18-23).

Aaron and his brethren were led by the Spirit to the land of Nephi, where the king of all the land, except that of Ishmael, lived. This king was none other than king Lamoni's father, who had given difficulty to Ammon. The old king had been so touched by the fact that Ammon had spared his life and had said such great things that he listened eagerly to Aaron. Through another miraculous manifestation the king and all his household were converted. Moreover, the king sent a decree throughout his dominions that none of the sons of Mosiah or their companions were to be molested, but that every opportunity was to be given to his people to receive the truth (22:1-23:3). The result was that Aaron and his brethren went from city to city and from one house of worship to another, consecrating priests and teachers and establishing the Church throughout the land. The missionaries enjoyed an almost pentecostal era of success. As a matter of fact, thousands were brought to believe in the Nephite traditions and to understand the scriptures and prophecy (23:4-6). Mormon makes a special point of the fact that the Lamanites, once converted, "never did fall away." (23:6 ) They became a righteous people, laid down their weapons of war, and did not fight against God or their brethren. The remarkable success of the missionaries is seen in the fact that the Lamanites in the lands of Ishmael, Middoni, and Shilom and those in the cities of Lemuel, Shemnilom, and Nephi were converted to the Lord (23:8-13). The converted Lamanites called themselves Anti-Nephi-Lehies from that time forth. The name probably means "Against Nephi-Lehies," i.e., against the unconverted Lamanites in the area of Nephi-Lehi (cf. 24:1). They were industrious and friendly with the Nephites, and the curse of God was upon them no more (23:16-18).

The unconverted Lamanites now wanted to war with their converted brethren, who had made a pact nevermore to take up arms. The situation was so serious that Ammon called all of his brethren to the land of Ishmael to take counsel with King Lamoni and his brother, Anti-Nephi-Lehi. The warlike Lamanites came up against their defenseless brethren and slew about one thousand of them. They finally desisted, much ashamed of their actions; indeed, many of them repented and were converted (24:1-30). We recommend that all who are interested in peace and the abolishment of war read Alma 24. This chapter is a remarkable tribute to the Lamanite converts. The world today desperately needs such peacemakers. A rather remarkable fact that we should also notice in this chapter is that God not only permitted many Lamanites to repent of their murders, but also seems to have forgiven them (vss. 10, 11). This may be justified on the grounds that the Lamanites before their conversion had little spiritual light and were ignorant of the consequences of their misdeeds.

In Chapter 25 is recounted the cruelty of the seed of Amulon and his brethren, who were priests of King Noah, and of the retribution brought upon them even as the prophet Abinadi had prophesied. The Lamanites hunted them and put them to death (25:1-12). The fact is also recorded that many additional Lamanites came over and joined themselves to the people of God, who were of the people of Anti Nephi-Lehi. To the joy of Ammon and his brethren, they also buried their weapons of war, kept the law of Moses, and looked forward to the coming of Christ (25:13-17).

It is no wonder that Ammon gloried in God (Ch. 26) because of the success which he and his brethren had in the Lamanite ministry. When they had left Zarahemla, they had no idea that God would crown their efforts with such a tremendous harvest of human souls. The joy manifested in the Nephite record over the saving of these souls is a great tribute to its worth as a book for mankind.

When that portion of the unbelieving Lamanites known as Amalekites found that they could not destroy the Nephites (ch. 25), they took revenge upon their believing brethren, the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. These people, it will be remembered, would no more take up arms, and were easily slain by the bloodthirsty Amalekites. When Ammon saw this work of destruction, he requested the king of the faithful Lamanites to gather his people and go with him to the land of Zarahemla. This the king consented to do if the Lord would give the word, which he did to Ammon. Therefore Ammon and his brethren, together with the Lamanites, set forth to the land of Zarahemla (27:1-14). On coming near the borders of Zarahemla, Ammon and his brethren went on ahead to prepare the way. Under these circumstances they chanced to meet Alma, as reported in 17:1-4. Alma conducted his good friends back to Zarahemla, where arrangements were perfected to let the Lamanites live in the land of Jershon. The Nephites also agreed to provide armies to guard their brethren, on condition that they contribute part of their substance for the maintenance of such forces (27:15-24). Ammon and Alma then returned to the Lamanite brethren and conducted them to the appointed place in the land of Jershon. The Nephites thereafter called these Lamanites the people of Ammon. They numbered them with the Church, and found them zealous for their religion and perfectly honest and upright in all their dealings. They had a great hope in Christ and the power of his resurrection. Thus they became a beloved and highly favored people of the Lord (27:25-30).

When the people of Ammon had been established in the land of Jershon, it was found that the armies of the Lamanites had followed them in the wilderness. A tremendous battle ensued between them and the Nephite armies defending the land of Jershon. This battle was the greatest that had ever taken place between the Lamanites and Nephites since the coming of Father Lehi to this continent. Tens of thousands were slaughtered, but the Nephites definitely won the battle and scattered their enemies abroad. Mormon commented on the great mourning among the Nephites over their dead kindred, and pondered over the future state of those who lost their lives whether consigned to a state of woe or to a state of neverending happiness (28:1-14).

Mormon proceeded to quote the innermost desires and yearnings of Alma to cry repentance to every soul. Here are some of them:

O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people! Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth. But behold, I am a man, and do sin in my wish; for I ought to be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto me. (29:1-3)

After more comment in which he asks why he should desire more than to perform the work to which he had been called, he gives this interesting bit of information:

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true. (29:8)

Apparently all men do not have the capacity to understand and obey the fulness of the gospel. Great masses of people, in God's wisdom, may have been gathered together in different parts of the earth to assimilate that portion of God's word they can enjoy and understand. The Arabs, the Indians of India, the Chinese, speaking collectively and not individually, are probably examples of such peoples. At any rate, Alma's words are thought-provoking.

The prophet gloried in the thought that he might be an instrument in God's hand in bringing some soul to repentance; that was his joy (29:9). He also remembered the captivity of his fathers, and how God had delivered them from the bondage of the Egyptians and had established his church among them. Then he expressed joy in the fact that God had brought success to him and also to his brethren, meaning the sons of Mosiah. He trusted that God would grant them to sit down in his kingdom, as also those souls who were the fruit of their labors (29:11-17).

After the disturbances due to the recent battles with the Lamanites had died down, there was peace and harmony among the Nephites. But near the end of the seventeenth year of the rule by judges, there came into Zarahemla a man preaching against the prophecies which had been uttered concerning Christ's coming (30:1-6). Evidently with a view to the right of any man, including this Anti-Christ, to express his own beliefs, Mormon says these memorable words:

Now there was no law against a man's belief; for it was strictly contrary to the commands of God that there should be a law which should bring men on to unequal grounds. For thus saith the scripture: Choose ye this day, whom ye will serve. [Cf. Joshua 24:15.] Now if a man desired to serve God, it was his privilege; or rather, if he believed in God it was his privilege to serve him; but if he did not believe in him there was no law to punish him. But if he murdered he was punished unto death; and if he robbed he was also punished; and if he stole he was also punished; and if he committed adultery he was also punished; yea, for all this wickedness they were punished. For there was a law that men should be judged according to their crimes. Nevertheless, there was no law against a man's belief; therefore, a man was punished only for the crimes which he had done; therefore all men were on equal grounds. (30:7-11 )

The name of the Anti-Christ was Korihor (notice the compound Egyptian, or Canaanite, name), and he proceeded to deny, among other things, the remission of sins and the atonement of Christ. He openly advocated the committing of whoredoms, and told the people that death ended all (30:12-18).

In the land of Jershon and of Gideon, Korihor did not have as much success as he had had previously. Indeed, he was bound and carried before the civil and ecclesiastical officers of the people. These officials, after noticing the hardness of his heart, sent him to the land of Zarahemla to be brought before Alma and the chief judge (30:19-29).

Korihor railed against them and their beliefs, but Alma answered him in a straightforward manner and told him that he (Korihor) believed in his testimony but was possessed of a lying spirit. Korihor then asked for a sign, denying any belief in God. Alma grieved at his hardness, told him that it would be better for his soul to be lost than to allow him to bring many souls down to destruction. In the name of the Lord, Alma then told him he should be struck dumb, so as to have no more utterance. Immediately he was struck dumb, as Alma had said (30:30-50).

The chief judge, in writing, then asked Korihor if he was convinced of the power of God. Korihor admitted his errors and told how he had been deceived by the devil in the form of an angel. He also besought Alma to take away the curse from him, but Alma refused on the grounds that Korihor would again lead away the hearts of the people (30:51-55). Korihor then was cast out and went from house to house begging for his food. The judgments of God upon Korihor were made known to all the people by the chief judge; all who had been deceived by the Anti-Christ were converted again to the Lord. In due time Korihor was trodden upon and killed when begging among the Zoramites, some Nephite dissenters (30:56-59). The lesson which Mormon draws out of the incident involving Korihor's death is this:

And thus we see the end of him who perverteth the ways of the Lord; and thus we see that the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell. (30:60)
