Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 19

The Book of Helaman

The Book of Helaman, named after Helaman II, contains 16 chapters only, or about 39½ printed pages in the modern edition. It has three superscriptions printed in italics; the first, over Chapter 1, is the largest and most interesting; the second, over Chapter 7, assigns most of the remainder of the book to Nephi the son of Helaman II; and the third, over Chapter 13, calls attention to the prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, in Chapter 13, 14, and 15. The first superscription is concerned with the contents and authorship of the entire book. Differing markedly from the one at the head of the first chapter of Alma, it reads as follows:

An account of the Nephites. Their wars and contentions, and their dissensions. And also the prophecies of many holy prophets, before the coming of Christ, according to the records of Helaman, who was the son of Helaman, and also according to the records of his sons, even down to the coming of Christ. And also many of the Lamanites are converted. An account of their conversion. An account of the righteousness of the Lamanites, and the wickedness and abominations of the Nephites, according to the record of Helaman and his sons, even down to the coming of Christ, which is called the Book of Helaman, c.

The reader should keep in mind that these words (as well as those of the other two superscriptions) are part of the original text of the Book of Mormon. This superscription refers, as will be noticed, to the contents of the book as a whole, because it emphasizes by repetition the fact that the book is based on the records of Helaman and his sons. The one at the head of the Book of Alma does not do this. It refers to the records of Alma only, that is to say, to the contents of the first forty-four chapters. No attention is paid to the fact that the remainder of the book (Alma 45-63) is dependent upon the writings of Helaman I and Shiblon.

Mormon did not write much of what was recorded by Helaman II, because in 3:37 we are informed of Helaman's death and of the accession of his eldest son, Nephi, to the judgeship. It may be assumed, therefore, that Nephi took over the sacred records from his father. This supposition is correct, as 3 Nephi 1:2 makes clear. Inasmuch as Nephi had the plates, it may be taken for granted that he did most of the writing, though is it not improbable that he instructed his brother Lehi to do part of it. That part of the text for which Lehi may have been responsible was not indicated by Mormon when he made his abridgment.

The second superscription, over Chapter 7, refers to the content of chapters 7 to 16 as the "prophecy of Nephi, the son of Helaman." If the reader will examine 3:37, he will find that the formal responsibility of Helaman's son, Nephi, begins at that point. That would probably include the keeping of records. For that reason one wonders why chapters 4 to 6 are not also included under the caption of Nephi's "prophecy." Perhaps Mormon may have used the writings of Nephi's brother Lehi in preparing these chapters. If he did, it would be the answer to our problem, but unfortunately he doesn't indicate the fact, as was pointed out in the previous paragraph.

The purposes for writing the Book of Helaman are not specifically declared, but from the first superscription, and from the body of the text, it may be deduced as being mainly historical.

The book contains a number of types of literature, among which historical narrative, hortatory discourse, prophetic communion (with God), prayers, prophetic narrative, and editorial reflections or commentaries may be noticed. Of these types of literature, the first-named is by far the most common. The Book of Helaman is in part a missionary book (notice chs. 5-7), as we found the Book of Alma to be.

The text of Helaman covers Nephite history for a period of over fifty years. (53 B.C.- 1 B.C.) As the superscription over Chapter 1 indicates, the book records history "even down to the coming of Christ."

The contents of the book may be exhibited under three major divisions, as the following scheme shows:

I. From Pahoran II to death of Helaman II. (Chs. 1-3.)

A. Three sons of Pahoran I contend for the judgeship. Pahoran II named chief judge. He is murdered by Kishkumen. Pacumeni appointed chief judge. Lamanites led by Nephite dissenter, Coriantumr, capture Zarahemla and slay Pacumeni, but the Nephite commander, Moronihah, with skillful strategy captures the Lamanite armies and retakes Nephite capital city. (Ch. 1)

B. Helaman II appointed chief judge. Gadianton and Kishkumen plot death of Helaman, but Kishkumen is detected and slain as he attempts to murder the chief judge. Gadianton band escapes Helaman's men. (Ch. 2)

C. Dissension in Nephite Church. Many Nephites migrate an exceedingly great distance unto the land northward. These migrants live in tents and in cement houses. They encourage growth of trees for timber. Many records are kept. Gadianton band gives trouble. Church prospers under Helaman's judgeship. Helaman dies and succeeded by his son Nephi. (Ch. 3)

II. From Nephi's accession to his prophecy. (Chs. 4-6)

A. Nephite dissenters stir up Lamanites, who capture Zarahemla and adjacent lands. Moronihah, the Nephite commander, and Nephi and Lehi, call upon the Nephites to repent of their sins. Nephites, weak because of transgressions, are able to recover but one-half of their property and lands. (Ch. 4)

B. Nephite government and law perverted. Nephi yields judgment seat to Cezoram so as to preach to his people. Lehi also preaches. Nephi and Lehi remember the instructions of their father Helaman. They convert eight thousand Lamanites. Cast into prison by Lamanite army. Great spiritual manifestations. Converted Lamanites restore Nephite lands. (Ch. 5)

C. Converted Lamanites send missionaries with great power and authority to preach to Nephites. Peace, freedom, and prosperity among both Nephites and Lamanites. Cezoram and son murdered. Nephites become wicked again. Gadianton robbers perpetrate murders and works of darkness. Righteous Lamanites hunt Gadianton band and preach to more wicked part of them. Nephites support Gadianton band which gains control of government. (Ch. 6)

III. Nephi's Prophecy. (Chs. 7-16)

A. Nephi's prayer and the episode of the chief judge's death. Nephi and five others accused. Their innocence established and the murderer made known. (Chs. 7-9)

B. Voice of God comes to Nephi as he ponders wickedness of his people. Great powers of sealing given Nephi. These are used to bring his people to repentance through a famine. Nephites begin to prosper. Gadianton band revived in great strength and defies Nephite armies. A commentary on human frailty, God's goodness and power, blessings, of the penitent, judgment of men according to their works, etc. (Ch. 12), presumably by Mormon. (Chs. 10-12)

C. Prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, to the Nephites, Proclaims judgments upon fourth generation of Nephites. Land to be cursed. He prays for people to repent. He predicts signs to be shown at Christ's birth five years distant. Also the signs to be given at his death. Christ to redeem all mankind. Remnant of the Lamanites to be saved. Nephites to he utterly destroyed unless they repent. (Chs. 13-15)

D. Some Nephites believe Samuel and join Church, but others reject and attempt to assault him. Escapes and returns to own country. Nephite skepticism concerning coming of Christ. (Ch. 16)

When the great Pahoran, Nephite chief judge, died, it appears that three of his sons contended seriously for the judgment seat. When the younger Mosiah had established the rule by judges, it was to be done by the voice of the people (Mosiah 29:39). Pahoran was the son of Nephihah, the former chief judge. The people had concurred in his being selected, but the tendency to appoint sons of judges seems to have been a weakness of the Nephite system of government. Now we find Pahoran's three sons, Pahoran II, Paanchi, and Pacumeni (notice the Egyptian names) struggling to get the highest office in the nation. Finally, Pahoran II was appointed, and Pacumeni took the appointment in good grace, but his brother Paanchi was sentenced to death for contesting the choice of the people by rising in rebellion (1:1-8). Paanchi's adherents thereupon seat one Kishkumen in disguise to slay Pahoran II. He succeeded in his murderous design and escaped to those who sent him. All entered into a secret compact to tell no man who had murdered Pahoran II. The band then mingled among the people (1:9-12). Pacumeni was subsequently appointed to be chief judge and governor to "reign" in his brother's stead, "according to his right" (1: 13).

In the forty-first year of the judges, the Lamanites, led by a Nephite dissenter, Coriantumr by name, now came upon the Nephites with such power and speed that they surprised and captured Zarahemla, in the center of the land. Pacumeni, the chief judge, was slain while trying to flee. Moronihah, the Nephite commander, had supposed that the Lamanites would attempt in any attack to take the cities on the borders of Nephite lands instead of strongholds in the center. For this reason strong Nephite armies were placed near the borders. The Lamanites' thrust through the center now gave Moronihah a military advantage that he was not slow to take advantage of, despite the great number of Nephites slain previously. He sent forth Lehi, one of his army leaders, to head off the Lamanite forces coming against the land Bountiful. Moronihah then placed his own forces in such a position as to head off the Lamanite army, which he hoped Lehi would send in reeling retreat. The strategy paid off, because after a bloody battle in which Coriantumr, the Lamanite leader, was slain, the Nephites captured his armies and recovered their own lost territory. The captured Lamanites were permitted to depart from the land in peace (1:14-34).

When Moronihah had established peace again in the land, Helaman II was chosen chief judge in the place of Pacumeni. Kishkumen, who had murdered Pahoran II, now plotted to kill Helaman. In this he was abetted by one Gadianton, the sinister leader of a murderous band. Gadianton had desires to attain the judgment seat and infiltrate members of his gang into the government. Fortunately, one of Helaman's servants, managed to trap Kishkumen and slay him before he could get at the chief judge. Then the servant told Helaman all that he knew of Gadianton's band. Helaman sent forth men to seize the robbers and secret murderers, but Gadianton and his men had already fled and could not be found. Mormon writes that this Gadianton band would in time almost overthrow the Nephite people and destroy them (2:1-14).

By the forty-sixth year of the rule by judges (B.C. 46), there had arisen much dissension-so much, apparently, that there were large numbers of Nephites who left the land of Zarahemla and migrated northward "an exceeding great distance" (3:4) to a land where there were large bodies of water and many rivers. (Cf. Mosiah 8:8; Mormon 6:4.) The emigrants spread out in the land where they went, living in tents and cement houses. Because of their need of timber, much was shipped northward to them.

Many Lamanites, the people of Ammon (Alma 27:26), also went north (3:1-12). I am inclined to believe that some of these migrating peoples found their way into what is now the United States. The Documentary History of the Church gives considerable reason to believe in the soundness of such a view. [^1] Most of them, however, seem to have found their way to the land of Desolation in the land northward.

Mormon tells about the extent of Nephite records. He relates that there were many accounts made by the people, some of which were "particular and very large" (3:13); nevertheless, he says that not a hundredth part of the records concerning their wars, shipping, building of ships, sacred structures, and wickedness could be contained in his work. They were handed down from generation to generation and were doubtless preserved lay Mormon in the Hill Cumorah (Mormon 6:6) before the final battles in which his people were destroyed (3:13-16).

Despite Nephite contention, Helaman II filled the judgment seat with honor, seeing to it that justice and equity were properly served. Like his father, he did what was right before his God. He had two sons, Nephi and Lehi, of whom Nephi was the elder. These sons, were brought up correctly. As the record says (3:21), "they began to grow up unto the Lord." Then the contentions and wars ceased to a degree in the land except for the depredations of the Gadianton robbers (3:17-23).

Prosperity began to attend the Nephite church to an extent that astonished the high priests and teachers beyond measure. Many of the Nephites, "even tens of thousands," were baptized and added to the Church. Mormon rejoiced hi the record he was abridging at this juncture, because he took time to comment on how merciful the Lord is to those who in all sincerity call upon his holy name (3:24-30). In the remainder of the chapter (3:31-37) he tells of the peace and joy in the land, and finally of the pride and the spirit of persecution that crept into the Church; the death of Helaman is also noticed, as well as the accession of his son Nephi to the judgeship.

The fifty-fourth year (B.C. 38) of the rule of the judges was marked by severe dissensions in the Nephite church and by civil contentions which led many dissenters over to the ranks of the Lamanites. In due time, these rebellious spirits stirred up their dark-colored brethren to such a pitch that their armies overcame the Nephite lands, even to the territory of the land Bountiful. Even the land of Zarahemla fell to the invaders. Moronihah, the Nephite commander, after three or four years succeeded in retaking about half of his people's possessions (4:1-10). Mormon attributes the fall and slaughter of the Nephites to their wickedness, pride, boasting, and social evils, not to mention their denial of prophecy and of the spirit of revelation. Only after the people had in a measure repented, because of the preaching of Moronihah, Nephi, and Lehi, was the great Nephite commander able to recover half of their lands and possessions (4:11-17). But after they had obtained this much, it was found impractical and inadvisable to attempt to recover more because of the great number and strength of the Lamanites. The Nephites now began to remember the prophecies and words of Mosiah, and how they had altered and trampled under feet the laws of Mosiah. They saw how corrupted their laws had become and how wicked they themselves were. Because of these things, the Church had suffered; the people had disbelieved in the spirit of prophecy and revelation, and had become weak like their brethren, the Lamanites. Now the judgments of God stared them in the face because of their transgression (4:18-26).

Because of the evil situation among his people, Nephi found it necessary to deliver up his seat as chief judge to Cezoram in order to preach among them all the remainder of his days. In this labor he was joined by his faithful brother Lehi. The two of them remembered the words of their father Helaman, who had commanded them to keep the commandments of God and to declare certain things among the people. His words are quoted in 5:6-12. Helaman wanted his people to remember the instructions of the prophets who had gone before him, men such as king Benjamin and Amulek. He pointed out that it is upon the rock of the Redeemer, the Christ, that people must build their foundation. Upon Christ and him only could one have a sure foundation, "a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (5:12)

Nephi and Lehi went not only among the Nephites in their ministry, but also among the Lamanites. The Lamanite ministry was very fruitful. In one place alone, the land of Zarahemla and around about, over eight thousand Lamanites were converted. These were baptized and brought into the Church. From Zarahemla the missionary brothers went to the land of Nephi, which had been rediscovered by Ammon and his brethren, as mentioned in Chapters 7 and 8 in the Book of Mosiah. While preaching here, they were cast into the very prison in which Ammon and his brethren were cast by Limhi's servants (5:21; cf. Mosiah 7:6-8). Verses 22 to 50 tell about a great and miraculous experience which happened to the two preachers and the men round about who came into the prison. After Nephi and Lehi had been in prison without food for a number of days, men went forth to take them in order to put them to death. The power of God, however, came upon the two missionaries, and they were encircled about as if by fire. The Lamanites did not dare lay their hands upon them but were struck dumb with amazement at the miraculous sight. That gave Nephi and his brother an opportunity to speak to them. They told their Lamanite brethren not to fear, because it was God that showed them this miraculous happening. As if to emphasize their words, the Lord brought about a great earthquake, and the prison shook. But by a miracle it was not destroyed. Then came a voice calling upon the Lamanites to repent, for the kingdom of heaven was at hand; no more should they seek to destroy the Lord's servants. The Holy Spirit came down and entered into the hearts of Nephi and Lehi so that they could speak marvelous words. Not only that, but angels came down from heaven and ministered to them. The sacred record mentions the fact that about three hundred souls saw and heard these miraculous occurrences. They were told to go forth and not to doubt God's power from that time forth; go forth they did, and ministered unto all the people round about. Their ministry seems to have been very fruitful, and the Lamanites yielded up to the Nephites the land of their possession.

The ministry of Nephi and Lehi seems to have been one of the most powerful in all the history of the Nephites. Few Nephite missionaries were ever given the power to convert the Lamanites as were these two men. Not only were the Lamanites converted to the Church, but they turned the tables on the Nephites by sending missionaries to them. Chapter 6 of Helaman is a remarkable record of this fact. Nephi and Lehi went north to preach (6:6). There was continual peace as they went on their journey, because both Nephites and Lamanites were able to intermingle freely with each other. These people became exceedingly rich, both in the land south and in the land north (6:7-9). The peace and prosperity continued for a time, but finally Cezoram the judge was murdered as he sat upon the judgment seat. Moreover, his son, who was appointed in his place, was also murdered. In the sixty-seventh year of the reign of the judges, it appears that the people began to be wicked again. Their riches and prosperity once more turned their heads, and they began to commit secret murders and to rob and plunder for the purpose of getting gain (6:10-17). Mormon takes considerable space to tell us more about the Gadianton robbers. He relates that it was the members of the Gadianton robbers who had Murdered Cezoram and his son. These robbers had secret signs and passwords in order to distinguish each other from those who did not belong to the band. Under their wicked covenants they proceeded to murder, plunder, steal, and commit all manner of iniquity. The record even implies that the secret signs and passwords were the same that had brought the Jaredite people to destruction. They had been put into the hearts of Gadianton and his band by Satan, that same individual who had plotted with Cain to murder his brother Abel so that it should not be known to the world. Latter-day Saints may profitably notice and carefully consider the pointed words of this chapter, which are directed at secret societies and organizations (6:18-31).

It is noteworthy that the Lamanites had exerted all their power to exterminate the Gadianton robbers. They succeeded fairly well among their own people, but with the Nephites it was different. It appears that instead of attempting to get rid of this wicked band, the Nephites built them up and supported them until they overspread all of the Nephite lands; they even corrupted the more righteous part of the people. The Gadianton hand obtained sole control of the government and trampled under their feet the poor, the meek, and the humble followers of God. The sixty-eighth year of the reign of the judges was notable among the Nephites for the sinister deeds and wickedness perpetrated among them (6:32-41).

In the sixty-ninth year of the rule of the judges (B.C. 23), Nephi returned to the land of Zarahemla from a preaching tour in the land northward. Unfortunately, the people in the north seem to have completely rejected the prophet, and he returned to the land of his nativity. The awful wickedness of the people, coupled with the terrific inroads of the Gadianton robbers in penetrating the inner circles of government, saddened greatly, and he wished in his soul that he could have lived in the days of his ancestor Nephi who came out of Jerusalem (7:1-9).

Nephi poured out his heart to God a tower in his garden near a highway. Men passing by observed him praying earnestly because of the wickedness of the people. They told others, and soon a multitude had gathered to find out why a man should mourn so greatly over their wickedness. When Nephi rose, he said:

Behold, why have ye gathered yourselves together? That I may tell you of your iniquities? (7:13)

Then he preached to the people with great force and power. He rebuked them for their wickedness, for their desire for riches and the vain things of this world, for committing murder, and for plundering and stealing and bearing false witness against their neighbors. He exhorted them to repent and turn to their God. Unless they did so, they would find he would not grant them strength against their enemies as he had previously done. The Lamanites would be in a better position, because they had not sinned against such great knowledge as the Nephites had been blessed with. Only repentance would save the Nephites from total destruction. The Lord had made these things known to him (7:10-29).

We are informed by the record that among the crowd who listened were certain judges belonging to the Gadianton band. They tried to stir up the people in anger against Nephi's words. However, they were not entirely successful, because other men among the Nephites realized that Nephi was a righteous man, and they were afraid that his predictions would come to pass unless they repented. The forbearance of these men enabled Nephi to continue his spirited address to the offenders (8:1-11). He pointed out the power given to Moses and spoke of the gifts of other prophets such as Abraham, Zenos, Zenock, Ezias, Isaiah, and Jeremiah, who knew of Christ's coming. Jeremiah and Father Lehi testified of Jerusalem's destruction, and their power to foretell could not be denied by the multitude, Nephi asserted. He also rebuked them again for their murders, fornication, and other wickedness. Destruction awaited them even at their doors; and as a sign of this, and of his own inspiration and power as a prophet, he told them to go to the judgment seat, where they would find their judge murdered by his brother, a member of the same secret Gadianton band (8:12-28).

Five men who did not believe in Nephi's words ran to the judgment seat to find out whether or not his predictions had been fulfilled. To their astonishment they found that Nephi had spoken the truth, and that the chief judge had fallen to the earth and lay in his own blood. Because of this, they believed in the other words spoken by the prophet, and fell to the earth in fear. They feared lest all the judgments which Nephi predicted should come upon the people (9:1-5). Many people soon gathered and had the five men who had fallen, cast into prison, because the people knew nothing about the gathering in Nephi's garden. The next day, after the burial of the chief judge, the other judges who had been at Nephi's garden inquired about the five men who had been sent to ask concerning the murder. The five were soon produced, and they testified about their experience, confounding those who claimed that Nephi was the chief conspirator in the death of the judge (9:6-18). Nevertheless, Nephi was bound and brought before the multitude, where he was questioned in various ways in order that he might be crossed up in his answers and be accused for murder in collaboration with some alleged confederate. Nephi now gave his questioners another sign: he told them to go to the house of Seantum, brother of Seezoram the dead judge, and question him in certain ways. Nephi described the manner in which Seantum would act and speak; he also declared that he would finally confess the murder and clear Nephi of complicity in it (9:19-36). The prophet's words were verified, and he and the five other accused men were set at liberty. Some Nephites believed in Nephi's words; others believed because of the testimony of the five men. Still other declared that Nephi must be a god, because of his knowledge (9:37-41).

A division among the people left Nephi alone, and as he went on to his own house, he pondered in his heart about the wickedness of his people. As he did so, the voice of God declared to him his satisfaction with his conduct in the presence of danger. Now God would bless him with great power, even sealing powers that would give him the authority to smite the earth with famine, pestilence, and destruction. Thus great power was given Nephi over his people, if it was needed. The Lord then commanded Nephi to go forth again and command the people to repent or be smitten to destruction (10:1-11). The prophet went immediately to declare the Lord's word to the multitudes throughout the land. But notwithstanding the great miracle involved in the episode of the chief judge, they would not listen. They reviled him and sought to cast him into prison. The powers given him by God prevailed, however, and he was taken by the Spirit elsewhere, where the same thing took place. In this way he proceeded from multitude to multitude, all of them rejecting him. Contentions arose among the people, and Mormon points out that they began to slay one another with the sword. Thus ended the seventy-first year of the rule by judges (10:12-19).

Wars and contentions brought so many difficulties, and the Gadianton robbers wrought so much destruction and wickedness, that Nephi felt the necessity of bringing the people to their senses by exercising the great powers God had given him. He prayed that the Lord would not destroy the people by the sword, but rather, bring on a famine to turn them to repentance. A great famine came, as requested, and for over two years the land was heavily smitten. When the people saw that they were about to perish, they pleaded with their judges to persuade Nephi to intercede with God on their behalf. The judges did as requested. When Nephi saw the sore repentance of the people and also recognized that they had swept away the Gadianton band, he prayed to the Lord to turn away his anger and test the people again. The prayer was effective, and the earth once more received rain and brought forth its products to bless the people (11:1-17).

The people rejoiced exceedingly, and they no longer sought to destroy Nephi, but esteemed him as a prophet and a man of God with great authority. Nor was his brother Lehi any less zealous in acts of righteousness. Nephite prosperity now began to spread abroad; moreover, the Church also was blessed, because most of the people in the land, both Nephite and Lamanite, were members thereof (11:18-21).

The need of prophets was emphasized shortly when certain doctrinal contentions which had sprung up among the people were settled by Nephi, Lehi, and others by the spirit of revelation. But war was stirred up by rebellious Nephite and Lamanite dissenters. They murdered, plundered, and proceeded to retreat to mountain fastnesses, where they were difficult to find. Dissenters went over to them, so that in the space of a few years they became large in numbers. Besides, they sought out the secret Gadianton plans; thus the Gadianton band was revived and wrought great havoc and destruction among the Nephites and Lamanites. Nor was an army of strong men able to search out and destroy them; as a matter of fact, the Gadianton robbers defied the whole armies of both Nephites and Lamanites. Great fear came upon the people, and they suffered great losses of personnel, both by death and by kidnapping. Apparently pride and iniquity also weakened them; in this condition they were ripening for destruction in the eighty-fifth year (7 B.C.) of the reign of the judges (11:22-38).

Out of Nephi's experiences and the actions of the people to whom he preached, Mormon was led to make a commentary on human frailty, God's goodness and power, his blessings on the penitent, the judgment of men according to their works, and the like. In fact, the whole of Chapter 12 is devoted to this commentary. Mormon could not help but contrast the bad and good among men. When men are prospered by God, too often they harden their hearts and forget him. And unless the Lord chastens his people and even brings death, terror, famine, and pestilence among them, they do not remember him (12:1-3). He continues thus:

O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the children of men; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the world! Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths! Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be their guide. (12:4-6)

Then, by a series of illustrations of God's power, he shows the nothingness of the children of men. Here is an example of special interest:

For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither, to the dividing asunder, at the command of our great and everlasting God. Yea, behold at his voice do the hills and the mountains tremble and quake. And by the power of his voice they are broken up, and become smooth, yea, even like unto a valley. Yea, by the power of his voice doth the whole earth shake; yea, by the power of his voice, do the foundations rock, even to the very center. Yea, and if he say unto the earth-Move-it is moved. Yea, if he say unto the earth-Thou shalt go back, that it lengthen out the day for many hours-it is done; and thus, according to his word the earth goeth back, and it appeareth unto man that the sun standeth still; yea, and behold, this is so; for surely it is the earth that moveth and not the sun. And behold, also, if he say unto the waters of the great deep-Be thou dried up-it is done. Behold if he say unto this mountain-Be thou raised up, and come over and fall upon that city, that it be buried up-behold it is done. (12:8-17)

Following his illustrations of God's great power, Mormon emphasizes the necessity of men repenting if they are to be saved. He prays that the Almighty may grant that men might be brought unto repentance and good works, that they might be "restored unto grace for grace, according to their works." (12:24) He indicates his great desire that all men might be saved, but he knows from reading the scriptures that they won't be; some will be cast out from God's presence. These will be consigned to a state of endless misery, fulfilling the words which say:

They that have done good shall have everlasting life; and they that have done evil shall have everlasting damnation. (12:26)

During the eighty-sixth year (6 B.C.) of the judges, the wickedness of the Nephites continued, but the Lamanites continued to observe the commandments of God, according to the law of Moses. A great Lamanite prophet, Samuel by name, came into the land of Zarahemla to preach repentance to the Nephites, but they cast him out, and he was about to return to his own land. But the voice of the Lord commanded him to turn back and prophesy to the people what came into his heart. The people of Zarahemla would not let him go into the city, so he got upon the wall and prophesied. He predicted heavy destruction upon the people unless they repented and had faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover, within four hundred years the sword of justice would fall upon the people, and numbers of their enemies in the fourth generation would live to see their utter destruction. Only the presence of the righteous in the city of Zarahemla prevented the Lord from destroying it by fire immediately. But when the inhabitants of the city cast out the righteous from among them, then it would be ripe for destruction. Gideon and other Nephite cities would also feel the weight of God's wrath upon them because of the iniquity and abominations of their people (13:1-16). A curse was to be sent upon the land and upon the riches of the people. Those whose hearts were set upon riches and not upon the Lord would not be able to find their treasures when hidden in the earth. Their boastings, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions, and murders had set the Lord against them. They worse than their forefathers in the treatment of the prophets who came among them, because they would accuse these men of God of being false prophets, sinners, and pawns of the devil, and would seek ways to destroy them. But the false prophets who came among them and flattered them with fancy words and promises, these they would believe and follow. Samuel then denounced them as a hardened and stiffnecked generation that would mourn and lament in their poverty-their riches would be taken from them-and wish that they had not killed the prophets or stone them or cast them out. The prophet seemed to indicate that the day of probation was nearly past and that their destruction was practically assured (13:17-28). So he cried:

O ye people of the land, that ye would hear my words! And I pray that the anger of the Lord be turned from you, and that ye would repent and be saved. (13:39)

Samuel the Lamanite prophesied many other things which Mormon could not write, but he did write down some other things of importance and of great interest that the prophet said. The first concerns a sign which Samuel gave concerning the coming of Christ within five years. This is of enough importance to quote in full:

And behold, he said unto them: Behold, I give unto you a sign; for five years more cometh, and behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name. And behold, this will I give unto you for a sign at the time of his coming; for behold, there shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that in the night before the cometh there shall be no darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto man as if it was day. Therefore, there shall be one day and a night and a day, as if it were one day and there were no night; and this shall be unto you for a sign; for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and also of its setting; therefore they shall know of a surety that there shall be two days an a night; nevertheless the night shall not be darkened; and it shall be the night before he is born. And behold, there shall be a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign unto you. And behold this is not all, there shall be many signs and wonders in heaven. And it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amazed, and wonder, insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth. (14:2-7)

Samuel the Lamanite then told the people that he wanted them to know of the judgments of God which were to come because of their iniquities, to know the conditions of repentance, and to become familiar with the signs concerning Christ's coming into the world (14:8-14). Through the Christ should salvation come unto men because of his death and resurrection:

For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord. Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death-that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual. But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord. Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness. (14:15-18)

The prophet proceeded to enumerate the signs of Christ's death. These are also important enough to quote in full:

But behold, as I said unto you concerning another sign, a sign of his death, behold, in that day that he shall suffer death the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give his light unto you; and also the moon and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land, even from the time that he shall suffer death, for the space of three days, to the time that he shall rise again from the dead. Yea, at the time that he shall yield up the ghost there shall be thunderings and lightnings for the space, of many hours, and the earth shall shake and tremble; and the rocks which are upon the face of this earth, which are both above the earth and beneath, which ye know at this time are solid, or the more part of it is one solid mass, shall be broken up; yea, they shall be rent in twain, and shall ever after be found in seams and in cracks, and in broken fragments upon the face of the whole earth, yea, both above the earth and beneath. And behold, there shall be great tempests, and there shall be many mountains laid low, like unto a valley, and there shall be many places which are now called valleys which shall become mountains, whose height is great. And many highways shall be broken up, and many cities shall become desolate. And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many. (14:20-25)

Samuel the Lamanite said that the angel who had told him these things had also made known that many persons should see even greater things than those which have been cited. This should be in order that no cause for unbelief might exist, and that whosoever would believe might be saved. Those who would not believe would have righteous judgments come upon them; if they were to be condemned, they would bring upon themselves their own condemnation. Men are free agents; if they perish, the perish unto themselves; if they do iniquity, they it unto themselves. They know good from evil and can choose life or death; they can do good and have good restored to them, or they can do evil, and have evil restored to them (14:26-31).

The great Lamanite prophet now proceeded to warn the Nephites again, basing his warning on the fact that the Lord had lavished special love upon them as a chosen people; hence their added responsibility. Because of this fact, their houses should be left desolate unless they repented. People could not hope to receive special blessings from God unless they were prepared to receive greater punishment for transgression than others. The Lamanites were walking circumspectly before God as a result of the good word which the Nephites had brought to them. When convinced of the wicked traditions of their forefathers, they believed the scriptures and the prophecies of the holy prophets, and their faith and repentance brought a great change of heart unto them. Their faith in Christ and steadfastness would bring a blessing from the Lord, and their days were to be prolonged. The promises of God would be extended to the Lamanite remnant even to the latter days. Notwithstanding the buffetings to be handed them, they would eventually come to a knowledge of their Redeemer and be numbered among his sheep (15:1-13). Therefore, the Lamanites would be better off than the Nephites, except through the latter's repentance. These powerful words of the prophet are of great interest:

For behold, had the mighty works been shown unto them which have been shown unto you, yea, unto them who have dwindled in unbelief because of the traditions of their fathers, ye can see of yourselves that they never would again have dwindled in unbelief. Therefore, saith the Lord: I will not utterly destroy them, but I will cause that in the day of my wisdom they shall return again unto me, saith the Lord. And now behold, saith the Lord, concerning the people of the Nephites: If they will not repent, and observe to do my will, I will utterly destroy them, saith the Lord, because of their unbelief notwithstanding the many mighty works which I have done among them; and as surely as the Lord liveth shall these things be, saith the Lord. (15:15-17)

Many there were among the Nephites who were touched by the Lamanite prophet's words and came to Nephi for the purpose of confessing their sins and of being baptized unto the Lord. Others were angry at him and threw stones or shot arrows at him as he stood upon the wall. But he was protected by the Spirit of the Lord, and none of the missiles touched him. A a result of this fact, many others believed in his words and went away unto Nephi to be baptized (16:1-5). Nephi continued his powerful ministry among the people. Thus Samuel's ministry aided and abetted the work he was doing to a considerable degree.

The greater part of the people of Zarahemla failed to believe in Samuel the Lamanite's words. When they were unsuccessful in harming him with their stones and arrows, they sought to arrest and bind him. In this they were disappointed; the prophet cast himself from the wall and fled into his own country. Here he continued to preach and prophesy among his Lamanite brethren. He was never heard of more among the Nephite people (16:6-8).

The prophet seems to have been a very courageous and spiritual man. The Savior regarded him highly; when he appeared among the Nephites, he commanded that a complete account be written on the records concerning the fulfillment of Samuel's prophecies. (See 3 Nephi 23:7-13.)

The remainder of Chapter 16 of the Book of Helaman records the growing wickedness of the Nephites, despite the ministration of angels (vs. 14) and other great manifestations of the Lord's mercy and compassion to his people. Mormon makes this comment concerning Nephite conduct:

And notwithstanding the signs and the wonders which were wrought among the people of the Lord, and the many miracles which they did, Satan did get great hold upon the hearts of the people upon all the face of the land. (16:23)

The Book of Helaman is in many respects a remarkable record. Its greatest characters are Helaman II, Nephi, Lehi, and Samuel the Lamanite. A noteworthy military leader of the Nephites is found in the shrewd but righteous Moronihah. The spiritual powers of Nephi, Lehi, and Samuel the Lamanite are outstanding among many great Nephite leaders mentioned in the Book of Mormon.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dramatic appearance of Jesus. Multitude personally touch his wounds. Calling of Twelve. Teaches doctrines of repentance, and of baptism by water and Holy Ghost. (Ch. 11) Church to be named after Christ. (27:1-12)
