Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 20

Third Nephi

The book known to us as Third Nephi was originally called "The Book of Nephi" as the caption immediately below the title in our modern editions indicates. The title "3 Nephi" was first added by Elder Orson Pratt [^1]in the 1879 edition to distinguish this book from the first two books in the Nephite record, known respectively as "The First Book of Nephi" and "The Second Book of Nephi." In other words, "Third Nephi" is not a part of the original text of the Book of Mormon. For convenience, we shall continue to employ the title, since it is in common use among our people.

Third Nephi contains 30 chapters, or nearly 57 printed pages in its modern dress. The first seven chapters record the events of Nephite history during the Savior's thirty-three years of mortality. Chapters 8 to 26 inclusive deal altogether with the events of about six days-the three days of darkness and destruction following the crucifixion and the three-day ministry of the resurrected Savior among the Nephites. Chapters 27 and 28 tell us of a visit which the Savior made to his Nephite Twelve, and Chapters 29 and 30 contain some of Mormon's warnings and admonitions to the Gentiles of our times.

Third Nephi contains what this writer denominates the American Gospel, the witness of this continent to the Christ. This outstanding bit of literature comprises 3 Nephi 1:4-21 and chapters 8-28. The gospel is a distinct and well-recognized type of religious literature; the Four Gospels in the New Testament are, of course, the great examples of it. Gospels are not intended to be lives of Jesus, but "good news," "tidings of great joy," about him. They differ, ofttimes greatly, in style, selection of materials, and emphasis; but each attempts in its own way to portray the "good news" to man that Jesus, the Christ, came into the world with the true way of life and salvation. Each attests his final triumph over death through the resurrection.

The American Gospel differs in an obvious way from the Four Gospels in that it deals with Jesus' ministry among the Nephites as a resurrected, glorified, and exalted personage rather than a mortal being. True, each of the Four Gospels tells us something about the Savior after his resurrection, but the space devoted to it is small in comparison with the size of the record. The gospel in 3 Nephi reveals clearly that Jesus taught the Nephites many of the same principles which he proclaimed in the flesh in Palestine; he did it, however, as a being risen from the dead. His repetition here of the Sermon of the Mount is a good example. (3 Nephi 12, 13, 14; cf. Matthew 5, 6, 7)

There are two superscriptions in 3 Nephi; the first appears over Chapter 1 and traces Nephi's genealogy; the second, over Chapter 11, announces the ministry of Jesus Christ to the Nephite people as recorded in that and the following chapters.

From the point of view of literature, Third Nephi is composed mainly of historical narrative, revelations, epistles, editorial comments, a gospel and hortatory material.

The purpose for which 3 Nephi was written, aside from the obvious historical one, is to bear witness to our generation (particularly the Lamanites) that Jesus is the Christ; that the people of this continent in ancient times saw, heard, and touched the glorified, resurrected Savior. (See 11:15; 17:25; 26:8.)

The book may be studied according to the following outline:

I. Nephite history from the birth of Christ to his death. (Chs. 1-7)

A. Nephi receives sacred records and relics from his father Nephi, son of Helaman, who disappears. Annunciation of Savior's birth (1:4-21; part of American Gospel). Many converted by signs of Christ's birth. Activities of Gadianton robbers. Righteous Nephites and Lamanites unite in common defense. Lachoneus, the governor, receives ultimatum from Giddianhi, the robber chieftain, to surrender his people. Lachoneus refuses and appoints Gidgiddoni as general over Nephite armies. (Chs. 1-3)

B. Gadianton robbers beaten in battle and their chieftain slain. Nephites triumph over Giddianhi's successor and repent of their sins. Mormon's comments concerning himself, the sacred records', and gathering of Israel. Nephites prosper, but pride, dissensions, and works of darkness follow. Chief judge murdered. People divided into tribes. Jacob, so-called king. Nephi's powerful ministry. (Chs. 4-7 )

II. The American Gospel. (Chs. 8-28. Ch. 1:4-21 should be included with it.)

A. Signs of crucifixion and death of Christ. Great tempests, whirlwinds, and fires as predicted by Samuel the Lamanite. Voice of Christ heard over land. (Chs. 8-10 )

B. Three-day ministry of resurrected, redeemed Savior among Nephites. (Chs. 11-26)

C. Jesus' last recorded appearance to his Twelve, giving sundry items of instruction and blessing. (Chs. 27-28)

III. Mormon's warning and call for repentance. (Chs. 29-30)

A. He gives stern warning to those Gentiles of our day who spurn revelations of the Lord, his works, and his people. (Ch. 29)

B. He calls modern Gentiles to repentance in accordance with the Lord's command. (Ch. 30)

The outline above is given in considerable detail because of the outstanding importance of 3 Nephi.

The ninety-first year of the reign of the judges had now passed away, and six hundred years had elapsed since Father Lehi had left Jerusalem. Lachoneus was the chief judge and governor of the land. The great Nephi, son of Helaman II, forthwith entrusted to his eldest son Nephi the Brass Plates and other sacred records, together with hallowed relics which had been brought out of Jerusalem. He then departed out of the land, and where he went no man knew (1:3; cf. 2:9). Nephi therefore kept the records in place of his father. This strange disappearance of such a great spiritual character merits more than passing notice. Little attention might be paid to the incident were it not for the fact that the younger Alma disappeared under somewhat similar circumstances after delivering up the records to his son Helaman. (See Alma 37:1-5; Alma 45:17-19.) What happened to Nephi? Was he slain under mysterious circumstances and his body never recovered, or was he translated? We are not specifically told, but one gets the distinct impression that some great spiritual incident lies behind the disappearance of Nephi (1:1-3).

Certain unbelievers now began to chide the faithful for believing in Samuel the Lamanite's prophecy (Helaman 14:2) that the Christ would come within five years' time. In fact, they made a great uproar throughout the land, causing sorrow to those who waited anxiously for the expected signs of the Savior's birth. The unbelievers even set a date beyond which the faithful would be put to death, unless the sign should be given. Nephi went out and prayed mightily to God all the day long in behalf of his people, who were to be destroyed. Finally, the Lord answered him with the wonderful news that the sign should be given that night, because on the morrow he would come into the world (1:1-14).

The sign was given as promised; for when the sun went down, there was no darkness. Unbelievers now began to fear because of their iniquity and unbelief. Many fell to the earth when they comtemplated the plan of destruction which they had formulated against their believing brethren. The signs predicted by Samuel the Lamanite and other prophets were completely fulfilled, including the appearance of a new star (1:15-21). The people, good and bad alike, now knew that the Redeemer had been born into the world. I include the annunciation of Christ's birth (1:4-21) in the Nephite record as part of the "American Gospel." It does for that gospel what Matthew 1:8-2:6 does for the first gospel in the New Testament.

The signs of Christ's coming in the flesh had a tremendous effect upon the Nephite people, for although some of them were deceived by lies originated by Satan, most of them were converted and baptized.

Some disturbances were later to be caused by persons who tried to teach the doctrine that it was no longer expedient to observe the law of Moses, but by far the greater difficulties that arose stemmed from the many murders committed by the Gadianton robbers. Nephite and Lamanite dissenters caused much sorrow among their respective families (1:22-30). It is hard to believe that such great wickedness could arise so quickly after the signs of Christ's birth were given.

Nephite degeneracy and abominations had become so bad by A.D. 9 that the doctrine of Christ was regarded as a vain and foolish thing, and great sections of the people ceased to believe that more spiritual signs would be given (2:1-9). Of some interest is the fact that the Nephites began to reckon their time from when the sign was given them of Christ's birth.

The depredations of the Gadianton robbers soon became so threatening that both the righteous Nephites and Lamanites, in self-defense, were forced to unite against them. It should be observed that the righteous Lamanites who were numbered with their Nephite brethren had the curse taken from them (2:15), and their skin became white. In the battles, the Nephites-including those who were not righteous-obtained some early advantage over the robbers, but finally the sword of destruction hung over them (2:10-19).

About A.D. 15 the arrogance of the Gadianton band was such that its leader, Giddianhi, sent a very insolent letter to Lachoneus, the Nephite governor, demanding that he yield up to the robbers the Nephite people, cities, lands, and possessions, or be visited with the sword and destruction. If the Nephites yielded, so the robber chieftain promised, and became one with them, secret works and all, they would not be treated as slaves, but as brethren and partners (3:1-10). But the governor was a just and courageous man. Instead of yielding to the Gadianton band, Lachoneus, by persuasion and words of prophecy, gathered his people with their flocks, herds, and moveable substance to one place, and appointed army officers, with Gidgiddoni, a great leader and prophet, at the head to lead in the general defense. The land they were to defend was that including Zarahemla and Bountiful. Under the influence of Lachoneus the people repented of their sins; at the instance of Gidgiddoni they also made weapons of war with which to defend themselves (3:11-26).

Thus prepared, both spiritually and materially, the Nephites met their enemies in the most sanguinary struggle that had ensued since the days of Father Lehi. The robbers lost the battle, and their leader, Giddianhi, was slain. The Nephite armies then retired to their secure base of operations (4:1-16).

Nearly two years passed away before the robbers took any further action. Then they laid siege to the Nephite stronghold, but their tactics in this respect only weakened them, because they did not have large stores of provisions as did the Nephites. In fact, the forces of Zemnarihah, the new robber chieftain, were almost reduced to starvation, and what was worse, continual Nephite sorties cut them off by the thousands and tens of thousands. Finally, it became apparent to Zemnarihah that he would have to lift the siege, but unfortunately for him, the great Nephite commander, Gidgiddoni, had anticipated his action by sending out armies by night to cut off his retreat. The robbers were met both in front and rear and were decisively defeated. Those who did not give themselves up as prisoners were slain on the battlefield. Zemnarihah was taken and hanged upon a tree until he was dead. The Nephites were extremely joyful because of the success which their God had given them in the great struggle. Mormon records the fact that the Nephites realized they were successful in battle only because the Lord had recognized their humility and repentant spirit (4:17-33).

The great battles which the Nephites had gone through, and the grace of God which had attended them, seem to have humbled them to such an extent that none doubted the words of the holy prophets. They forsook their sins and served the Lord with all diligence. The prisoners they had taken in battle were taught the word of God; those who repeated of their sins and made a covenant never more to murder were set at liberty. Those who still had murder in their hearts and threatened their brethren were condemned and punished according to the law. Thus the Nephites put an end to the great crisis that had developed in connection with the Gadianton robbers (5:1-7).

At this point Mormon breaks the historical narrative by giving an account of himself and the plates which he was keeping. He says that not a hundredth part of what transpired among the Nephites for twenty-five years-the time that had elapsed since Christ's birth-could be written into the record be was making. The great prophet does point out the existence of records that contain a full account of the history. Nephi himself made a shorter but true account. Mormon took his source material from Nephi's record engraven on the Large Plates and wrote on plates made by himself (Plates of Mormon). (5:8-11) The prophet relates that he was called Mormon, being named after the land of Mormon, where the elder Alma established the first church of the Nephites (Mosiah 18:4, 17) after their transgression (Omni 12). He also says that he was a disciple of Jesus Christ, meaning an apostle, called to declare his word among the people. In accordance with the prayers and faith of those who had preceded him (cf. Enos 12-13), he discloses that it was expedient for him, according to the will of God, to make a record of Nephite history from the beginning. The sources he used would, of course, be those written before his time, to which he would add a record of things which he had seen with his own eyes (5:12-17). Moreover, he testifies, "I know the record which I make to be a just and true record; nevertheless there are many things which, according to our language, we are not able to write." He concludes the matters concerning himself by disclosing that he is a pure descendant of Lehi and that he has reason to bless God and his Savior Jesus Christ (5:18-20).

He then alludes to the blessings and mercies of God upon the children of Lehi, and to the eventual gathering of the remnant of Jacob from the four quarters of the earth. The covenant which God made with the house of Jacob will surely be fulfilled, and Israel will know its Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God (5:21-26).

Following the war with the Gadianton robbers, the Nephites returned to their lands, where they could pursue their lands ways of life. Great prosperity and peace attended them under the leadership of Lachoneus and Gidgiddoni. A great period of building ensued; many cities were built or repaired, and many highways were constructed. But the wealth acquired by some began to have its bad effects. People were lifted up by either their wealth or their learning, or both, and rifts appeared in the population (6:1-13). Pride and inequality in the land were so rife that Mormon could say:

The church began to be broken up; yea, insomuch that in the thirtieth year the church was broken up in all the land save it were among a few of the Lamanites who were converted unto the true faith; and they would not depart from it, for they were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord. (6:14)

The prophet attests in some detail the great power which Satan had in leading away the hearts of the people. The sad fact was that they did not sin ignorantly, because they knew the will of God; they were in willful rebellion against him (6:15-18).

The son of Lachoneus, who had the same name as his father, now ruled the people in his father's stead. At the time that he assumed the judgeship, inspired men began to go through the land, preaching boldly of the sins and iniquities of the people and proclaiming the redemption which the Lord would make for his people. They gave frank testimony concerning his coming death and sufferings. Many of these inspired men, who gave testimony concerning the Christ, were taken secretly and put to death by corrupt judges. This was contrary to Nephite law, for no man was to be put to death without express authority from the governor of the land. Complaints of these high-handed violations of justice were brought before the governor, as well as were the wicked judges themselves, but the conspirators in government banded so strongly together that justice could not be served. These evil men combined against the Lord's people and set at defiance the law and the rights of the country. They even conspired to destroy the governor and establish a king over the land so as to destroy the liberty which the people had enjoyed (6:19-30).

The evil forces abroad in the land did indeed succeed in murdering the chief judge. Moreover, the people became divided against each other, separating into tribes according to family, kindred, and friends (7:1-2). Thus the government of the land was destroyed. Secret combinations and contentions eventually had such effects that Mormon reports:

The more righteous part of the people had nearly all become wicked; yea, there were but few righteous men among them. And thus six years had not passed away since the more part of the people had turned form their righteousness, like the dog to his vomit, or like the sow to her wallowing in the mire. (7:7-8; cf. Proverbs 26:11; 2 Peter 2:22)

The secret combinations that had brought about such an incredible disintegration in government now placed a man by the name of Jacob at their head and proclaimed him as king. The tribes, though not themselves righteous, rejected Jacob, and he was forced to flee north. The people in the tribes, in spite of the fact that they were not united as to laws and government, did have a measure of peace by enforcing strict measures which prohibited one tribe from trespassing against another. Nevertheless, they stone the prophets and cast them out from among them (7:9-14).

The powerful ministry of Nephi continued despite the sorrow and disappointment he must have suffered concerning the quick change of the Nephite people from righteousness to almost complete wickedness. His great spirituality is shown by the fact that the was blessed by the visitation of heavenly beings and by the voice of the Lord. With these great assurances, he went boldly among the people preaching repentance and remission of sins through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. His ministry was attended by such power and authority that Mormon says it would not suffice to write but part of certain things which he did (7:7); therefore he did not write any of them in his book. The people were angry with him because his great power left them with no recourse. In the name of Jesus Christ he cast out devils and unclean spirits and healed the sick; he even raised his brother from death after the brother had been stoned by the people. Nephi converted a number of people by his preaching and baptized them unto repentance (7:15-26).

The date of Christ's crucifixion was now near at hand. It should be emphasized again that the Nephite Church had been nearly destroyed by apostasy and contentions, and the government had also become so corrupt and broken down that it bore little resemblance to the vigorous one in full bloom only a few years before. A few righteous persons under the leadership of Nephi constituted the Nephite church which still held to the law of Moses.

The American Gospel (Chs. 8-28)

Chapters 8, 9, and 10 of 3 Nephi form a natural division of the American Gospel. They deal with the events which were preliminary to the dramatic appearance of the resurrected Savior which is recorded in Chapter 11.

The Nephite people, at least the more righteous among them, were now looking forth to the fulfillment of Samuel the Lamanite's prophecies (Helaman 14:20-28), concerning the signs that would be given at the time of Christ's crucifixion. According to the reckoning of the record keeper, probably Nephi, thirty-three years had passed by since the birth of the Savior. Some doubtings and disputations began to arise among the people despite the many signs that had been given them previously (8:1-4).

But the signs were now to be shown forth in terrible force, for in the thirty-fourth year, in the first month of the year according to the Nephite reckoning of time, on the fourth day of the month [^2], there came a great storm, the like of which had never been known in Nephite history (8:5). A terrible tempest arose, and for about three hours the earth shook with great violence. [^3]Many Nephite cities were either burned or sunk or broken down by reason of the tempest, whirlwinds, lightnings, and cataclysms which occurred. Certain cities remained, but the damage to them was exceedingly great, and many of their inhabitants were slain. Highways were broken up, and smooth places were made rough. People were carried away by the whirlwinds and never heard of more. The whole face of the land was deformed, rocks were rent in twain, and then a terrible darkness settled for three days. The darkness was of such a nature that the survivors could feel its vapors, and no light of any kind whatever could be kindled. This physical effect (vss. 20-22) may possibly be accounted for on the basis that the Spirit of Christ was withdrawn in part from the land (cf. D&C 84:45-46; D&C 88:7-13). The prophecies of Samuel the Lamanite and others concerning the signs to be shown forth at the crucifixion of Christ were, in short, completely fulfilled. The inhabitants of the land who had been spared howled, wept, and mourned, and wished that they had repented before this great and terrible time (8:6-25).

Chapter 9 records that a voice was heard by all the inhabitants of the land. This was the voice of God explaining the reasons why such terrible ordeals had come upon them. The Lord singled out the names of many of the cities that were destroyed in various ways, and pointed out that catastrophes came upon them because of the wickedness and abominations of their people. He affirmed that all of those who were spared were saved only because they were more righteous than their fellows. The Lord advised them to repent of their sins and be converted, that he might heal them. He told them also that the scriptures which related to his coming had been fulfilled. Moreover, the law of Moses was now fulfilled, and sacrifices and burnt offerings as required under that law were to be done away. The Savior further announced that only those who would repent and come unto him with a broken heart and a contrite spirit as little children would be saved in the kingdom of God (9:1-22).

After Jesus had spoken, there was silence in the land for many hours. Needless to say, the people were astonished and ceased lamenting and crying over the loss of their kindred. Finally the voice came again, and all of the people heard the words of the Savior explaining that he would have gathered all of the house of Israel as a hen gathers her chickens, but they would not. He then told those who had been spared that if they would only repent, they would be gathered as a hen gathers her chickens. Otherwise, the places of their dwellings would become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of the covenant which he had made with their fathers (10:1-7).

After the people had heard the Savior's words, they again began to mourn greatly because of the loss of their kindred and friends. Finally, the three days of darkness passed away, the earth ceased to tremble, and the dreadful groaning and noises ended. The people now gave praise and thanksgiving to their Lord, who had spared them. Mormon emphasized the fact that only the more righteous part of the people, both Nephites and Lamanites, were saved; those who received the prophets and had not stoned them or had not shed the blood of the saints were spared the righteous vengeance of God. He also pointed to the express fulfillment of the scriptures in the events of the three days' destruction (10:8-17).

In verse 18 of Chapter 10, Mormon anticipated the appearance of the resurrected Christ to his people, by pointing to the fact that he came apparently at the "ending of the thirty-fourth year." A comparison of this verse with 8:5 would seem to show that nearly a year passed by after the great three days of darkness and destruction before our Lord appeared to the Nephites. This conclusion would also seem to be borne out by a careful study of other facts in the record as written by Mormon. [^4] However, a consensus of Book of Mormon students would probably show that they feel it difficult to believe that the Savior would put off his appearance to the Nephites for a whole year after his resurrection.

Mormon evidently waited some little time after recording the events that took place during the three days of darkness and destruction before he undertook an account of the appearance of the resurrected Christ to his people (10:19). The eleventh chapter of 3 Nephi, which describes the appearance of the glorified, redeemed Savior to the Nephites, is the most dramatic in the Book of Mormon. About 2500 men, women and children (17:25) were gathered round about the temple in the land Bountiful discussing the great and marvelous changes and signs that had taken place among them, when suddenly they heard a voice from the heavens. [^5] Their very frames quaked, and their hearts burned as the small voice pierced them to the soul. They also heard the voice a second time without understanding it. But the third time they understood the voice, which said:

Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him. (11:7)

As they cast their eyes upward, they saw a man descending out of heaven clothed in a white robe. Presently he came down and stood in their midst. The people were frightened, or startled, not knowing the meaning of it all. They thought that the personage who had appeared to them was an angel, but to their amazement he stretched forth his hand and spoke unto them these words:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning. (11:10-11)

It is a marvelous thing that the Mormon people should teach that the resurrected, redeemed Savior of the world also presented himself to the ancient inhabitants of America. But why should it seem impossible that he would do so? Surely people of this continent, separated by thousands of miles of water from most of the peoples of the earth, were not to be forgotten by our Lord. Surely a branch of the house of Israel, a house holding the keys of salvation for the world, might well be visited by him.

When the people realized who it was that had come among them, Jesus determined to give them such a testimony of himself as would never be forgotten. He commanded them to arise and come forth unto him, in order that they might thrust their hands into his side, and feel the prints in his hands and in his feet (11:12-14). In Mormon's account of what took place, he might have said that "the people did so" and have left it at that, but he did not do it that way. Notice his method. By careful repetition he emphasizes the witness which the people received:

And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come. (11:15; italic mine.)

Mormon's intentions are clear (cf. 17:25),he wants our generation to have another clear, independent witness that Jesus is the Christ. And those fortunate Nephites whom he describes do indeed bear record to the world today, as with voices from the dust, that they did severally see and touch and hear the Christ, the Redeemer of the world. It should be quite apparent why the writer describes the gospel containing this account as The American Gospel instead of the Fifth Gospel. A fifth gospel would be mentally tacked on to the other four, which are witnesses of another hemisphere that Jesus is the Christ. But the American Gospel is a fresh, independent account, the witness of this continent.

When all of the Nephites had gone forth to the Christ, they cried hosannahs to the Most High God and fell down at his feet and worshipped him (11:16-17).

The Christ now chose twelve men, with Nephi at their head, to be his disciples, and to each he gave power to baptize the people. This chosen Twelve (11:18-22; 12:1) I believe to have been true Apostles. Moroni 2:2 would seem to indicate this fact, but if there is any doubt about the matter, it may be well to cite the Prophet Joseph Smith:

This book [the Book of Mormon] also tells its that our Savior made his appearance upon this continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists; . . . (D.H.C., 4:538; italics mine.)

The Savior gave explicit directions to his disciples concerning the manner in which they were to administer the ordinance of baptism. A fixed prayer for this ordinance was given to them which is very similar to the one that has been given to us in this dispensation (11:25; cf. D&C 20:73). The Lord also commanded them to have no disputation concerning points of doctrine as they formerly had had; the spirit of contention, he advised, comes from the devil, the author of it (11:23-31).

The Master then emphasized to the Twelve the basic principles of repentance and baptism. He who would surrender himself to these principles was to be visited with fire and the Holy Ghost, which bears record of the Father and the Son. Unless they repented and became as little children and were baptized, they could in no wise inherit the kingdom of God. Anyone who built upon any other doctrine would find himself upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell would stand open to receive him (11:32-41).

---
Notas:
[^1] Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; Break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child! For more are the children of the desolate [i.e., Zion in her desolate, barren state] Than the children of the married wife [i.e., Zion before her separation from her husband, saith the Lord. Thus saith the Father unto Malachi— Behold, I will send my messenger, And he shall prepare [make clear] the way before me, And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple, Even the messenger of the covenant, Whom ye delight in; Behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts. For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; And all the proud [insolent, presumptious], Yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; And the day that cometh shall burn them up, Saith the Lord of Host, That it shall leave them neither root nor branch.
[^2] Enlarge the place of thy tent, And let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations, spare not, Lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes. But who may abide [endure] the day of his coming, And who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap. But unto you that fear my name, Shall the Son of Righteousness [Hebrews, Sun of Righteousness, i.e., the Savior] arise with healing in his wings [i.e., will establish peace and righteousness] And ye shall go forth and grow up [possibly grow fat, i.e., prosper] as calves in the stall.
[^3] For thou shalt break forth [increase, spread abroad] on the right hand and on the left, And thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles [shall possess the nations] And make the desolate cities to be inhabited. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; And he shall purify the sons of Levi, And purge them as gold and silver, That they may offer unto the Lord An offering in righteousness. And ye shall tread down the wicked [cf. 3 Nephi 21:12-22; Micah 5:7-15]; For they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet In the day that I shall do this, Saith the Lord of Hosts.
[^4] Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; Neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; For thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth [i.e., such as the Egyptian bondage and the period of the Judges], And shalt not remember the reproach of thy youth, And shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more [i.e., such as the Babylonian and subsequent exiles]. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem Be pleasant unto the Lord, As in the days of old, And as in former years.
[^5] For thy maker, thy husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; And thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel— The God of the whole earth shall he be called. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet Before the coming Of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.
