Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

IV

The Literary Labors of Moroni

This division contains the remainder (Chs. 8-9) of the Book of Mormon, the Book of Ether, and the Book of Moroni.

Chapter 24

The Book of Mormon (Continued)

With Chapter 8 of the Book of Mormon we begin a consideration of the literary labors of Moroni, who finished his father's book. The reader should observe carefully that Moroni did not begin to give an account of what transpired after the last great battle between the Nephites and Lamanites until the year A.D. 400 (8:6). At the time Moroni wrote, it seems that he had little inclination to tell about the final destruction of his people. Moreover, he was alone and had nowhere to go. It mattered little to him where he went; he seems to have been in the mood to get his job of writing over with as soon as possible and hide the records. He had no kinsfolk or friends in whom to confide (8:1-5). The prophet tells us a little about how small groups of Nephites were hunted down by Lamanites and exterminated. Even the Lamanites warred with each other. The only men who knew the true God were the three disciples of Jesus, who tarried in the land until the Lord forbade them to remain with the people. Moroni mentions the fact that these three holy men had ministered unto him and his father (8:7-11).

It is the writer's belief that Moroni finished writing verses 1-13 of Chapter 8, wrote the first paragraph of the title of the page of the Book of Mormon, and then hid his record in the Hill Cumorah (read carefully verses 12 and 13): After hiding the plates, he continued to wander, I believe, over the face of this continent for many years. Probably about the year 419 or 420 he decided to come back to the Hill Cumorah and make an addition to the plates, he continued from what is now verse 14 of Chapter 8.

The prophet tells of the fact the record (Book of Mormon) is to come forth out of the earth and that it will come forth through and by the power of God. He points out that if faults are found in the book, they are the faults of man. Despite faults, whosoever fights against the works of the Lord will be in danger of being hewn down and cast into the fire. "For," says he, "the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled." (8:22)

Moroni also predicted that the prayers of the Nephite saints should cry forth out of the dust of the earth in behalf of him appointed by the Lord to bring forth the Nephite record; furthermore, it should come forth in a day when miracles are said to be done away (8:25-26). It should come forth in a time when fires, tempests, and vapors of smoke are heard of in foreign lands. It should come in a day of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in many places. It should come in a day when the churches of men are built up for gain, and when men are forgiven of their sins for money (8:29-32). Moroni proceeded to excoriate the wicked and perverse generation that should exist among the Gentiles when the Book of Mormon was to come forth. He exhorted the people against building up secret combinations which are organized to get gain and which cause widows and orphans to mourn before God. Finally, he warned that the sword of vengeance should hang over the Gentiles, because of the blood of the saints which should be on their hands (8:33-41).

Chapter 9 consists mainly of an address by Moroni to unbelievers. He tells them that when the day of their visitation arrives they will no longer deny Christ, because of the terrible consciousness of their guilt. He says:

Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell (9:3-4)

He exhorts the unbelieving to turn unto God and cry mightily unto him in order that they may be found spotless at the great and last day. The prophet speaks sharply to those in our day who deny the revelations of God, who say that there can be no more revelations, prophecies, gifts, healings, speaking of tongues, and interpretation of tongues. He affirms that those who oppose these things do not understand the gospel of Christ (9:6-8). Moroni also speaks of the Fall and of the redemption of man which comes through Jesus Christ. Because of the death of Christ, all men are bought forth in the resurrection of the dead. Moreover, the judgments of God will come forth upon men. Those who are righteous will be righteous still (9:12-14). He points out the signs that will follow them that believe in a God of miracles: they will cast out devils; they will speak with new tongues; if they drink any deadly thing, it will not hurt them; and if they lay hands on the sick, they will recover. Whosoever believes in the name of Christ, doubting nothing, will have power through the Lord to confirm all his words, even to the ends of the earth (9:15-25). He warns against opposing God's work and advises men to be wise in the days of their probation. People are also admonished by Moroni not to be baptized unworthily or to partake of the sacrament unworthily. All things we do should be done in a worthy spirit and in the name of Jesus Christ, the son of the living God. Moroni says to us, "I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye hear my words." (9:30)

In the last part of Chapter 9, Moroni tells how the record upon which he was working was written in the characters known as reformed Egyptian. Although he would rather have written in Hebrew, it seems that reformed (modified) Egyptian characters were more suitable to the purposes of the Nephite scribes.

When Moroni had completed Chapters 8 and 9 of Mormon, he may have supposed that his work was finished, because he ends Chapter 9 very formally. If so, he seems to have reconsidered, because he proceeded to abridge the Book of Ether. This book we shall consider next.
