Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 26

The Book of Moroni

The Book of Moroni was, as far as we are aware, the last of Moroni's literary labors and concludes the Nephite volume of scripture. It contains ten chapters, comprising a trifle over twelve printed pages in its present form. This book was written as the result of an afterthought on the part of its author. After finishing his abridgment of the Book of Ether, Moroni had decided not to write any more. But he said:

I have not as yet perished; . . . Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I had supposed; for I had supposed not to have written any more; . . . (1:1, 4)

The book seems to have been written in or about the year A.D. 420 (10:1), thirty-six years after the last great battle between the Nephites and Lamanites. The reason why Moroni writes is seen to be a very unselfish one, as these words reveal:

I write a few more things, that perhaps they may be of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day, according to the will of the Lord. (1:4)

The content of the Book of Moroni is confined roughly to three classes of material: (1) Moroni's historical observations and admonitions; (2) the discipline and procedures in the Nephite church; (3) the teachings and epistles of Moroni's father Mormon. We may divide the book more or less logically into four major parts:

I. Moroni's preliminary remarks, historical and explanatory. (Ch. 1)

A. Moroni continues to write; he successfully evades Lamanites. Their fierce wars. Nephites who do not deny Christ slain by them. Moroni will not deny the Christ. (1:1-3)

B. Moroni explains his motives in writing; he has in mind future welfare of Lamanites. (1:4)

II. Instructions concerning Church discipline and procedure among Nephites. (Chs. 2-6)

A. Savior's instructions to Nephite Twelve concerning bestowal of Holy Ghost. (Ch. 2)

B. How Nephite Twelve ordained priests and teachers. (Ch. 3)

C. Manner in which sacramental bread and wine was administered. (Chs. 4-5)

D. Conditions and mode of baptism among Nephites. Matters of Church discipline. (Ch. 6)

III. Moroni introduces teachings and epistles of his father. (Chs. 7-9)

A. Mormon's teachings on faith, hope, and charity. (Ch. 7)

B. Mormon's pastoral epistle to Moroni concerning question of repentance and baptism for little children. (Ch. 8)

C. Second pastoral epistle of Mormon to Moroni concerning Lamanite and Nephite atrocities, the work of the ministry, together with an affectionate admonition. (Ch. 9)

IV. Moroni's final farewell to Lamanites. A.D. 420. (Ch. 10)

A. How to gain a testimony concerning truth of Book of Mormon. Power of Holy Ghost. (10:1-7)

B. The gifts of God. Exhortation to lay hold of every good gift. (10:8-30 )

C. Appeal to Zion of latter days to arise and be no more confounded. Exhortation to come unto Christ and be perfected in him. (10:31-33)

D. Moroni bids all men farewell. (10:34)

The first chapter of Moroni is a human document of the first rank. Despite the fact that Moroni had wandered for thirty-six years alone and friendless, he tells that he did not make himself known to the Lamanites, "lest they should destroy me." (1:1). There is a good lesson for us in this remark. It is apparent that life meant something to him, even in his lonely condition. He had the inner spiritual resources to carry him through his difficulties. Great men make life worthwhile. Some men find it possible to make life enjoyable and useful in their own company. Others fail to find life a challenge in the presence of a multitude.

Moroni informs us about fierce wars among the Lamanites; moreover, because of their hatred they were putting to death every Nephite who would not deny the Christ (1:2). How did he know of these things? During his wanderings in the daytime he doubtless took note of their internecine wars, and on occasion at nighttime he probably drew near their campfires, where he would sometimes find them torturing some luckless Nephites captured during their travels. Those who would not deny their Lord were promptly put to death, but the weaker ones would disavow him in order to save their lives. "And I," he says, "will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life." (1:3) These are the words of a courageous spirit who will not deny his Lord and Master. The practice of true religion demands physical and moral courage.

We have already alluded to Moroni's unselfish words in 1:4, where he says that he is writing a few more things that will be of worth unto his brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day. These words are easily passed by, but the fact remains that they are very revealing of the character of Mormon. He is fleeing away from the Lamanites, his enemies, but is willing to write spiritual things that will benefit their descendants. Few men would treat their enemies as magnanimously as Moroni. This, however, is an illustration of the fact that a man inspired by line religion does not think evil of his enemies. He effectually turns the other cheek to them, as Jesus decreed.

Relatively little is told it in the Book of Mormon about the organization and discipline of the Church as directed by the Savior when he appeared among the Nephites. Moroni seems to have sensed the omissions and attempts in part to supply them. His contributions in this respect are found in Chapters 2-6. In Chapter 2 he discloses some new and interesting facts concerning the manner of bestowing the Holy Ghost by the Nephite Twelve appointed by Jesus when he appeared unto the Nephites. He quotes the exact words which Jesus used-omitted in 3 Nephi-when he conferred power upon each of them to bestow the Holy Ghost:

And he called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give it, for thus do mine apostles. (2:2)

The last clause, "for thus do mine apostles," is of special interest to us. It seems to indicate quite definitely that the Twelve which Jesus called on this continent were apostles. [^1]This fact we have previously discussed in connection with our Study of 3 Nephi.

Moroni explains that at the time of his first appearance Christ spoke to the apostles the words which have been quoted. He says that the multitude did not hear it, but the disciples did; and on as many as they laid their hands, fell the Holy Ghost (2:3).

The great prophet next explains the manner in which the disciples ("'elders of the Church") ordained priests and teachers in the Nephite Church. In the Church today we have no set way of performing such ordinations, but the Nephites seem to have had a set prayer (3:3). Moreover, before men were ordained to the priesthood a prayer was uttered (3:2). Moroni tells its that those who did the ordaining did so "by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in them." (3:4)

Chapters 4 and 5 explain the manner of administering the sacrament ("the flesh and blood of Christ"). The elders or priests performing the ordinance kneeled down, as our brethren do today, and then pronounced the set prayers known to us. The only differences would seem to be that the Nephites used wine instead of water, and the congregation may have kneeled also. (4:2; cf. D&C 27:1-4; D&C 20:76)

Chapter 6 is a formal discussion of other matters of Nephite Church discipline. Moroni states that men were not baptized unless they brought forth spiritual fruits in order to be worth of it. None were received unto baptism unless they came forth with a "broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repeated of all their sins." (6:2) After baptism, the candidates were numbered among, the people of the Church. Their names were taken in order that they might be remembered in the records; from thenceforth they were nourished "by the good word of God." (6:4)

The Nephites met together often, to fast and to pray, and to speak with one another concerning the salvation of their souls. Moreover, the sacrament was administered often among them. It is important also for us to notice that they were strict to see that no iniquity was among them. Whoever committed iniquity which could be proved through three witnesses of the Church was cut off unless he repented and confessed (6:7). The record is careful to explain, however, that as often as sinners repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven by their brethren (6:8). Their meetings were conducted under the influence of the Holy Ghost. Moroni says:

As the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done. (6:9)

These words should be of value to the Church today. Our meetings should be conducted under the influence of the Holy Spirit. Too often there is a tendency among officers to conduct meetings according to a fixed pattern. If the Spirit were allowed to dictate, our conduct of meetings might at times be considerably different from what it is. Hence the necessity of learning to understand and follow the dictates of the Holy Spirit.

We are indebted to Moroni for writing down a sermon of his father concerning the great Christian teachings of faith, hope, and charity. The text says (ch. 7) that Mormon spoke these words in a synagogue which had been built as a place of worship.

From Mormon's sermon, it appears that he was heavily influenced by words of Christ which must have been written down at the time of his appearance unto the Nephites. Many of the things which he said will be recognized as having their counterpart in the New Testament. One of the first matters to which our attention is called in the sermon is the fact that Mormon states that men shall be known by their works. If men's works are good, it may be presumed that they are good also. It is hard for an evil man to do that which is good, for unless he offers a gift or praise unto God with real intent, it profits him nothing. Verses 8 to 11 are especially important. Here we learn that an evil man gives his gifts grudgingly. Therefore it may be assumed that when men perform deeds which appear good in the sight of others but which in reality are grudgingly offered, the act is counted evil before God. In applying this principle to our present age, we may assume that if we pay tithing or ward maintenance or fast offerings to the Church, and do so grudgingly, it is not counted a righteous deed in the eyes of God. Men who pray without real intent are accounted as evil; such prayer profits the individual nothing, and God does not receive it.

The prophet explains that a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water, nor can a good fountain bring forth bitter water. Therefore, a real servant of Christ cannot follow the devil or be a servant of the devil (7:11). We are informed that God invites and entices men to do good continually, but the evil one is an enemy unto God, fights against him constantly, and invites and entices to sin. It is given to men to know good from evil. The good is plain and may be known as clearly as daylight is distinguished from darkness. Mormon teaches that the spirit of Christ is given to every man so that he may know good from evil (7:12-16).

In verse 20, Mormon asks the question, "My brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing?" He explains how men may come to that faith which will cause them to lay hold of every good thing: God knowing all things, sent angels to minister to men and to tell them about the coming of Christ. Moreover, prophets were sent who gave instruction concerning his coming. Through the word of God, men begin to exercise faith in Christ. By faith they become the sons of God. Because of men's faith, God has permitted miracles to be manifested unto them. Nor shall the day come when miracles will be taken away from the Church, except under conditions of wickedness and abominations. As long as men have faith, the Holy Ghost will not be withheld from them; without it, they cannot be saved. Nor have angels ceased to appear to men (7:21-39).

Through hope in Christ men may attain faith. They may have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection to be raised to life eternal (7:41). Faith and hope seem to be closely related, for, as Mormon says, "if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope." (7:42) And again, "Behold I say unto you that be cannot have faith and hope, save he shall be meek, and lowly of heart." (7:43) Without faith and hope men are not acceptable before God.

From verses 45-47 one judges that Mormon was acquainted with the same teachings on faith, hope and charity as are found in Chapter 13 of First Corinthians. In fact, some of his words are so similar to those in Paul's epistle that many have concluded that Joseph Smith quoted them verbatim from the New Testament. (Compare 7:45-46 and 1 Corinthians 13:4-8.) The writer believes, however, that both Mormon and Paul had access to the same sermon by Jesus concerning faith, hope, and charity, unfortunately, the sermon is not quoted either in Third Nephi or in the New Testament. It may be presumed, however, that no man in the history of the world was better able to speak on faith, hope, and charity than was Jesus. Mormon and Paul both preached the same gospel and had access to the same teachings. [^2] Therefore, it ought not to surprise us that their words are somewhat similar. Mormon ended by exhorting his brethren to pray to the Father with all the energy of their hearts in order that they might be filled with His love and be purified even as He is pure (7:48).

Chapters 8 and 9 of Moroni contain two pastoral epistles from Mormon to his son. The reader will remember that in the New Testament there are three epistles of Paul which are called "pastoral." The pastorals in question are 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus. The name "pastoral" refers to the general nature of their contents, which unites and yet separates them from the other New Testament epistles. Pastoral epistles all deal more or less with the duties of the presiding officer in a given branch or center of the Christian Church. We call these letters of Mormon "pastorals" because of the fact that he writes them to his son Moroni, who was engaged in the ministry, giving advice, counsel, and personal experience in much the same way that Paul writes to Timothy and Titus. We may ask, what was the situation that brought forth the first letter of Mormon to his son? It appears that Moroni had recently, been called to the ministry. In fact, the opening words of Chapter 8 state:

An epistle of my father Mormon, written to me, Moroni; and it was written unto are soon after my calling to the ministry.

It may be taken for granted that by "ministry" is meant missionary labor. It would appear that in the course of Moroni's missionary labors he seems to have encountered persons in a certain branch of the Nephite Church who were contending that little children should be baptized. Those who held to this doctrine apparently aroused much concern and unrest in the young missionary's heart. Therefore he wrote to his father Mormon telling him about the situation and doubtless asking his advice. The creeping of the false doctrine of child-baptism into the Nephite church caused Mormon to write the letter, as these words show:

And now, my son, I speak unto you concerning that which grieveth me exceedingly; for it grieveth me that there should disputations rise among you. For, if I have learned the truth, there have been disputations among you concerning the baptism of your little children. And now, my son, I desire that ye should labor diligently, that this gross error should be removed from among you; for, for this intent I have written this epistle. For immediately after I had learned of these things of you I inquired of the Lord concerning the matter. And the word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying: Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole ["strong," "well," morally speaking], for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me. (8:4-8)

The reader will observe the great concern of Mormon over the fact that heresies were creeping into the Nephite church. He, as a great leader and prophet, wanted to head them off. The remainder of the letter, through verse 26, is a masterly and spiritual presentation of the case against child-baptism. Verses 26-29 throw considerable light on Mormon's character and personality. Apparently he was at a considerable distance from his son Moroni and was acting in a military capacity for his people. In verse 27 he says:

Behold, my son, I will write unto you again if I go not out soon against the Lamanites. Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except they should repent.

Mormon asks his son to pray for the Nephites that repentance may come to them; he plainly indicates his great concern for the future of the nation. The true greatness of Mormon as a leader and a patriot is shown in this letter. "No nation," he seems to say between the lines, "can endure and become great except through the personal righteousness of its members." He ends his letter by saying: "Farewell, my son, until I shall write unto you, or shall meet you again. Amen." (8:30)

The, second letter of Mormon (Moroni 9) to Moroni must have been written a considerable time after the first, for it had been necessary for him to go out to battle against the Lamanites (9:1-2; cf. 8:27). The fact that Mormon had been engaged in battle, the effects of which were still fresh on his mind, caused him to write a letter much different from the first. This letter is not doctrinal; it tells largely about the cruelty, bestiality, and sadism of the hardhearted and unrepentant nation of Nephites. Mormon speaks very sadly of his people:

O the depravity of my people! They are without order and without mercy. Behold, I am but a man, and I have but the strength of a man, and I cannot any longer enforce my commands. And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which is good; and the suffering of our women and our children upon all the face of this land doth exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be written. (9:18-19 )

This letter of Mormon's is heavy with his description of the wickedness of the Nephite people; nevertheless, he does not forget his ministry or that of his son. He makes the following noble statements, which are an index to his character:

And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God.

. . . My son, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever. (9:6, 25)

From these words we can see that Mormon's letter is truly pastoral despite the abominations of which he writes concerning his people. The deeply religious character of Mormon is displayed in it. Despite the iniquities and terrible sins of his people, he still wants to reach out a helping hand to them. He seems to believe that the souls of men and women are seldom so bad that they cannot return to God. He realizes the tremendous responsibility of being in the ministry. The gospel of Christ is given to men for the purpose of saving them and not damning them. Mormon makes that fact very plain in the letter to his son. This letter should be better appreciated than it is in the Church, because it contains spiritual values of great worth to all men.

When were Mormon's two pastoral epistles written? An exact answer to this question cannot be given. The contents of the letters seem to indicate a time late in Nephite history, when the nation was ripe for destruction. Thus Mormon in the first letter, while commenting on the Nephites, says:

And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my son, they must perish soon, unto the fulfilling of the prophecies which were spoken by the prophets, as well as the word of our Savior himself. (8:29)

Moreover, the letters must have been written sometime after Mormon had reconsidered his decision not to lead the wicked Nephites into battle (Mormon 5:1; cf. Mormon 3:16), for in the first letter to his son the great leader mentions, as we have seen, the possibility of his going out against the Lamanites to battle (8:27). The decision to lead the Nephites once more in battle seems to have been made shortly before A.D. 380 (Mormon 5:1-6). In the second letter to his son, Mormon writes:

I trust that I may see thee soon; for I have sacred records that I would deliver up unto thee. (9:24)

We know that by 384 Moroni already had in his possession the sacred records mentioned by his father (Mormon 6:6). All things considered, it seems quite probable that Mormon's letters to Moroni were written sometime between 380 and 384.

We noticed in the first chapter of Moroni's book that he was much concerned about the future of the Lamanites. It will be observed also in Chapter 10 that he is still thinking of the Lamanite remnant in the latter days. The prophet writes in the year 420, as the first verse indicates. Beginning with verse 3, he exhorts the Lamanites of the latter days to remember how merciful the Lord has been to mankind from the creation of Adam even down to the time that they shall receive his words. He promises them that if they will read the contents of the Book of Mormon with a sincere heart and with real intent, having faith in Christ, the truthfulness of this scripture will be manifested unto them by the power of the Holy Ghost. "And," he says, "by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (10:5)

Then he deals with the gifts of the spirit which are given to profit men under various circumstances. Verses 8 to 18 give substantially the same teachings concerning the gifts of the Spirit that are found in Chapter 12 of 1 Corinthians and in Section 46 of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^3] After explaining the nature of these gifts, he states that they are spiritual and will never be done away with so long as the world shall stand, unless men shall cease to believe in God. He exhorts all men to have faith, hope, and charity. Except for these qualities they cannot enter or be saved in the kingdom of God. Furthermore, he warns his readers that they shall see him at the bar of God and the Lord will say unto them:

Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? (10:27)

The prophet explains that God's word shall hiss forth from generation to generation, and he exhorts men to come unto Christ and lay hold upon every good gift. He then quotes Isaiah 52:1-2, which has reference to the Zion of the latter days (10:31). The complete explanation of this passage from Isaiah will be found in verses 7-10 of Section 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Those readers who will study these words may understand the concern and joy which Moroni spoke of the work of God which was to take place in the latter days in this land.

In the very last verse of this chapter, Moroni seems to express a premonition of his coming death. He says:

And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. Amen. (10:34)

The writings of Moroni reveal him to be a great and noble soul. He seems to have been a powerful person both physically and mentally, reminding us of his father Mormon in those respects. He was a true son of his father, in that he had those qualities and characteristics which are typical of the true follower of Jesus Christ.

---
Notas:
[^1] A twofold postulate is made to the effect that a prophet always spoke out of a definite historical situation to the present needs of the people among whom he lived; and that a definite historical situation must be pointed out for each prophecy. The Jewish and Christian churches (apart from the gently hinted doubts of Ibn Izra in the twelfth century A.D.) have until the last one hundred and fifty years unhesitatingly assigned the whole to Isaiah, the son of Amoz. Such a strong and persistent tradition cannot honestly be set aside without positive and compelling historical evidence. Such is missing. Subjective analysis of the text of Isaiah, the results of which are disputed, cannot be accounted sufficient grounds upon which to put aside the ancient tradition. Is the text of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon word for word the same as that of the King James Version? If it is, the claims made that the original on the gold plates harks back to the time of Isaiah can be denied. In other words, the Book of Mormon should be thrown out of court as a witness to the original text of Isaiah. This would be a reasonable action because every Biblical scholar knows that the Hebrew text of Isaiah upon which the King James Version mainly depends has been corrupted somewhat in the course of transmission through the ages. If the Book of Mormon reproduced all these corruptions, there would be plain evidence that Joseph Smith did not translate from a really ancient text of Isaiah.
[^2] The literary style of those chapters held not to be from Isaiah is very different from those which are admitted to be that prophet's. The Septuagint and other ancient versions of scripture give absolutely no hint of the multiple authorship of Isaiah. It is a most surprising fact that the Septuagint (Greek) translation of Isaiah, which was made from the Hebrew about 200 B.C., does not give us the name of a single one of the ten or more "prophets" that are assumed by various critics to have contributed to Isaiah's book. "Singular ... that history should have lost all knowledge of this Isaianic series of prophets. Singular ... that it should be these prophets whose names had the common fortune of being forgotten, although in point of time they all stood nearer to the collector than the old prophet who was their model, and after whom they had formed themselves." (Franz Delitzsch, op. cit., Vol I, P. 13; italics ours.) What is the testimony of the ancient Greek, Syriac, and Latin versions of Isaiah respecting that in the Book of Mormon? These versions have also become corrupted in the course of transmission through the centuries, but bit tire laws of chance they ought to agree in some instances with the readings of the Book of Mormon where the latter differs from the Hebrew. That is to say, each occasionally preserves a true reading of Isaiah where the Hebrew fails us, and in such places where the true text of Isaiah appears the Book of Mormon should agree. In general we should be prepared to admit that the science of textual criticism will throw great light on the asserted antiquity of the text of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon. Critical tests can be most subtle and powerful in probing for slips on the part of unlearned impostors who offer amended Biblical texts for the examination of the public.
[^3] The theological ideas of the non-Isaianic Portions of the prophecy differ from those of Isaiah. To quote Driver again: Christ and his Apostles assigned the book to Isaiah. The New Testament quotes from thirty-two chapters of Isaiah. Many of these chapters are quoted several times. Fourteen chapters from 1-35 are represented and eighteen chapters from 40-66. The distribution is excellent. There is not the slightest hint anywhere in the New Testament that any other prophet than Isaiah the son of Amoz was the author of the quoted passages. In fact, the emphasis is the other way. Notice that Christ quotes the prophecy in Isaiah 61:1, 2 and expressly states that it was fulfilled at that time (see Luke 4:18-21). Luke, a capable historian, writes that Christ was given "the book of the prophet Isaiah" (Luke 4:17) from which he quoted the fulfilled prophecy. Observe also that the learned and critical Paul, who quotes Isaiah so often and from so many different places (see especially Romans), knows of no equivalent to "Deutero" or "Trito" Isaiah.
