Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 28

The Church Among Book of Mormon Peoples

It is difficult to give a connected account of ecclesiastical organization among the Jaredites, who were tire earliest Book of Mormon peoples. The fact is that the word "church" does not occur at all in the Book of Ether, which is practically our only source of in formation concerning the Jaredites. When Moroni produced his very limited abridgment of the book, he seemed interested only in giving a bare outline of Jaredite history and of the manner in which theses people were cut off from the presence of the Lord when they became ride in iniquity. (See Ether 2:15.)

We do know that the Jaredites had some great prophets. The brother of Jared, who is mentioned early in the record, must have been one of the greatest prophets the world has ever seen (Ether 4:4, 7). Ether, the last prophet of the Jaredite nation, was another spiritual giant (Ether 13:13), but of the part the prophets may have played in a formal church organization nothing is said.

When we turn to the history of the Nephites, we are favored with more information, but even here one is faced with great gaps in the record.

An examination of 1 Nephi discloses that Father Lehi, before leaving Jerusalem, was one among many prophets who warned the Jews to repent or face the destruction of their capital city (1 Nephi 1:4-20). In other words, Lehi must have been a prophet and teacher of the same faith as Jeremiah, whom he may have known well. However. nothing is said of a formal church organization among the Jews until Chapter 4 is reached. This is the chapter which tells how Lehi's son Nephi obtained from Laban, the keeper of the records, possession of the Brass Plates containing the Hebrew scriptures. At the Lord's behest Nephi slew Laban (1 Nephi 4:10-13) and proceeded to impersonate him in the presence of the servant who had the keys of the treasury where the records were kept. Nephi's description of the incident follows:

And after I had smitten off his head with his own sword, I took the garments of Laban and put them upon mine own body; yea, even every whit; and I did gird on his armor about my loins. And after I had done this, I went forth unto the treasury of Laban. And as I went forth towards the treasury of Laban, behold, I saw the servant of Laban who had the keys of the treasury. And I commanded him in the voice of Laban, that he should go with me into the treasury. And he supposed me to his master, Laban, for he beheld the garments and also the sword girded about my loins. And he spake unto me concerning the elders of the Jews, he knowing that his master, Laban, had been out by night among them. And I spake unto as if it had been Laban. And I also spake unto him that I should carry the engravings, which were upon the plates of brass, to my elder brethren, who were without the walls. And I also bade him that he should follow me. And he, supposing that I spake of the brethren of the church, and that I was truly that Laban whom I had slain, wherefore he did follow me. And he spake unto me times concerning the elders of the Jews, as I went forth unto my brethren, who were without the walls. (1 Nephi 4:19-27)

Two phrases in this passage arrest our attention. They are "elders of the Jews" and "the brethren of the church." The first may or may not have reference to Jews holding priestly office; the work "elder " was probably a title of honor applied among, the Jews to various classes of dignitaries. This particular phrase occurs only once in the Bible, and their in the New Testament (Luke 7:3).

The second phrase clearly indicates the existence of an ecclesiastical organization among the Jews, the details of which Old Testament scholars would give much to know. We may safely assume that the Jewish church was at the time racked and torn by apostasy. A few priests from among the Levites and the prophets to whom Nephi refers (1 Nephi 1:4) doubtless constituted the leadership of the faithful minority. Laban, on the other hand, was probably a member of the worldly clique who, to all outward appearances, had control of the church.

It is apparent throughout the Small Plates of Nephi that the early Nephites belonged to a family organization which worshiped in many respects like the Jewish church when that organization was true to God. The details of the spiritual organization are not given, but it is clear that the law of Moses was kept. Here is air instance:

And now, when I, Nephi, had heard these words [commanding him to slay Laban], I remembered the words of the Lord which he spake unto me in the wilderness, saying that: Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise. Yea, and I also thought that they could not keep the commandments of the Lord according to the law of Moses, save they should have the law. And I also knew that the law was engraven upon the plates of brass. And again, I knew that the Lord had delivered Laban into my hands for this cause—that I might obtain tire records according to his commandments. (1 Nephi 4:14-17)

Faithful member also looked forward to the coming of Christ. Lehi and Nephi were shown in vision the ministry of John the Baptist, the ministry and death of the Savior, and the twelve apostles of the Lamb (1 Nephi 10:7-10; 1 Nephi 11:13-34). Therefore we may conclude that the Nephites in earliest times understood the functions of the Melchizedek as well as the Aaronic Priesthood. Nephi further writes:

Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him. And also my soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord which he hath made to our fathers; yea, my soul delighteth in his grace, and in his justice, and power; and mercy in the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death. And my soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come all men must perish. For if there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he cometh in the fulness of his own time. (2 Nephi 11:4-7)

Jacob, the brother of Nephi, makes it clear that he and others labored among his people to bring them unto Christ:

And we also had many revelations, and the spirit of much prophecy; wherefore, we knew of Christ and his kingdom, which should come. Wherefore we labored diligently among our people, that we might persuade them to come unto Christ, and partake of the goodness of God, that they might enter into his rest, lest by any means he should swear in his wrath they should not enter in, as in the provocation in the days of temptation while the children of Israel were in the wilderness. (Jacob 1:6,7)

Old Testament scholars would be surprised to know that all the prophets before Jacob's time knew of Christ and looked forward to his coming, because the prophet writes:

We knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us. Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him, and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son. (Jacob 4:4,5)

The true intent of the law of Moses was abundantly clear to the faithful Nephites. It is also manifest that the worship of the Nephites was on a high Christian level, in spite of the Law.

It appears that under the Aaronic Priesthood priests and teachers were consecrated. Nephi tells of consecrating his brothers, Jacob and Joseph:

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did consecrate Jacob and Joseph, that they should be priests and teachers over the land of my people. (2 Nephi 5:26; cf Jacob 1:18)

Jacob later writers of having been "ordained after his [God's] holy order, and having been consecrated by my brother Nephi." (2 Nephi 6:2) Apparently he received the Melchizedek Priesthood.

In the Book of Jarom mention is made of prophets in addition to priests and teachers:

Wherefore, the prophets, and the priests, and the teachers, did labor diligently, exhorting with all long-suffering the people to diligence; teaching the law of Moses, and the intent for which it was given; persuading them to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was. And after this manner did they teach them. (Jarom 11)

What was the status of prophets and teachers? When Nephi spoke of ordaining his brothers, he said that he consecrated them both "priest and teachers." (Italics ours) The word "teacher" is evidently used in its general sense rather than as an office in the priesthood. In the quotation from the Book of Jarom the word may have either meaning. It is possible a few men of understanding were appointed to teach who did not hold the priesthood. The priesthood is held so commonly in the Church today that we do not always realize that under the law of Moses a few men may have been authorized to teach who did not hold the priesthood. On the other hand, it is probable that all the prophets, even before the coming of Christ, held the Melchizedek priesthood. The practice in this respect must have been very similar to that in the ancient Jewish church.

The reader may have noticed that up to this point we have carefully avoided the implication that the early Nephites—those spoken of in the Small Plates of Nephi—had a formal church organization. We have spoken of these Nephites as a "family organization" which worshiped God, which had the priesthood, and which seems to have understood the value and worth of the true Church of Christ. Nephi refers repeatedly to the "great and abominable church" and to churches built up in the latter days and "not unto the Lord" (2 Nephi 28:3), but he is also very specific in referring to "God and the people of his church." (2 Nephi 25:14) Nevertheless, not a word is said about his own people belonging to a formal church organization, though it is implied (2 Nephi 31:17). Indeed, it is not until we reach the eighteenth chapter of Mosiah that the formal organization of the Church is mentioned. There we are told that the elder Alma's baptized converts were "called the church of Christ, from that time forward." (Mosiah 18:17.) When Alma's followers were finally joined to the main body of the Nephite people under King Mosiah, the king granted Alma permission to establish branches of the Church throughout the land of Zarahemla:

And it came to pass that king Mosiah granted unto Alma that he might establish churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla; and gave him power to ordain priests and teachers over every church. Now this was done because there were so many people that they could not all be governed by one teacher; neither could they all hear the word of God in one assembly; therefore they did assemble themselves together in different bodies, being called churches; every church having their priests and their teachers, and every priest preaching the word according as it was delivered to him by the mouth of Alma. And thus, notwithstanding there being many churches they were all one church, yea, even the church of God; for there was nothing preached in all the churches except it were repentance and faith in God. And now there were seven churches in the land of Zarahemla. And it came to pass that whosoever were desirous to take upon them the name of Christ, or of God, they did join the churches of God; and they were called the people of God. And the Lord did pour out his Spirit upon them, and they were blessed, and prospered in the land. (Mosiah 25:19-24)

It should be emphasized that although Alma carried on the actual work of organizing the Church, it was done under the immediate direction and authority of Mosiah, who was a seer (Mosiah 8:13-15). Alma seems to have been ordained or set apart as high priest and given complete authority over the Church:

And it came to pass that they [dissenters and sinners] were brought before the priests, and delivered up unto the priests by the teachers; and the priests brought before Alma, who was the high priest. Now king Mosiah had given Alma the authority over the church. (Mosiah 26:7,8. See also Mosiah 23:16,17 where Alma is spoken of in a general sense as "high priest, he being the founder of their church.")

In after years the elder Alma seems to have been especially remembered for his work in organizing the Church among the Nephites, for Mormon speaks of him as the "founder of their Church." (Mosiah 29:47)

We observe that years later the younger Alma ordained priests and elders:

And now it came to pass that after Alma had made an end of speaking unto the people of the church, which was established in the city of Zarahemla, he ordained priests and elders, by laying on his hands according to the order of God, to preside and watch over the church. (Alma 6:1)

The practice of the Nephites in ordaining elders must have been a considerable departure from the practice in the ancient Hebrew church after the days of Moses. The Doctrine and Covenants states the practice in ancient Israel:

Therefore, he [the Lord] took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; and the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John,... (84:25-27).

The Prophet Joseph Smith pointed out, however, that the prophets of Israel held the Melchizedek Priesthood, being ordained under the hand of God (Compendium, Revelation Ed. 1914, p. 270). It would appear that while the Nephites were held to the observance of the law of Moses down to the coming of Christ (2 Nephi 25:24,25), they were given a special blessing as far as the Melchizedek Priesthood was concerned.

It is to be observed that baptism was practiced in the Nephite church; the ordinance must often have been accompanied by the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. Even in early times Nephi urged his people to come to Christ through the gate of repentance and baptism:

For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost. (2 Nephi 31:17; see also verses 11-14)

The conferring of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands is another ordinance in which the Nephite church had at times a decided advantage over the ancient Jewish church under the law of Moses. Even John the Baptist seems not to have held keys of that authority, for his baptism was unto repentance only (Matthew 3:11; Acts 19:1-7). Strangely enough, the Book of Mormon makes no explicit reference to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost while the Nephite observed the law of Moses, but because of our knowledge of the priesthood we assume that the ordinance was occasionally performed. (Notice implications in 2 Nephi 31:13,17; Alma 6:1.) An apparent reference to the ordinance is found in Alma 31:36. It concerns the younger Alma, who was doing missionary work with Ammon, Aaron, Omner, Amulek, and Zeezrom among the Zoramites. The context makes no allusion whatever to baptism, but the text says:

Now it came to pass that when Alma had said these words, that he clapped his hands upon all them who were with him. And behold, as he clapped his hands upon them, they were filled with the Holy Spirit.

However, the text of Alma 8:30 indicates that Amulek had previously enjoyed the Holy Ghost. The same gift must also have been enjoyed previously by the others. We should assume, then, that Alma was able to bless his brethren in this particular instance with a special manifestation of God's goodness.

A very interesting instance of baptismal practice is described in Mosiah 18. This chapter tells how the elder Alma, a disciple of Abinadi the prophet, went to the waters of Mormon to teach people who flocked to him. After a time he advised that they covenant with God by being baptized. The description of the manner of baptism and of the reception of the Spirit is noteworthy:

And now it came to pass that Alma took Helam, he being one of the first, and went and stood forth in the water, and cried, saying: O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that he may do this work with holiness of heart. And when he had said these words, the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he said: Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God, as a testimony that ye have entered into a covenant to serve him until you are dead as to the mortal body; and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may he grant unto you eternal life, through the redemption of Christ, whom he has prepared from the foundation of the world. After Alma had said these words, both Alma and Helam were buried in the water; and they arose and came forth out of the water rejoicing, being filled with the Spirit. And again, Alma took another, and went forth a second time into the water, and baptized him according to the first, only he did not bury himself again in the water. (Mosiah 18:12-15)

Alma baptized 204 souls. As has been pointed out, it is written that those who were baptized were called "the church of God, or the church of Christ." (Mosiah 18:17)

We are then informed that Alma, "having authority from God," ordained priests—one priest to every fifty of their number (Mosiah 18:17). The priests were supposed to preach to their people and teach them things pertaining to God. They were also instructed to labor with their own hands for their support. The people were taught to love one another and to keep the Sabbath day holy. They were advised to impart of their substance to those in need and to walk uprightly before God (Mosiah 18:18-29). We are not told in this chapter how Alma received his priesthood or what office he held, but the reasonable assumption is that Abinadi ordained him. Moreover, he must have held at least the office of a priest at that time. Again, we observe that nothing is said about the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. That Alma's followers belonged to the Church of Christ reminds us of a passage in the Book of Alma which describes how a certain Nephite general, Moroni, prayed in behalf of his brethren who were called Christians:

And he prayed mightily unto his God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as there should a band of Christians remain to possess the land—for thus were all the true believers of Christ. who belonged to the church of God, called by those who did not belong to the church. And those who did belong to the church were faithful; yea, all those who were true believers in Christ took upon them, gladly, the name of Christ, or Christians as they were called, because of their belief in Christ who should come. And therefore, at this Moroni prayed that the cause of the Christians, and the freedom of the land might be favored. (Alma 46:13-16)

The fact that the Book of Mormon speaks of Christians before the coming of Christ strikes those not of our faith as being implausible. However, its not a strange fact or an anachronism to those who understand the gospel, because they are aware that the coming of Christ was well known to the prophets.

The deep and abiding knowledge which the ancient Nephite church had of the plan of redemption and of the Melchizedek Priesthood before Christ came is well illustrated in Alma 12, 13. In these chapters the younger Alma discusses the mysteries of God, death, immortality, spiritual death, the doctrine of the tree of life, Melchizedek, and high priest after the order of the Son of God. Even more surprising in certain respects is the reference to keys of sealing powers given Nephi, the son of Helaman:

Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God. Behold, I declare it unto thee in the presence of mine angels, that ye shall have power over this people, and shall smite the earth with famine, and with pestilence, and destruction, according to the wickedness of this people. Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people. And thus, if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in twain, it shall be done. And if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and become smooth, it shall be done. And behold, if ye shall say that God shall smite this people, it shall come to pass. (Helaman 10:6-10; cf. Matthew 16:19.)

These sealing powers of the priesthood were similar to certain of those held by Elijah in ancient Israel. Nephi used them to bring a famine in the land for the purpose of stirring up his people unto repentance (Helaman 11:3-18). We call attention to these powers of sealing to illustrate the great authority present at times in the Nephite church prior to the appearance of Christ. In fact, the text expressly refers to Nephi as a "man of God, having great power and authority given unto him from God." (Helaman 11:18.)

It should be pointed out that when the Nephites began to be ruled by judges (91 B.C.), the head of the Church was infrequently the chief judge also. This was true of the younger Alma, who is spoken of in the superscription of Alma 1 as the Chief Judge over the people of Nephi, and also the High Priest over the Church. (See also Mosiah 29:42.) Nephi, the son of Helaman II, seems also to have held both offices at the same time (see Helaman 3:37; cf. Helaman 10:6-11; Helaman 11:3-5; 3 Nephi 1:2,3).

A few years before the appearance of Christ, the Nephite church was nearly broken up by dissension and inequality among the people:

But it came to pass in the twenty and ninth year there began to be some disputing among the people, and some were lifted up unto pride and boasting because of their exceeding great riches, yea even unto great persecutions; for there were many merchants in the land, and also many lawyers, and many officers. And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning; yea, some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches. Some were lifted up in pride, and others were exceedingly humble; some did return railing for railing, while others would receive railing and persecution and all manner of afflictions, and would not turn and revile again, but were humble and penitent before God. And thus there became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the church began to be broken up; yea, insomuch that in the thirtieth year the church was broken up in all the land save it were among a few of the Lamanites who were converted unto the true faith; and they would not depart from it, for they were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord. (3 Nephi 6:10-14)

There seems to have been a professional class of high priests in the Church who conspired with chief judges and lawyers against inspired men and good government. It is well to quote at length a passage describing the situation:

Now there were many of the people who were exceeding angry because of those who testified of these things; and those who were angry were chiefly the chief judges, and they who had been high priests and lawyers; yea, all those who were lawyers were angry with those who testified of these things. Now there was no lawyer nor judge nor high priest that could have power to condemn any one to death save their condemnation was signed by the governor of the land. Now there were many of those who testified of the things pertaining to Christ who testified boldly, who were taken and put to death secretly by the judges, that the knowledge of their death came not unto the governor of the land until after their death. Now behold, this was contrary to the laws of the land, that any man should be put to death except they had power from the governor of the land—therefore a complaint came up unto the land of Zarahemla, to the governor of the land, against these judges who had condemned the prophets of the Lord unto death, not according to the law. Now it came to pass that they were taken and brought up before the judge to be judged of the crime which they had done, according to the law which had been given by the people. Now it came to pass that those judges had many friends and kindreds; and the remainder, yea, even almost all the lawyers and the high priests, did gather themselves together, and unite with the kindreds of those judges who were to be tried according to the law. And they did enter into a covenant one with another, yea, even into that covenant which was given by them of old, which covenant was given and administered by the devil, to combine against all righteousness. Therefore they did combine against the people of the Lord, and enter into a covenant to destroy them, and to deliver those who were guilty of murder from the grasp of justice, which was about to be administered according to the law. And they did set at defiance the law and the rights of their country; and they did covenant one with another to destroy the governor, and to establish a king over the land, that the land should no more be at liberty but should be subject unto kings. (3 Nephi 6:21-30)

It must be said to the credit of the prophet Nephi, who later became the Savior's chief apostle, that he worked with all his power to bring about a reformation among the people, and with some success (3 Nephi 7:15-26).

Let us now inquire into the nature of the Church established among the Nephites when the resurrected Christ appeared unto them. First of all, it should be observed that only the more righteous part of the people were preserved from the terrible cataclysms and destruction that ensued upon the crucifixion of Christ (3 Nephi 9:13; 3 Nephi 10:12, 13). Possibly most of this remnant were permitted to see and touch our Lord upon his appearance (3 Nephi 11:13-16, 19:1-5).

Among the first things that Jesus did was to appoint twelve men, with Nephi at the head, to minister unto the people (3 Nephi 11:18-22; 3 Nephi 12:1). That these men were ordained apostles there can be little doubt (see Moroni 2:1, 2). Repentance and baptism by water and by the Holy Ghost were stressed (3 Nephi 11:21-40). The conferring of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands was specifically authorized (Moroni 2:1-3). The Savior gave explicit instructions concerning the name of his Church:

Have they nor read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; and whoso take upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel. (3 Nephi 27:5-8)

Jesus made it plain to the Nephites that with his coming the law of Moses was done away with:

Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end. Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled. And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come. For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me. Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life. (3 Nephi 15:4-9)

One may assume, I believe, that the Church of Christ was set upon in its completeness among the Nephites; nevertheless, it is vain to look in the sacred record for any mention of the ordination of high priests, seventies, patriarchs, bishops, and deacons. High councils are not referred to; neither is there any reference to auxiliary organizations, not to mention temple work. Of this last we may be sure that the Savior had much to say, since he quoted chapters three and four of Malachi (3 Nephi 24, 25) and "expounded them to the multitude". (3 Nephi 26:1) In fact, "He did expound all things unto them, both great and small". We have not mentioned the fact, but it should be said that the Nephites had temples throughout most of their history. In early times Nephi constructed one after the order of Solomon's temple:

And I, Nephi, did build a temple; and I did construct it after the manner of the temple of Solomon save it were not built of so many precious things; for they were not to be found upon the land, wherefore, it could not be built like unto Solomon's temple. But the manner of the construction was like unto the temple of Solomon; and the workmanship thereof was exceeding fine. (2 Nephi 5:16)

On the Savior's appearance to the Nephites the latter were "round about the temple which was in the land Bountiful". (3 Nephi 11:1)

Before our Lord's coming, ordinances of a limited nature were probably performed for the living in the temples; after his coming full ordinances for both living and dead were doubtless instituted. Details of these facts have been withheld from us because it was the prerogative of the Prophet Joseph Smith to reveal them to this generation. The same may be said of the great social order of having all things in common which was instituted among the Nephites (4 Nephi 3).

A few details of Church procedure and customs among the Nephites are revealed by Moroni in the book called by his name (Moroni 2-6). He tells us the manner in which the Holy Ghost was conferred, the manner of ordaining priests and teachers, the mode of administering the sacrament, and the way in which the Church met together to fast, pray, preach, and deal with its members. In Moroni 7 we see an example of the high Christian teaching on faith, hope, and charity as given by Mormon, one of the last great Nephite prophets.

Before concluding this chapter it will be well to point out a difficulty which often greets the student of the Nephite church in his attempt to understand the limitation of its powers before Christ's coming. We have already observed that when the Savior came he delegated authority to his servants to baptize both with water and with the Holy Ghost. In this manner repentant persons were admitted into the Church. Thus Nephi was invested with these powers (3 Nephi 11:21; 3 Nephi 12:1; Moroni 2:1, 2). However, before the coming of Christ we know that the Church existed and that Nephi had power to baptize (3 Nephi 7:25, 26). He had great power and authority in the ministry—indeed, so much so as to raise his brother from the dead (3 Nephi 7:17-21). Why, then, did Jesus have to give Nephi power again to baptize? The answer to this may not be too difficult. The earlier Church with its obligation to observe the law of Moses possibly had been very limited in its authority; moreover, the right of Nephi to baptize may have been restricted to the remission of sins in the same way as was John's, which we have already taken into account. It will be noticed that 3 Nephi 7:26 speaks only of "baptism unto repentance".

And there were many in the commencement of this year that were baptized unto repentance. . .

Baptism "unto repentance" would be normal procedure under the law of Moses. Therefore, we may assume that when Christ came and set up his Church in its fulness, Nephi needed to be invested with greater authority and powers than he had hitherto possessed. We are confronted, however, with the fact that in earlier times (as in the days of the younger Alma) the latter ordained "elders" (Alma 6:1). But men are not ordained elders in the Church unless they are first baptized and have received the gift of the Holy Ghost. And again we observe that in Alma's time the language used in relation to baptism states "unto repentance". (See Alma 5:62; Alma 7:14; Alma 9:27; cf. Helaman 3:24; Helaman 5:17, 19.) Some inconsistencies we point out are probably only apparent inconsistencies. Whenever the sacred record says that baptisms were "unto repentance" it does not necessarily always follow that hands were not laid on the heads of believers to convey the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Perhaps the following is a fair summation and explanation of most of the facts concerning the Church among the Nephites: When the Nephites first came to this continent, they probably had no formal church organization; but when their numbers increased considerably, they doubtless were commanded by the Lord to organize the Church. When Nephi, the son of Lehi, reminds his people that "the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost", he must be making an allusion to the Church (2 Nephi 31:17). The gate to it is repentance and baptism by water. The people of the Church were under obligation to keep the law of Moses; nevertheless, they had the Melchizedek Priesthood; many of them observed the spirit of the gospel and were baptized with water and the Holy Ghost. Prophets, priests, and teachers were consecrated among them; in the days of the elder Alma a formal church was organized for the first time among the Nephites after the flight of the elder Mosiah and a few others from the corrupt main body of the Nephite people. (See Jacob 3:4; cf. Omni 12-15; Mosiah 18:16-18; 3 Nephi 5:12.) This church was called the Church of Christ, or the Church of God. Alma was appointed the High Priest over the entire Church by the younger Mosiah, a seer with ample authority. In the time of the younger Alma, "the High Priest according to the holy order of God" (superscription Alma 5), elders as well as priests were ordained; consequently we may take it for granted that not all persons in the Nephite church before Christ's coming were baptized "unto repentance" only. Possibly only a few men were honored with the Melchizedek Priesthood. It appears that greater power and authority rested in the Church at certain times than at other times. Thus Nephi, the son of Helaman II, was vested with keys of sealing power similar in certain respects to those held by Elijah the prophet (Helaman 10:6, 7). Just prior to Christ's coming, the Church was almost broken up, but the prophet Nephi was able to baptize a few converts "unto repentance". After the appearance of the Savior, the Church was set up in all its fullness. The law of Moses was brought to an end, and a great new social order was set up. Men like Nephi were given more power and authority than they possessed before the coming of Christ. As the apostles passed away, others were appointed in their places (4 Nephi 14) until the time when apostasy finally gripped most of the Nephite nation. As with the Church in the Eastern Hemisphere, so in the Western Hemisphere—with the passing of divine authority the lights of the true church were snuffed out, and it remained for the Restoration to turn them on again. But with the passing of the Church went the whole Nephite nation in death and destruction, as the prophets had predicted.
