Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 29

The Concept of God in the Book of Mormon

It will be our purpose in this chapter to investigate in some detail the Nephite concept of Deity. The concept of God held by a people is an index to the quality of its religion. It has been said that man's idea of God is truly the acid test of his valuation of life and determines in great part his form of civilization. We agree that the idea of God is meant to be the highest and deepest conception of which the human mind is capable.

One of the surprises of our study has been the discovery of the large number of titles applied to Deity by the Nephite writers. Before listing these it will be well to point out that they seemed to believe in three distinct beings as constituting the supreme heavenly council (Alma 11:44). It may not always be possible in a given text to determine which particular member of the council is meant, but such instances are relatively few. When Abinadi the prophet quotes one of the Ten Commandments (Mosiah 13:15), the reader may ask what member of the council is meant by "the Lord thy God". The alert student of the Book of Mormon will be able to point out that it is in all probability the pre-existent Christ (3 Nephi 15:5), whereas the student of the Old Testament alone would scarcely be able to hazard more than a guess.

When in Helaman 10:6 we read, "Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God", the same difficulty exists, but the answer is probably the same as before. A passage concerning Deity which has offered considerable difficulty to many readers of the Book of Mormon is found in Mosiah 15:1-4. This scripture refers to God and his Son as "one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth", and to the Christ as "the Father and the Son". Let us quote the entire passage in order that the reader may have a clear picture of the difficulties:

And now Abinadi said unto them: I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people. And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son—the Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son—and they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth Mosiah 15:1-4).

Here Abinadi speaks of the Savior as "God himself", and then hastens to point out that he is called the Son of God because he was to come in the flesh. Evidently Abinadi is alluding to the fact that God the Father was to conceive Christ in the flesh. In referring to Jesus as "the Father and the Son" the prophet is not attempting to show that he is "two in one and one in two". What he seems to mean is that the Christ is the Father in the sense that he inherited the same qualities of heart and mind. It will be observed that Abinadi refers in verse 7 to the coming crucifixion and death of the Savior, "the will of the Son being, swallowed up in the will of the Father". The quotation points strongly to the perfect harmony and unity existing between two beings—the Father and the Son. Verse 8 seems to emphasize the distinct individuality of the Father and the Son:

And thus God [here the Father?] breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—

Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants may aid us in understanding Abinadi's teaching. Verses 3 and 4 read:

And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one—the Father because he gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men.

This scripture points to the unity of the Father and the Son in the sense that the latter received the qualities of the former, that is to say, "his fulness". Undoubtedly, Abinadi's teaching is to be interpreted in the same manner. However, it must be admitted that his doctrine in the case cited could have been more simply and clearly worded. The reader is referred to our much fuller discussion of the meaning of Abinadi's words in Chapter 16.

Some persons believe that there is an instance in the Book of Mormon in which the third member of the supreme heavenly council, the Holy Ghost, is shown to be a distinct male personage. When Nephi, the son of Lehi, desired to see and understand certain visions of his father, he was carried away "in the Spirit of the Lord" (1 Nephi 11:1) and his desires granted:

And he [Holy Ghost?] said unto me: What desirest thou? And I said unto him: To know the interpretation thereof—for I spake unto him as a man speaketh; for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and he spake unto me as a man speaketh with another. (1 Nephi 11:10, 11)

In fairness it should be explained that students of the Book of Mormon are by no means all agreed that this scripture has reference to the Holy Ghost. Some of them believe that it refers to the pre-existent Christ. However, after much detailed study, the writer has come to the very definite conclusion that Nephi was talking to the Holy Ghost in person. (See our discussion concerning 1 Nephi 11 in Chapter 9.) The phrase "Spirit of the Lord" occurs about forty times in the Nephite scripture. (See, e.g., 1 Nephi 1:12; 1 Nephi 7:14, 15; Mosiah 18:13; Alma 19:14; Alma 40:13; Helaman 4:24; Moroni 9:4. Those who believe that the quotation has reference to the pre-existent Christ should be prepared to explain references like the last two, which obviously refer to the Holy Ghost.)

Now, let us turn our attention to the titles applied by the Nephites to Deity. Following is a list of them. It is complete enough for most purposes:

Almighty God Spirit Alpha and Omega Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent Christ Lord Christ the Lord Lord God Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent Lord God Almighty Christ, the Lord Omnipotent Lord God Omnipotent Eternal Father of Heaven and Earth Lord God, who is the Almighty Eternal Head Lord and Savior Father Lord and the Redeemer God Lord God of Hosts God of Israel Lord Jesus Christ God of the land, who is Jesus Christ Lord of Hosts God, the eternal Father Lord of the Vineyard God, the Father Lord, Omnipotent Heavenly King Lord, our God Holy Ghost Lord, the Almighty God Holy God Lord, the King of Heaven Holy Messiah Lord, the Redeemer Holy One Lord, the Redeemer of Israel Messiah . . . a Savior Holy One of Israel Mighty God Holy One of Jacob Mighty One of Israel Holy Spirit, which is one eternal God Mighty one of Jacob Jehovah, the Eternal Judge Most High God Jesus Only begotten of the Father Jesus Christ Redeemer and God Jesus the Christ, the eternal God Redeemer of Israel, His Holy One Lamb Savior Lamb of God Son of God Son of the everlasting God Son of the eternal Father The Good Shepherd The King of all the Earth The King of Heaven

A few titles have been omitted from this list that occur in the quotations from the text of Isaiah and nowhere else in the Book of Mormon. The number of titles must cause a thinking person to reflect on what the probabilities would be of one man (such as Joseph Smith) deliberately inventing so many. It seems highly probable that these titles are due to the work of many writers and not one.

We may now examine the qualities and attributes ascribed by the Nephites to God. First, it is to be observed that they viewed God as a God of love. In a vision, Nephi talks with an angel who shows him many things:

And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father! Knowest thou the meaning of the tree which thy father saw? And I answered him, saying: Yea, it is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things. And he spake unto me, saying: Yea, and the most joyous to the soul. . . . And it came to pass that I beheld that the rod of iron, which my father had seen, was the word of God, which led to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life; which waters are a representation of the love of God. . . . (1 Nephi 11:21-23, 25)

During the golden era of Nephite history following the Savior's appearance on this continent, "there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people" (4 Nephi 15).

In the latest period of Nephite history, Mormon the great general, editor, and abridger speaks of loving his erring people according to the love of God which was in me, with all my heart. . . ." (Mormon 3:12)

Alma the Younger, who flourished about eighty years before the coming of Christ, advises his people to have "the love of God always in your hearts, that ye may be lifted up at the last day and enter into his rest." (Alma 13:29)

Not only was God a God of love, but a God of mercy and goodness. Thus, a converted Lamanite king addresses his people as follows:

I thank my God, my beloved people, that our great God has in goodness sent these our brethren, the Nephites, unto us to preach unto us, and to convince us of the traditions of our wicked fathers. . . . And the great God has had mercy on us, and made these things known unto us that we might not perish; yea, and he has made these things known unto us beforehand, because he loveth our souls as well as he loveth our children; therefore, in his mercy he doth visit us by his angels, that the plan of salvation might be made known unto us as well as unto future generations. Oh, how merciful is our God! . . . (Alma 24:7, 14, 15)

Father Lehi exclaimed:

Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty! Thy throne is high in the heavens, and thy power, and goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants of the earth; and, because thou art merciful, thou wilt not suffer those who come unto thee that they shall perish! (1 Nephi 1:14)

Mormon points out that the "Lord is merciful unto all who will, in the sincerity of their hearts, call upon his holy name". (Helaman 3:27) He also indicates that "all things which are good cometh of God", and that, moreover, "every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God." (Moroni 7:12, 13)

The Nephites looked upon God as a God of justice. To be sure, god was merciful, but the demands of justice had to be met. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, exclaimed:

O the greatness and the justice of our God! for he executeth all his words, and they have gone forth out of his mouth, and his law must be fulfilled. (2 Nephi 9:17)

He also pointed out that the "atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them". (2 Nephi 9:26)

Alma explains to his son Corianton the demands of justice in relation to the plan of man's redemption:

Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God. And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence. And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also . . . . And if there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature? But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God . . . . For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. (Alma 42:13-15, 21, 22, 24, 25)

The reader will do well to read all of Alma's words on the justice of God.

The prophets of the Book of Mormon looked upon God as a being who would contenance no hypocrisy or double-dealing. Nephi exhorted his brethren to "follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins". (2 Nephi 31:13) Moroni, the last prophet of the Nephite nation, addresses himself to men of the latter days and excoriates them by saying, "O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? (Mormon 8:38)

The Book of Mormon teaches that men are to serve God with a clear conscience, walking uprightly and circumspectly before him. King Benjamin declares that he had served his people, "walking with a clear conscience before God". (Mosiah 2:27) Writing of the people of Alma the Elder, Mormon says that "they did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants". (Mosiah 18:29) Later he writes of Alma's people again stating that they were "walking circumspectly before God". (Mosiah 26:37) These statements reveal a high conception of God.

God was looked upon as a God of truth. Nephi speaks of the "truth which is in the Lamb of God" and of the "truth which is in God", while the younger Alma writes of "the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth". (1 Nephi 13:24, 25; Alma 5:48) Later, Alma again speaks of the "Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience, mercy, and long-suffering, quick to hear the cries of his people and to answer their prayers". (Alma 9:26)

The brother of Jared said to the pre-existent Christ, "Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie." (Ether 3:12 )

The Nephites speak of God as a being to be trusted. Nephi says, "O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever", and Jacob speaks of his people as "trusting in the god and rock of their salvation". (2 Nephi 4:34; Jacob 7:25)

God was looked upon as the creator of all things. Father Lehi said to his sons that "there is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are, both things to act and things to be acted upon" (2 Nephi 2:14). Lehi's son Nephi, addressing his brothers, said, "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it". (1 Nephi 17:36)

King Benjamin speaks of "Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent. . . . who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all". (Mosiah 5:15) Alma said to Korihor the Anti-Christ, "The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator". (Alma 30:44)

It appears that God was regarded as knowing all things. Nephi says, "But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men". (1 Nephi 9:6) Mormon said that "the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will". (Words of Mormon 7) Moroni acknowledged that "God knoweth all things", and later said, "God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting, behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men". (Mormon 8:17; Moroni 7:22)

Mormon twice points out that God is neither a partial nor a changeable being:

But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial god, and also a changeable God, and a respecter of persons; for how many little children have died without baptism! . . . For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity. (Moroni 8:12, 18)

When God is spoken of as "unchangeable, what is probably meant is that he always acts in accordance with law. For the Nephites recognized that he is a God of law. Jacob said, "Wherefore, he [God] has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment", and the resurrected Lord said to the Nephites, "I am the law and the light". (2 Nephi 9:25; 3 Nephi 15:9)

The Book of Mormon conceives of god as mindful not only of the house of Israel, but of all people. Observe the universality in the lovely passage ascribed to Ammon, a Nephite missionary:

Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth. Now this is my joy, and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my God forever. Amen. (Alma 26:37)

God was viewed as a perfect being, and the younger Alma speaks of him as atoning for the sins of the world, in order to "appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also". (Alma 42:15) The Nephites also received the Savior's statement to the effect that "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect". (3 Nephi 12:48; cf. Matthew 5:48)

The Nephites ascribed to God their liberty and freedom upon this land. Lehi says that none shall come to this land save they are brought by the hand of the Lord, and that "if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity". (2 Nephi 1:7) Moroni, a commander of Nephite armies, on one occasion tore off a piece of his coat and wrote upon it;

In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children—and he fastened it upon the end of a pole. . . . and he took the pole, which had on the end thereof his rent coat, (and he called the title of liberty) and he bowed himself to the earth, and he prayed mightily unto his God for the blessing of liberty to rest upon his brethren. . . . (Alma 46:12, 13)

On still another occasion, we are told, the Nephites "turned upon the Lamanites and they cried with one voice unto the Lord their God, for their liberty and their freedom from bondage." (Alma 43:49)

The Nephite record clearly teaches that God is forgiving. Nephi says that he frankly forgave his erring brothers, "and I did exhort them that they would pray unto the Lord their God for forgiveness." (1 Nephi 7:21) The Lord instructed the elder Alma as follows:

For behold, this is my church; whosoever is baptized shall be baptized unto repentance. And whomsoever ye received shall believe in my name, and him will I freely forgive. . . . Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if the confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive; and I will forgive him also. Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me. (Mosiah 26:22, 29, 30)

Jacob, the prophet, looked upon God as a strict God, and speaks of the "strict commandment which I have received from God." (Jacob 2:9) Alma reminds his son Helaman "how strict are the commandments of God." (Alma 37:13)

God was conceived as a God of power. Nephi speaks of him as having" all power unto the fulfilling of all his words." (1 Nephi 9:6) King Benjamin admonished his people to "believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth, "and Mormon wrote", Know ye not the he hath all power, and at his great command the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll?" (Mosiah 4:9; Mormon 5:23)

The Nephites believed that God was a God of miracles. In an address to unbelievers Moroni said:

And now if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, their have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles. But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the heavens and earth, and all things that in them are. . . . And now, O all ye that have imagined up unto yourselves a god who can do no miracles, I would ask of you, have all these things passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? Behold I say unto you, Nay; and God has not ceased to be a God miracles. . . . Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by this word the heaven and the earth should be; and by the power of his word man was created of the dust of the earth; and by the power of his word have miracles been wrought? And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not many mighty miracles? And there were many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles. And if there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of miracles, and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you he changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a God of miracles. (Mormon 9:10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19)

He then goes on to point out that God ceases to do miracles among the children of men "because that they dwindle in unbelief, and depart from the right way, and know not the God in whom they should trust." (Mormon 9:20)

God was considered to be a judge. Nephi said that men "must be brought to stand before God, to be judged of their works," (1 Nephi 15:33) Moroni speaks of the "pleasing bar of the great Jehovah the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead." (Moroni 10:34) And Mormon tells us of "the great and coming day when all people must surely stand before the judgment-seat of Christ." (3 Nephi 28:31)

The Nephites assented to the Old Testament view that God was a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children (Mosiah 11:22, 13:13.) They also believed that men could stir up God to wrath. Speaking to his wayward sons, Lehi said:

My heart hath been weighed down with sorrow from time to time, for I have feared, lest for the hardness of your hearts the Lord your God should come out in the fulness of his wrath upon you, that ye be cut off and destroyed forever. . . . (2 Nephi 1:17)

Alma exhorted his brethren by saying, "Let us repent, and harden not our hearts, that we provoke not the Lord our God to pull down his wrath upon us" (Alma 12:37).

Sin was looked upon as abominable in the sight of God. Speaking to his brethren, Jacob said, "ye are beginning to labor in sin, which sin appeareth very abominable . . . unto God." (Jacob 2:5) Alma the Younger taught that the "Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (Alma 45:16)

God was regarded as a wise being. Jacob exclaimed, "O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace."(2 Nephi 9:8) In reference to the wickedness of King Noah's people, the great and good King Mosiah was led to say, "And were it not for the interposition of their all-wise Creator, and this because of their sincere repentance, they must unavoidably remain in bondage until now." (Mosiah 29:19)

A fairly complete view of the Nephite concept of God has been given. But we should be very remiss if we failed to emphasize that God was regarded as a holy being. Some of his titles, the reader will recall, indicate that the Nephites so regarded him. We may quote Jacob to this effect:

O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name. (2 Nephi 9:41)

Nephi speaks of the situation under which men may "shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel," and Mormon tells us how, in ease and prosperity, men "do trample under their feet the Holy One." (2 Nephi 31:13, Helaman 12:2) Mormon also reminds us that he was able to speak "by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy will." (Moroni 7:2) The brother of Jared, addressing his words to the Lord, said, "we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee." (Ether 3:2)

The evidence presented here must go far toward impressing one that at their best the Nephites people had a high and marvelous concept of God. Only when sin made them completely lose contact with him did their civilization topple and disappear. The people of our Church may feel proud to believe in the God revealed in the Book of Mormon.
