Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 30

Personal Religion and Brotherhood in the Book of Mormon

One of the outstanding religious characteristics found in the Book of Mormon is the warm personal relationship existing between God and his people. To the Nephite branch of Israel, God was not a remote being, shut off from men by a impenetrable veil and acting only though secondary causes and impersonal laws. He was a living, personal, dynamic being who entered into a covenant relationship with these people even as with the ancient Hebrews. The idea of a covenant between God and his people is expressed upwards of 115 times in the Nephite record. The close relationship existing between the Nephites and their God enabled them more completely to understand the conduct which God required. Therefore, we should not underrate or depreciate the significance of their sacred literature as a means to solution of many of our religious problems. To be sure, Nephite society, even in its periods of flowering must have been relatively simple and primitive compared with our own vast, complex, and highly organized social structure. Nevertheless, we may use much of their religious teaching just as it stands, because it express eternal principles, of righteousness which through generations of time remain immutably the same.

One of the expressions of personal religion in the Book of Mormon, and one which at the same time illustrates the close personal tie existing between God and his people, is given in the Book of Enos. Enos was the son of Jacob, brother of Nephi. The teachings of his great father touched his soul deeply, and he tells of a spiritual wrestle which he had before God prior to receiving a remission of his sins:

Behold, it came to pass that I, Enos, knowing my father that he was a just man—for he taught me in his language, and also in the nurture and admonition of the Lord—and blessed be the name of my God for it—and I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a remission of my sins. Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the word which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart. And my soul hungered; and kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens. And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed. And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away. And I said: Lord, how is it done? And he said unto me: Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou hast never before heard nor seen. And many years pass away before he shall manifest himself in the flesh; wherefore, go to, thy faith hath made thee whole. Now, it came to pass that when I had heard these words I began to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites; wherefore, I did pour out my whole soul unto God for them. And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into my minds again saying: I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my commandments. I have given unto them this land, and it is a holy land; and I cure it not save it be for the cause of iniquity; wherefore, I will visit thy brethren according as I have said; and their transgressions will I bring down with sorrow upon their own heads. (Enos 1-10)

This passage is notable not only for the great personal testimony which Enos received from God, but for his unselfishness in asking for the welfare of his brethren. He was rewarded in this desire, and the Lord honored his further requests. (See verses 12-18) Enos took the Lord at his word when he said, "Whatsoever thing ye shall ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it." (Enos 15)

Another great passage which illustrates the intimate relationship between God and his people is found in the Book of Ether. The brother of Jared prayed earnestly for the Lord to touch sixteen small stones for the purpose of providing light in the Jaredite vessels during their journey across the deep:

And it came to pass that when the brother of Jared had said these words, behold, the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger. And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood; and the brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he was struck with fear. And the Lord saw that the brother of Jared had fallen to the earth; and the Lord said unto him: Arise, why hast thou fallen? And he saith unto the Lord: I saw the finger of the Lord, and I feared lest he should smite me; for I knew not that the Lord had flesh and blood. And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this? And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me. And the Lord said unto him: Believest thou the words which I shall speak? And he answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie. And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord showed himself unto him, and said: Because thou knowest these things ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you. Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters. And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image. Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:6-16)

This scripture makes abundantly clear the thinness of the veil that separated righteous men from their God.

Since religion is known to find its concrete expression in community life and in its external relations, it may be well to give a brief sketch of the political and social development of the Nephite people. In their earliest history the Nephites were few in number and little more than nomads under the leadership and instruction of Nephi the son of Lehi (2 Nephi 5:19). When Nephi's elder brothers Laman and Lemuel sought to slay him, the people were split into two distinct groups (2 Nephi 5). These groups remained distinct and generally aloof from each other for almost the entire life of the Nephite nation. The Lamanites were distinguished from the Nephites by their dark skin with which the Lord cursed them, and he used them as a scourge against Nephi's people (2 Nephi 5:20-25). A tremendous amount of blood was shed on both sides in the course of their existence. Finally in accordance with the prophetic philosophy of history (see 2 Nephi 1:20; Jarom 9; Omni 6; Alma 38:1; etc.), the Nephite nation was cut down by the Lamanites.

After the split into two groups, Nephi was selected to be king of his people. He demurred at this but finally consented to do his best (2 Nephi 5:18). The people loved him so much that they called succeeding kings second Nephi, third Nephi and so on, in his remembrance, despite their other names (Jacob 1:10, 11). Presumably there was an unbroken line of monarchs down to the time of the elder Mosiah, who seems to have been a prophet warned by the Lord to flee away with his followers from the main body of Nephites, out of the land of Nephi (Omni 12). This was an important event in so far as the Book of Mormon is concerned, because the remainder of Nephite history seems only to concern the Mulekites and the descendants of Mosiah and his fellow fugitives. What became of the main body of Nephites is a mystery. They may eventually, because of wickedness, have been destroyed or have become identified with the Lamanites, but this supposition cannot be verified. Mosiah and his followers discovered another people known to us as Mulekites in the of Zarahemla, and they combined forces with Mosiah as king (Omni 14-19). At his death Mosiah was succeeded by his son Benjamin, who, in turn, was followed by this son Mosiah. Each of these kings was a benevolent and righteous man. In the day of King Benjamin a small group of his people went into the wilderness and became lost. Many years later they were enabled to return to Zarahemla, which was then under the rule of the younger Mosiah. These wanderers had had a hard time of it and had been ruled over by Zeniff, Noah and Limhi. The first and last named were just men, but Noah was a scoundrel. A small offshoot of these people in turn had been led by Alma, a prophet, into the wilderness. Finally, they, too, were enabled to return to Zarahemla. Before the death of the younger Mosiah, he persuaded his people to give up their monarchical form of government and adopt a rule by judges popularly elected. This they did, and the rule of kings ended about 91 B.C. (Mosiah 29:38-47) Apparently there were higher and lower judges, and the chief judge was also known as the governor of the land (Mosiah 29:28, 29; Alma 2:16; Mosiah 61:1; 3 Nephi 1:1). It appears that even during the days of the judges, religious authorities had certain civil powers and carried out judgments against offenders (Alma 30:20, 21, 29; 3 Nephi 6:21, 22, 27).

The last mention of judges in the Book of Mormon is found in 3 Nephi 6:27, just before the appearance of the resurrected Christ to the righteous of the Nephite people. The exact nature of Nephite government after the coming of Christ is unknown, but it may be assumed that it was a theocracy because the people had all things in common and because of the love and happiness among them (4 Nephi 3, 15-18). Only after divisions had taken place among the people about A.D. 200 would other forms of government appear again. The last years of Nephite government were probably carried out under military leadership.

The student of religion is interested in discovering the attitude of Nephites governments toward injustice, the poor, the rich, cruelty, luxury, slavery, and other social questions. In earliest times, that is to say, in the days of Nephi, we know that as a prophet-king he ruled with justice, equity, and righteousness. We know little or nothing about the attitude of the kings who succeeded him—at least to the days of the elder Mosiah (Omni 12)—toward the social issues mentioned above. But judging from the prophetic writings of Jacob, Enos, Jarom, and Amaleki, we are justified in assuming the existence of much social injustice during the period concerned. Jacob bitterly attacked the illicit marriage practices of Nephites who took unto themselves many wives and concubines:

And now it came to pass that the people of Nephi, under the reign of the second king, began to grow hard in their hearts, and indulge themselves somewhat in wicked practices, such as like unto David of old desiring may wives and concubines, and also Solomon, his son. (Jacob 1:15)

The prophet excoriated the men were guilty of breaking the heart of their legitimate wives and children:

Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you. . . (Jacob 2:35)

Jacob chastised those who because of their riches and luxuries persecuted their less fortunate brethren:

And the hand of providence hath smiled upon you most pleasingly, that you have obtained many riches; and because some of you have obtained more abundantly than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of yours hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they. And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that God justifieth you in this thing? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But he condemneth you, and if ye persist in these things his judgments must speedily come unto you. O that he would show you that he can pierce you, and with one glance of this eye he can smite you to the dust! O that he would rid you from this iniquity and abomination. And, O that ye would listen unto the word of his commands, and let not this pride of your hearts destroy your souls! Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. (Jacob 2:13-18)

The prophet Jarom spoke of his people in similar terms:

Behold, it is expedient that much should be done among this people, because of the hardness of their hearts, and the deafness of their ears, and the blindness of their minds, and the stiffness of their necks; nevertheless, God is exceeding merciful unto them, and has not as yet swept them off from the face of the land. (Jarom 3)

It is also evident that the elder Mosiah and his followers would scarcely have fled from the main body of Nephites except for the extreme unrighteousness and unsocial attitude of their contemporaries.

The attitude of King Benjamin toward the rich and poor may be judged from the following extract from his great sermon:

And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another. And if ye judge the man who putteth up his petition to you for your substance that he perish not, and condemn him, how much more just will be your condemnation for withholding your substance, which doth not belong to you but to God, to whom also your life belongeth; and yet ye put up no petition, nor repent of the thing which thou hast done. I say unto you, woe be unto that man, for his substance shall perish with him; and now, I say these things unto those who are rich as pertaining to the things of this world. And again, I say unto the poor, ye who have not and yet have sufficient, that ye remain from day to day; I mean all you who deny the beggar, because ye have not; I would that ye say in your hearts that: I give because I have not, but if I had I would give. And now, if ye say this in your hearts ye remain guiltless, otherwise ye are condemned; and your condemnation is just for ye covet that which ye have not received. And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you—that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants. (Mosiah 4:21-26 )

The reader will observe the high spiritual and practical standards of this Nephite ruler on social issues that still beset the world.

Attention is also called to the attitude of the younger Alma, first chief judge under the new order of government instituted by the younger Mosiah, toward luxury, riches, and persecution. It should be observed that Alma had other duties as the high priest over the Church of God (Alma 5:3):

And now my beloved brethren, I say unto you, can ye withstand these sayings; yea, can ye lay aside these things, and trample the Holy One under your feet; yea, can ye be puffed up in the pride of your hearts; yea, will ye still persist in the wearing of costly apparel and setting your hearts upon the vain things of the world, upon your riches? Yea, will ye persist in supposing that ye are better one than another; yea, will ye persist in the persecution of your brethren, who humble themselves and do walk after the holy order of God, wherewith they have been brought into this church, having been sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and they do bring forth works which are meet for repentance—yea, and will you persist in turning your backs upon the poor, and the needy, and in withholding your substance from them? (Alma 5:53-55)

Observe also the high type of personal religion and regard for brotherhood in the following extract from Alma's sermon:

Behold, are ye stripped of pride? I say unto you, if ye are not ye are not prepared to meet God. Behold ye must prepare quickly; for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand, and such an one hath not eternal life. Behold, I say, is there one among you who is not stripped of envy? I say unto you that such an one is not prepared; and I would that he should prepare quickly, for the hour is close at hand, and he knoweth not when the time shall come; for such an one is not found guiltless. And again I say unto you, is there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother, or that heapeth upon him persecutions? Wo unto such an one, for he is not prepared, and the time is at hand that he must repent or he cannot be saved! Yea, even we unto all ye workers of iniquity; repent, repent, for the Lord God hath spoken it! Behold, he sendeth an invitation unto all men, for the arms of mercy are extended towards them, and he saith: Repent, and I will receive you. (Alma 5:28-33)

In later times, immediately before the resurrected Savior's advent among the Nephites, a situation arose of which Mormon, the great abridger, writes:

But it came to pass in the twenty and ninth year there began to be some disputings among the people, and some were lifted up unto pride and boastings of their exceeding great riches, yea, even unto great persecutions; for there were many merchants in the land, and also many lawyers, and many officers. And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning; yea, some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches. Some were lifted up in pride, and others were exceedingly humble, some did return railing for railing, while others would receive railing and persecution and all manner of afflictions, and would not turn and revile again, but were humble and penitent before God. And thus there became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the church began to be broken up; yea, insomuch that in the thirtieth year the church was broken up in all the land save it were among a few of the Lamanites who were converted unto the true faith; and they would not depart from it, for they were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord. Now the cause of this iniquity of the people was this—Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world. (3 Nephi 6:10-15)

This scripture clearly reveals the highly enlightened views of the Nephites on the use of riches, the reasons for differences in learning on pride power, authority, and "the vain things of the world." Observe that the Nephites prophets were mightily concerned with the welfare of the poor. (See also 2 Nephi 28:13; Alma 1:27; Helaman 4:12; Helaman 6:39; Mormon 8:37.)

It is a curious fact that the Book of Mormon uses the word "injustice" twice only (Alma 42:1; Alma 55:19); on the positive side, "justice" is used about sixty times. The word "cruelty" is used but once and "cruel" twice; on the other hand, the Nephite record uses "mercy" about 84 times, "merciful" 46 times, and "compassion" twelve times.

The Nephite position on slavery (the word "slavery" occurs but once) may be judged from the following passage which refers to Moroni, a great general:

And Moroni was a strong and a mighty man; he was a man of a perfect understanding; yea, a man that did not delight in bloodshed; a man whose soul did joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country, and his brethren from bondage and slavery. (Alma 48:11)

The six references to slaves in the Book of Mormon generally indicate a strong aversion to the practice of having or marking them. The following words of a missionary who was trying to persuade a Lamanite king and his followers to join the Nephites is sufficient to illustrate the point:

But Ammon said unto him: It is against the law of our brethren, which was established by my father [Mosiah], that there should be any slaves among them; therefore let us go down rely upon the mercies of our brethren. (Alma 27:9)

In all periods of Nephite history there is expressed a great antipathy to bondage.

When the Nephite people reached the acme of their social and religious development after the coming of Christ they were in a state which the world today might well envy. The Book of Mormon records the following remarkable facts:

And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly on with another. And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift. (4 Nephi 2, 3)

It is evident throughout the Book of Mormon that the driving force of the prophets was moral and religious rather than economic and political. The prophets did not attack social and economic distinctions as such among, their people, but seem to have regarded equal economic opportunity and social station as the ideal, as the above scripture indicates. Their main concern was with right and wrong, with justice and oppression, with mercy and man's inhumanity to man. The Book of Mormon prophets attacked social and economic distinctions only when there were violations of the fundamental laws of justice and humanity. It should not be inferred from their frequent concern with the rich and riches that they were socialists. Riches and the rich were denounced only when fundamental human rights and well-being were violated. The constant humanitariarism of the prophet of the Book of Mormon, their drive against sin, iniquity, and all forms of oppression, and their passionate concern for the happiness and welfare of their people, confer on their teachings a perennial value and an everlasting validity.

Because of the fact that much of the Book of Mormon is an abridgment, we find little said about the status of the family. However, enough is said to give us a fair idea of the relations existing between husbands and wives, and children and parents. We may assume at the outset that the early Nephites and Jaredites had family customs very similar to those of other normal oriental peoples of their times. Ordinarily, oriental society was man's society. That is the reason so relatively little is said in the Old Testament about women. Possibly the same reason applies to the Book of Mormon. It must not be supposed that women and children were not loved and respected in their sphere. But the man's place in society was emphasized more than is the custom among us.

That it was the ideal of Nephite husbands to love their wives is shown by the Book of Mormon in many ways. Thus, Jacob protests against the illegitimate marriages contracted by certain Nephite men, of which fact we have already spoken in another connection. He said:

For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people in the land of Jerusalem, yea, and in all the lands of my people, because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. And I will not suffer, saith the Lord of Hosts, that the cries of the fair daughters of this people, which I have led out of the land of Jerusalem, shall come up unto me against the men of my people, saith the Lord of Hosts. (Jacob 2:31-32 )

By inference we see that the prophet believes in happy families. He hastens to point out that the Lamanites are better in comparison:

Behold, the Lamanites your brethren, whom ye hate because of their filthiness and the cursing which hath come upon their skins, are more righteous than you; for they have not forgotten the commandment of the Lord, which was given unto our fathers—that they should have save it were one wife, and concubines they should have none, and there should not be whoredoms committed among them. And now, this commandment they observe to keep; wherefore, because of this observance, in keeping this commandment, the Lord God will not destroy them, but will be merciful unto them; and one day they shall become a blessed people. Behold, their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and their husbands and their wives love their children; and their unbelief and their hatred towards you is because of the iniquities of their fathers; wherefore, how much better are you than they, in the sight of your great Creator? . . . Wherefore, ye shall remember your children, how that ye have grieved their hearts because of the example that ye have set before them; and also, remember that ye may, because of your filthiness, bring your children unto destruction, and their sins be heaped upon your heads at the last day. (Jacob 3:5-7, 10)

This scripture also indicates the standards which the prophet expected of husbands and wives in respect to their children.

That members of Nephite families did have normal affection for each other is shown in the following passage, which describes a situation following defeat in battle:

And now there was a great mourning and lamentation among the people of Limhi, the widow mourning for her husband, the son and the daughter mourning for her husband, the son and the brethren. Now there were a great many widows in the land, and they did cry mightily from day to day, for a great fear of the Lamanite had come upon them. (Mosiah 21:9, 10)

The Book of Alma has a similar passage:

And now this was a time that there was a great mourning and lamentation heard throughout all the land, among all the people of Nephi—yea, the cry of widows mourning for their husbands, and also of fathers mourning for their sons, and the daughter for the brother, yea, the brother for the father; and thus the cry of mourning was heard among all of them, mourning for their kindred who had been slain. (Alma 28:4, 5)

It is plain that the Nephites believed in the value and sanctity of the home and the institutions connected with it:

Nevertheless, the Nephites were inspired by a better cause, for they were not fighting for monarchy nor power but they were fighting for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church. And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God; for the Lord had said unto them, and also unto their fathers, that; Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies. And again, the Lord has said that; Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and then rights, and their religion. (Alma 43:45-47)

In the last days of Nephite history the great Mormon, prophet-general, urged his people to fight for their families:

And it came to pass that I did speak unto my people, and did urge them with great energy, that they would stand boldly before the Lamanites and fight for their wives, and their children, and their houses, and their homes. (Mormon 2:23)

The love which parents could show to children is seen in Nephi's account of his father Lehi, who left a blessing upon the children of his wayward sons, Laman and Lemuel (2 Nephi 4:3-9). Nor should we forget the words of Mormon, who said:

And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation. (Moroni 8:17)

Book of Mormon people were taught to teach their children and be responsible for their upbringing. Notice the words of Alma to his wayward son Corianton:

And now the Spirit of the Lord doth say unto me: Command thy children to do good, lest they lead away the hearts of many people to destruction; therefore I command you, my son, in the fear of God, that ye refrain from your iniquities; that ye turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength; that ye lead away the heart of no more to do wickedly; but rather return unto them, and acknowledge your faults and that wrong which ye have done. (Alma 39:12, 13)

We may assume that home life among Book of Mormon people was generally happy and harmonious. Husbands loved their wives, and wives their husbands. Children were probably obedient and respectful, and loved by their parents. That there were exceptions the record makes clear, for, like the Bible, it is a book of life. Observe the sorrow and pain which Laman and Lemuel caused their brother Nephi. (See 1 Nephi 2:9-14; 1 Nephi 7:8-19; 1 Nephi 8:35-37) Notice also that Alma, in great distress of soul, was obliged to counsel and reprimand his son Corianton for serious wrongdoing (Alma 39-42). The terrible depravity of the Nephite people in the final states of their history could only be exceeded by examples from our recent world war. Mormon mentions the shameful sufferings of men, women, and children in their last struggle as a nation (Moroni 9:8-18).

Little is said in the Book of Mormon about the status of hired servants. No mention is made of worker's guilds or the equivalent of our modern unions. Reference is often made to skilled workmanship in various fields of endeavor (1 Nephi 18:1, 4; 2 Nephi 5:16; Jarom 8; Mosiah 11:10; Ether 10:7, 27), but the social state of the worker or the conditions under which he worked are rarely dealt with. Since in normal times the Nephites and Jaredites were spiritually enlightened peoples, we may presume that the status of the hired servant and worker was reasonably good. The Book of Mormon mentions the slaying of servants by a Lamanite king and the beating of a maidservant by a renegade Nephite leader (Alma 17:28; Alma 18:4-7; Alma 50:30).

Nephites and Jaredites, like most peoples, practiced the arts of friendship. Though no stories of warm personal relationships such as those of David and Jonathan and Ruth and Naomi of Old Testament fame are recorded in the Nephite scripture, we do find instances of friendship that must have been somewhat unusual. Observe the one mentioned by Lehi:

And now, Zoram, I speak unto you: Behold, thou art the servant of Laban; nevertheless, thou hast been brought out of the land of Jerusalem, and I know that thou art a true friend unto my son, Nephi, forever. Wherefore, because thou hast been faithful thy seed shall be blessed with his seed, that they dwell in prosperity long upon the face of this land; and nothing. save it shall be iniquity among them, shall harm or disturb their prosperity upon the face of this land forever. (2 Nephi 1:30, 31.)

That the Nephite people did actively promote friendly relations between themselves and their red-skinned Lamanite brethren is shown when the sons of Mosiah were permitted to preach to them:

Now it came to pass that after the sons of Mosiah had done all these things, they took a small number with them and returned to their father, the king, and desired of him that he would grant unto them that they might, with these whom they had selected, go up to the land of Nephi that they might preach the things which they had heard, and that they might impart the word of God to their brethren, the Lamanites—that perhaps they might bring them to the knowledge of the Lord their God, and convince them of the iniquity of their fathers; and that perhaps they might cure them of their hatred towards the Nephites, that they might also be brought to rejoice in the Lord their God, that they might become friendly to one another, and that there should be no more contentions in all the land which the Lord their God had given them. Now they were desirous that salvation should he declared to every creature, for they could not bear that any human soul should perish; yea, even the very thoughts that any soul should endure endless torment did cause them to quake and tremble. And thus did the Spirit of the Lord work upon them, for they were the very vilest of sinners. And the Lord saw fit in his infinite mercy to spare them; nevertheless they suffered much anguish of soul because of their iniquities, suffering much and fearing that they should be cast off forever. And it came to pass that they did plead with their father many days that they might go up to the land of Nephi. And king Mosiah went and inquired of the Lord if he should let his sons go up among the Lamanites to preach the word. And the Lord said unto Mosiah: Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites. And it came to pass that Mosiah granted that they might go and do according to their request. (Mosiah 28:1-8)

This passage is notable for its fine display of brotherhood and personal religion. (See also Alma 24:16-18)

The Nephite attitude toward borrowing from one's fellowman is expressed in the main passage concerning the practice:

And I would that ye should remember, that whosoever among you borroweth of his neighbor should return the thing that he borroweth, according as he doth agree, or else thou shalt commit sin; and perhaps thou shalt cause thy neighbor to commit sin also. (Mosiah 4:28)

King Benjamin's sentiments are such that we must agree with him. The Nephites were taught by the resurrected Savior the views expressed by him in the Sermon on the Mount:

Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away. (3 Nephi 12:42; cf. Matthew 5:42)

One reference is made in the Book of Ether to borrowing, but the practice there expressed seems to have been customary only in the last days of the nation when it was in the final stages of decay:

Wherefore every man did cleave unto that which was his own, with his hands, and would not borrow neither would he lend; and every man kept the hilt of his sword in his right hand, in the defence of his property and his own life and of his wives and children. (Ether 14:2)

From what we have already seen, it is apparent that a strong humanitarian strain runs through the Book of Mormon. A few other things may be said about this quality. The Nephites quote with approval the words of Isaiah concerning the practice of making a prey of the widows and fatherless (2 Nephi 20:2; cf. Isaiah 10:2). King Limhi commanded that support should be given widows and their children:

Now there was a great number of women, more than there was of men; therefore king Limhi commanded that every man should impart to the support of the widows and their children, that they might not perish with hunger; and this they did because of the greatness of their number that had been slain. (Mosiah 21:17)

Moroni deprecates the treatment of the hungry, the needy, the sick and afflicted, and the widows and orphans in the latter days:

Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not? Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their fathers and their husbands to cry unto the Lord from the ground, for vengeance upon your heads? (Mormon 8:39, 40)

Little or nothing is said in the Book of Mormon concerning the treatment of beasts of burden. Probably the Old Testament laws concerning them were followed, since the Nephites had the Hebrew scriptures upon their Brass Plates. The same may be said about the protection of the physically weak and defenseless. The Nephite record also enjoins the observance of the Sabbath day of rest (Jarom 5; Mosiah 13:16-19; Mosiah 18:23).

The Nephite prophets strongly emphasize the necessity of just dealings between man and man. In the younger Alma's advice to his wayward son Corianton he says:

Therefore, my son, see that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again. (Alma 41:14)

Mormon mentions the just state of affairs among men after the appearance of the Savior:

And they taught, and did minister one to another; and they had all things common among them, every man dealing justly, one with another. (3 Nephi 26:19)

We may examine at this point Book of Mormon views on a number of sins against brotherhood not especially emphasized before.

Untruthfulness is strongly denounced. The following passage illustrates this fact as well as a number of other pertinent matters:

Now those priests who did go forth among the people did preach against all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and malice, and revilings, and stealing, robbing, plundering, murdering, committing adultery, and all manner of lasciviousness, crying that these things ought not so to be. (Alma 16:18)

Jacob wrote concerning the liar:

Wo unto the liar, for he shall be thrust down to hell. (2 Nephi 9:34)

And in Alma 1:16-18 we read:

Nevertheless, this did not put an end to the spreading of priestcraft through the land; for there were many who loved the vain things of the world, and they went forth preaching false doctrines; and this they did for the sake of riches and honor. Nevertheless, they durst not lie, if it were known, for fear of the law, for liars were punished; therefore they pretended to preach according to their belief; and now the law could have no power on any man for his belief. And they durst not steal, for fear of the law, for such were punished; neither durst they rob, nor murder, for he that murdered was punished unto death.

Hypocrisy and deception were frowned upon. Observe the words of Amulek:

Now they knew not that Amulek could know of their designs. But it came to pass as they began to question him, he perceived their thoughts, and he said unto them: O ye wicked and perverse generation, ye lawyers and hypocrites, for ye are laying the foundation of the devil; for ye are laying traps and snares to catch the holy ones of God. Ye are laying plans to pervert the ways of the righteous, and to bring down the wrath of God upon your heads, even to the utter destruction of this people. (Alma 10:17, 18)

Mormon addresses the Gentiles of the latter days in these words:

Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Nephi 30:2)

Condemnation of the practice of stealing is strongly made. King Benjamin taught:

Neither have I suffered that ye should be confined in dungeons, nor that ye should make slaves one of another, nor that ye should murder, or plunder, or steal, or commit adultery; nor even have I suffered that ye should commit any manner of wickedness, and have taught you that ye should keep the commandments of the Lord, in all things which he hath commanded you. (Mosiah 2:13. See also Mosiah 13:22; Alma 23:3.)

Fraud and dishonesty are condemned by implication:

Now it came to pass that while Amalickiah had thus been obtaining power by fraud and deceit, Moroni, on the other hand, had been preparing the minds of the people to be faithful unto the Lord their God. (Alma 48:7. See also Alma 47:30, 35; Alma 55:1.)

It is interesting to notice that the words "dishonest" and "dishonesty" do not occur in the Book of Mormon. The word "honest" occurs twice (Alma 27:27; Helaman 9:36).

The words "greed" and "greedy" do not occur in the Nephite record, though "glut" appears three times and "glutting" once. We quote one passage showing Nephite disapproval of gluttony, whether in respect to food or gain:

Now they were a lazy and an idolatrous people; therefore they were desirous to bring us into bondage, that they might glut themselves with the labors of our hands; yea, that they might feast themselves upon the flocks of our fields. (Mosiah 9:12. See also Alma 30:27, 31, 32.)

The Book of Mormon censures covetousness. Actually the word "covet" appears only three times, but "envy," "envying," and envyings" together appear fourteen times. The word "desire" in the sense of coveting and longing for that which is morally wrong also occurs a number of times. The prophet Abinadi quoted the Mosaic directive against covetousness as it appears in the Ninth Commandment (Mosiah 13:24). King Benjamin warned the poor among his people against covetousness in the following words:

And again, I say unto the poor, ye who have not and yet have sufficient, that ye remain from day to day; I mean all you who deny the beggar, because ye have not; I would that ye say in your hearts that: I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give. And now, if ye say this in your hearts ye remain guiltless, otherwise ye are condemned; and your condemnation is just for ye covet that which ye have not received. (Mosiah 4:24, 25)

Little is said about land-grabbing in the Book of Mormon, though it quotes Isaiah 3:14 and Isaiah 5:8 with approval:

The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients [elders] of his people and the princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyard and the spoil of the poor in your houses. . . . Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth! (2 Nephi 13:14; 2 Nephi 15:8)

The word "cheating" is used only in reference to the machinations of the evil one. Nephi speaks of the devil as cheating men's souls (2 Nephi 28:21), and other references are made to his beguiling our first parents." (2 Nephi 9:9; Mosiah 16:3; Ether 8:25)

Wars and rumors of wars are much spoken of in the Book of Mormon, but the ideal of the Nephite prophets was peace. We quote a passage from King Benjamin which is also a notable religious expression in other respects:

I say unto you, my brethren, that if you should render all the thanks and praise which your whole soul has power to possess, to that God who has created you, and has kept and preserved you, and has caused that ye should rejoice, and has granted that ye should live in peace one with another—I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants. (Mosiah 2:20, 21)

Alma 24:17, 18 is a description of Lamanite converts who determined to have no more war:

And now it came to pass that when the king had made an end of these sayings, and all the people were assembled together, they took their swords, and all the weapons which were used for the shedding of man's blood, and they did bury them up deep in the earth. And this they did, it being in their view a testimony to God, and also to men, that they never would use weapons again for the shedding of man's blood; and this they did, vouching and covenanting with God, that rather than shed the blood of their brethren they would give up their own lives; and rather than take away from a brother they would give unto him; and rather than spend their days in idleness they would labor abundantly with their hands.

Other references to peace are numerous in the Book of Mormon, but these must suffice.

In Chapter 32, "Some Universals in the Book of Mormon," we observe the enlightened views of the Nephite prophets toward other peoples. A few words may be added to what is said there. The Nephites were like the Hebrews in considering themselves a chosen people. This concept should not be construed in a narrow sense. The religion of the Nephites was a covenant religion. When the risen Savior came among them, he explained that they were the "other sheep" mentioned in John 10:16, but that his apostles in Palestine had not understood the fact:

And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost. (3 Nephi 15:21-23)

It is thus apparent that the Book of Mormon puts the righteous of the house of Israel in a favored position before God. Nevertheless—and this is important to keep in mind—Jesus later explained to the Nephites that if the Gentiles in the latter days would repent and hearken unto his words, they should be numbered with his covenant people:

But if they will repent and hearken note my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance; and they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem. And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem. And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst. (3 Nephi 21:22-25)

We must conclude from our studies that personal religion and brotherhood in the Book of Mormon attain a surprisingly high standard.
