Sidney B. Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium ( 1968)

Chapter 32

Some Universals in the Book of Mormon

By a universal element is meant a statement of a bit of wisdom or teaching which has a comprehensive spiritual appeal to humanity at large. The Golden Rule of the Master is an unusually good illustration of what is meant. The examples found in the Book of Mormon are generally of very high merit.

At the outset we observe that the title page of the Book of Mormon states that this scripture was written in part "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself to all nations." Manifesting himself to all nations! There is no narrowness or particularism here. The message and doctrines of the book are, and were, intended for persons of every church, creed, and race, whether Jew or Gentile, Mormon or Methodist, black, brown, red, or white. The doctrine of the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man pervades the book from beginning to end. The spirit of humility, faith, trust in God, sincerity, and love for man are inherent throughout. In fact, the good of man is the center and whole aim of it.

The reader will find an intense opposition to sin and oppression emphasized throughout the volume. In these days, when we hear so much about the soul-destroying doctrines of fascism and communism, and of the attempts being made to shackle and regiment men by devious techniques, it is wholesome and soul-satisfying to consider the spirit of free agency and democracy in the Book of Mormon:

Therefore, they relinquished their desires for a king, and became exceedingly anxious that every man should have an equal chance throughout all the land; yea, and every man expressed a willingness to answer for his own sins. Therefore, it came to pass that they assembled themselves together in bodies throughout the land, to cast in their voices concerning who should be their judges, to judge them according to the law which had been given them; and they were exceedingly rejoiced because of the liberty which had been granted unto them. And they did wax strong in love towards Mosiah; yea, they did esteem him more than any other man; for they did not look upon him as a tyrant who was seeking for gain, yea, for that lucre which doth corrupt the soul; for he had not exacted riches of them, neither had he delighted in the shedding of blood; but he had established peace in the land, and he had granted unto his people that they should be delivered from all manner of bondage; therefore they did esteem him, yea, exceedingly, beyond measure. And it came to pass that they did appoint judges to rule over them, or to judge them according to the law; and this they did throughout all the land. (Mosiah 29:38-41)

Related in idea is a great passage in 2 Nephi 2:27:

Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself.

Among the greatest universals to be found in the Book of Mormon is the one which sets forth the common position of all men before God. In 1 Nephi 17 we find Nephi instructing his brethren concerning the reasons why God permitted the Israelites to conquer the inhabitants of Palestine after crossing the Jordan. He says:

And now, do ye suppose that the children of this land, who were in the land of promise, who were driven out by our fathers, do ye suppose that they were righteous? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. Do ye suppose that our fathers would have been more choice than they if they had been righteous? I say unto you, Nay. Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God.... (1 Nephi 17:33-35; italics ours.)

Here is courageously expressed the principle that, everything else being equal, all men stand in the same relation to God. There is no favoritism. The only thing that can change that relationship is sin and unrighteousness; God definitely favors the righteous. One is reminded here of the stirring words of the prophet Amos when he said:

Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto Me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir? (Amos 9:7)

The same principle is again expressed by Nephi in a beautiful passage:

He [the Lord] doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both few and Gentile. (2 Nephi 26:33; italics ours.)

Nor should we miss Ammon's significant words:

Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth. Now this is my joy, and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my God forever. (Alma 26:37)

It is the considered belief of the writer that doctrines such as expressed above will "prove" the Book of Mormon to the world more than any other thing we can do or say in its defense.

Another very interesting universal in the Book of Mormon has reference to the teaching of God's word among the nations. While the Lord would like to lift up and exalt all of his children, he knows, as all teachers know, that men are of unequal intellectual and spiritual capacities. Some persons understand and receive truth with great facility and yield fruit an hundred fold; others receive it less readily and yield fruit tenfold or twofold; and still others find it hard to see the truth at all save in its barest outlines. Yet our Father views all of his children with love and compassion, and he does not desire those of little capacity to he held responsible for truth in the same degree as those of large capacity. What we have said of individuals the Book of Mormon seems to apply to nations:

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true. (Alma 29:8.)

If this scripture is understood correctly by the writer, it seems to account for the fact that among most of the world's various literatures there are expressed certain basic gospel truths. In other words, God permits all peoples to have as much of his truth as they can assimilate and understand. The writer knows from actual experience how very difficult it is to explain to Arabs the fundarnental principles of the gospel. Up to a certain point they comprehend and understand; beyond that they seem to be lost. If the Book of Mormon is correct, it would seem to be no accident that great leaders like Confucius, Buddha, Zoroaster, Mohammed, and others have been raised up among various peoples of the world. These men have, in a measure, taught "His word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they [the people] should have." We have no disposition to over-simplify the problem, but it has always seemed to us a remarkable fact, having great philosophical import, that only a small fraction of the world's peoples have any considerable insight into Christianity even when taught by capable persons.

Whether one agrees entirely or in part with the Book of Mormon teaching here expressed, the fact remains that it has universal insights worthy of consideration.

In Alma 32 is a great discourse on faith—how it may be acquired and made a practical instrument in spiritual life. Alma seems to have such confidence in the religious truths expounded by him that he is willing to have his words subjected to experimental trial. He preached to his hearers as follows:

But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words. (Alma 32:27; italics ours.)

The recognition that many teachings in the spiritual realm may be, and should be, tested by experiment is of universal interest and validity. What trouble and sadness may the world have been spared had it recognized this principle! Moreover, it has the backing and blessing of no less a figure than Jesus of Nazareth, who declared:

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine [teaching], whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. (John 7:17)

A feeling of confidence, trust, and respect is aroused in a person when he is invited to experiment upon or test the validity of a religious principle. The Book of Mormon tells us that another prophet by the name of Amulek, a friend and comrade of Alma's, emulated the example of the latter by exhorting his brethren to "plant the word in your hearts, that ye may try the experiment of its goodness." (Alma 34:4; italics ours.)

The Book of Mormon doctrine of experimentation or of testing the validity of religious teaching is interestingly applied by the last Nephite prophet, Moroni. Before sealing up the sacred Gold Plates of which he was the custodian, this great man urged the future readers of the Book of Mormon to test the validity of its claims by means of a sincere experiment:

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Moroni 10:4)

This important experiment in the spiritual realm is urged upon all men without distinction; if it is honestly and sincerely performed, any person may have the truth manifested concerning the claims of the Nephite scripture by means of the Holy Ghost.

Before passing from Alma's sermon let us notice another teaching of his which has universal elements in it. It concerns the principle of faith. After pointing out that faith and knowledge are two entirely different concepts, and, furthermore, that a person who knows the will of God is in a more responsible position before him than one who only believes, the prophet says:

And now, as I said concerning faith—faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true. (Alma 32:21; italics ours.)

This Book of Mormon prophet has his feet on the ground—when a person has faith he hopes for things which are not seen, which are true. This is a clearer and in many respects a more satisfactory statement about faith than the one in Hebrews 11:1:

Faith means the assurance of what we hope for; it is our conviction about things that we cannot see.

Alma takes faith out of the realm of mere credulity—i.e., readiness to believe on slight evidence. There is a note in his statement which rings true to the critical mind. There are too many persons in every generation, including our own, who hope for things—fantastic things—in the name of faith and religion, but who give little thought as to whether or not they are based on truth.

The ancient problem of good-and-evil is of universal interest. The problem, as one might expect, is not handled by the Book of Mormon in a thorough going philosophical sense at all. The ancestors of the Nephites, the Hebrews, had little or no philosophical tradition in the Greek sense of the term. Moreover, the earliest Nephites seem, according to their own accounts at least, to have been simple folk with few or no profound speculative interests. Consequently, the religion of the Nephites was simple, and they handled the problem of good-and-evil accordingly. Nowhere does the Book of Mormon make an attempt to solve it in the manner of the Book of Job. To the Nephite teachers all that is good comes from God, and evil comes from the devil:

For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil. (Alma 5:40)

Notice also the teaching of Mormon:

Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. (Moroni 7:12)

In the instructions of Lehi to his son Jacob is to be found an interesting variation in the Nephite solution of the problem of good-and-evil. We call it the doctrine of opposition-in-all-things. In terms of modern philosophy it might be denominated the theory of contrast-effect. Lehi says:

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so ... righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad.... it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter. Wherefore, the Lord God gave auto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other. (2 Nephi 2:11, 15, 16)

There are universal elements in this teaching acceptable even to some modern philosophers, though they might point out that there is entirely too much evil in the world in proportion to the good, to justify the principle. Though Lehi was probably not attempting to be philosophical, his sermon to his son is, to the writer at least, the most philosophical of all in the Book of Mormon.

Before concluding this chapter we call attention to two other passages in the Book of Mormon having distinct universal implications. The first, which is very commonly quoted by our people, throws light on the purposes leading to man's existence in mortality. It therefore refers to all men without exception. The passage reads:

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. (2 Nephi 2:25)

Men are that they might have joy! All men, whether Americans, English, Russians, French, Germans, Japanese, Italians, Hottentots, or Burmese, were placed on this earth for the purpose of having joy. The word "joy" as used by Lehi in this scripture had no narrow connotations. The word, of course, has the usual dictionary meanings such as "the emotion excited by the acquisition or expectation of good"; "gladness"; "delight"; "bliss"; "gaiety"; but far and beyond all these Lehi seems to mean a way of life that will lead to eternal felicity in God's presence. As the Nephite prophet further affirms:

I have none other object save it be the everlasting welfare of your souls. (2 Nephi 2:30)

There is a nobility and character to Lehi's words which all men must admire, whether or not they agree with his theology. He reaches out for men and encompasses them in the arms of love and understanding, The chaotic and war-ridden world in which we find ourselves desperately needs such men.

The second passage of scripture appropriately connects the service which men give each other with their service of God. A great Nephite king, Benjamin by name, in his old age gave a last sermon to his people. In it he said:

Behold, I say unto you that because I said unto you that I had spent my days in your service, I do not desire to boast, for I have only been in the service of God. And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. Behold, ye have called me your king; and if I, whom ye call your king, do labor to serve you, then ought not ye to labor to serve one another? (Mosiah 2:16-18)

There are few finer sentiments than these to be found in all scripture. When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God! One need only find and serve his neighbor in order to find himself in the service of God. Fortunate nations may serve God by teaching and lending a helping hand to the millions of unfortunates in other far-flung dominions. The only true self-service is to be found in this way of living.

The universal element in such teachings as Benjamin's justifies the assertion made about the Book of Mormon at the beginning of this chapter—that "the good of man is the center and whole aim of it."
