John Doyle Lee was executed on Mountain Meadows, Washington County, Utah Territory, at the scene of the massacre, on the 23d day of March, 1877. On Wednesday preceding the day fixed upon for the execution the guard having Lee in charge started from Beaver City, where Lee had been imprisoned, for Mountain Meadows, where it had been decided to carry the sentence into execution. The authorities had received information that an attempt to rescue Lee would be made by his sons, and precautions were taken to prevent the success of any such attempt. The place of execution was kept a secret, and a strong guard procured. Lee was cheerful and seemed to have but little dread of death.

The party reached Mountain Meadows about 10 o'clock Friday morning, and after the camp had been arranged Lee pointed out the various places of interest connected with the massacre, and recapitulated the horrors of that event. A more dreary scene than the present appearance of Mountain Meadows cannot be imagined. The curse of God has fallen upon it and scorched and withered the luxuriant grass and herbage that covered the ground twenty years ago. The Meadows have been transformed from a fertile valley into an arid and barren plain, and the Mormons assert that the ghosts of the murdered emigrants meet nightly at the scene of their slaughter and re-enact in pantomime the horrors of their taking off.

As the party came to a halt at the scene of the massacre sentinels were posted on the surrounding hills, to prevent a surprise, and preparations for the execution were at once begun. The wagons were placed in a line near the monument, and over the wheels of one of them army blankets were drawn to serve as a screen or ambush for the firing party. The purpose of this concealment was to prevent the men composing the firing party from being seen by anyone, there being a reasonable fear that some of Lee's relatives or friends might hereafter wreak vengeance upon his executioners. The rough pine boards for the coffin were next unloaded from a wagon, and the carpenters began to nail them together. Meanwhile Lee sat some distance away.

At 10.35, the arrangements having been completed, Marshal Nelson read the sentence of the Court, and at its conclusion turned to Lee and said:

"Mr. Lee, if you have anything to say before the sentence of the Court is carried into effect, you may now do so."

"I wish to speak to that man," said Lee, pointing to the photographer, who was adjusting his camera near by. "Come over here," said Lee, beckoning with his hand.

"In a moment, Mr. Lee," replied Mr. Fennemore.

"I want to ask a favor of you," said Lee. "I want you to furnish my three faithful wives each a copy," meaning the photograph about to be taken. "Send them to Rachel A., Sarah C., and Emma B." Lee then repeated the names of his three wives carefully, saying to the artist, who had approached him: "Please forward them - you will do this?"

Mr. Fennemore responded affirmatively.

Lee then seemed to pose himself involuntarily, and the picture was taken. He then arose from his coffin, where he had been seated, and, looking calmly at the soldiers and spectators, said in an even tone of voice:

"I am on the brink of eternity; the solemnities of eternity rest upon my mind. I have made out - or have endeavored to do so - a manuscript, abridging the history of my life. This is to be published. In it I have given my views and feelings with regard to these things. I feel resigned to my fate. I feel as a summer morn. I have done nothing wrong; my conscience is clear before God and man. I am ready to meet my Redeemer and those that have gone before me, behind the veil. I am not an infidel. I have not denied God and His mercies. I am a believer in these things. Most I regret is parting with my family; many of them are unprotected and will be left fatherless." Here he hesitated. "When I speak of these things they touch a chord within me. I declare my innocence of anything wrong. I am only a victim - a victim must be had. I do not fear to die; I trust in God; Death has no terror. No mercy have I asked. I do not fear eternity. I am a believer in the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is my last word - it is so. I believe in the gospel that was taught in its purity in former days. I regret leaving my family; they are near and dear to me. These are things which touch me - those poor orphaned children! I ask the Lord, my God, if my labors be done, to receive my spirit."

Lee was informed that his hour had come. He looked at the small group of spectators, exchanged a few words with Marshal Nelson, saying:

"I ask one favor of the guards - center my heart."

The Marshal then bound a handkerchief over Lee's eyes, but his hands were allowed to remain free. Lee straightened himself up, faced the firing party as he sat on his coffin, clasped his hands over his head, and exclaimed:

"Remember! The balls through my heart!"

The Marshal gave the order to the guards, Fire! As the word "fire!" rang out on the morning air a report was heard and Lee fell back, dead. There was not a cry, not a moan.

### THE END.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORMON MENACE: THE CONFESSIONS OF JOHN DOYLE LEE, DANITE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
