Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

All Things Shall Be Revealed

Luke 8 18Luke 8 17Luke 8 16Matt 13 9Though Jesus used parables to hide the full meaning of his teachings from the Jews, yet those rebellious hearers could have understood if they had sought the light, and their failure to believe and understand rose to condemn them. Jesus here tells them, in effect, that gospel light does not burst upon men in full noonday splendor, but that it arises in their hearts gradually, line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. "He that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D. & C. 50:24.) Eventually the faithful, having continued to grow in light and truth, shall have all things revealed to them and shall know all things. (D. & C. 76:5-10; 93:26-28; 101:32-34; 121:26-29.)

Matt 13 9Matt. 13:9. Those who are capable of understanding shall understand. Those whose spiritual ears are open shall hear the whisperings of the Spirit.

Luke 8 16Luke 8:16. 'No man who is a true minister, when he brings gospel light, covereth it with mystery and confusion (as in the case, for instance, with the sectarian creeds describing God), but he holds forth as much light before men as they are able to bear.'

Luke 8 1717. 'For no parable, no teaching, no mystery, no hidden thing, is to be kept from the knowledge of the faithful; eventually all things shall be revealed, and the righteous shall know them.' "There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed; there is no work of darkness save it shall be made manifest in the light; and there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth save it shall be loosed. Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at that day be revealed." (2 Ne. 30:17-18; Ether 4:7-12.)

Luke 8 1818. 'But take heed how ye hear and accept gospel truth, for you shall be rewarded with new revelation only if you are prepared to receive it. The measure of attention you give to the truths a!—ready revealed will dictate how much new truth shall be meted to you. If you continue to receive light and truth, and abide in them, eventually you shall be perfected in the truth and know all things. But if you do not continue to receive gospel light, and to walk in that light, from you shall be taken even that light which you once had, and you shall walk in darkness.'
