Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

This Doctrinal New Testament Commentary

Volume I of this work is both a harmony and a commentary. But it is totally unlike any other harmony or commentary. As a harmony it is concerned primarily with comparing, evaluating, and interpreting events and teachings from a doctrinal rather than a chronological or historical standpoint. In some instances, for example, the records of the same gospel truths are compared in parallel columns even though the original statements were made to different peoples at different times. Contexts and settings of such passages are then noted in the explanatory material.

As a commentary this volume is concerned primarily with analyzing and interpreting the doctrinal teachings of our Lord as such are found in his words and acts. Discussions of personalities; of geography, chronology, and time; of the political, social, and economic conditions of the day—all of which occupy such a prominent place in most commentaries—are given less weight and consideration. It is an actual knowledge of our Lord's doctrines that leads to salvation in his kingdom, not the times, places, or circumstances under which those saving truths happened to be presented to a given group of hearers.

To the Latter-day Saints the real value of these commentaries is that they interpret and explain the New Testament doctrines in the light of all revelation both ancient and modern. Interpretations are based, not alone on Biblical knowledge, as is the case with commentaries prepared by sectarian scholars, but upon the wonderful flood of revealed truth that has come in modern times through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his associates.

Particular and extensive use is made of the Inspired Version. All major changes found in this version, together with all new and added knowledge found in it, are published in full, alongside the comparable passages from the King James Version. Extensive use is also made of the revealed word as found in the Doctrine and Covenants, Book of Mormon, and Pearl of Great Price, and as found in the sermons and writing of such recognized doctrinal authorities, scriptorians, and theologians, as Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and Joseph F. Smith.
