Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Is the Living Manna Sent from God

John 6 28The sense and meaning of this abbreviated account of our Lord's great discourse and discussion on the Bread of Life is:

John 6 2828. 'Then said they unto him, You say that God is your Father, that he hath sealed you, that he hath openly and publicly presented you as the Messiah; well then, assuming such is the case (which, mind you, we do only for purposes of inquiry), what is it that you expect us to do about it? What shall we do to work the works of him who you say is your Father? If he is your Father (a claim we do not seriously countenance), then surely there is some special message he would have you deliver. Prove your claim of divine Sonship by delivering the message.'

John 6 2929. 'Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the message of the Father, this is what he would have all men do: Believe in me; believe that I am the Son of God; believe that I came forth from the Father; believe that I am the promised Messiah, the King of Israel, the Deliverer, your Redeemer, Lord, and Savior. Believe that the Father sent me to do his will, and show that you believe by obeying the laws and ordinances of my gospel.'

SCJohn 6 30John 6 3130-31. 'They said therefore unto him, We cannot accept your claim of divine Sonship unless you show us some great sign. True, you fed five thousand and more of us yesterday near Bethsaida with five loaves and two fishes, but surely you won't claim that as proof of the exalted claim to divinity which you now make. Why Moses, who was a man and not a god, fed millions of our fathers daily for forty years with manna from heaven. His miracle far exceeded yours of yesterday. Surely, if you are the Son of God, as you say, you will do some great work so we may believe on thee. Yea, we challenge your claim of divinity by asking, What miraculous work dost thou do?'

SCJohn 6 32John 6 3332-33. 'Then Jesus said unto them, With all force and solemnity, I tell you that ye do err. It was not Moses who gave you that bread from heaven; rather, it was I, the God of Israel; and further, that ancient manna, as used by your fathers, supplied only their temporal needs; they ate daily and hungered daily. But now my Father giveth you the enduring, spiritual bread from heaven, that bread of which men may eat and never hunger more. This bread which my Father giveth is his own Son who was with him in the beginning, who cometh down from heaven, and who offers eternal life to all men.'

John 6 3434. 'Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this spiritual bread, this bread which will feed not our bodies only but our souls also; yea, give us this bread of which we may eat and never hunger more, so that we may press forward and gain eternal life.'

John 6 3535. 'And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; I am the living manna sent down by the Father; I am come to feed you spiritually. He that cometh to me, and obeyeth my gospel, shall be fed spiritually; yea, he shall never hunger more; and he that believeth that I am the Son of God, sent down from the Father, shall find in my gospel rivers of living water from which to drink and quench his spiritual thirst; yea, he shall drink and never thirst more.'

John 6 3636. 'And now, why say ye, Evermore give us this spiritual food and drink, for I have already offered it unto you, and you received it not; yea, though ye have heard my words and even seen my miracles, yet ye have not believed that I am he through whom salvation cometh.'

John 6 3737. 'Nevertheless, all those among you who believe in me and my words, and who obey my law, have been given to me by my Father; and such shall come unto me and be fed spiritually; yea, the invitation is to all, and none are denied: if men will come unto me, they shall in no wise be cast out.' (2 Ne. 26:33.)

John 6 3838. 'For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.' (3 Ne. 27:13-16.)

John 6 3939. 'And this is the Father's will who hath sent me, that I should work out the infinite and eternal atonement, so that all men shall be raised in immortality at the last day; yea, it is his will that all should come forth from the grave and that none should be lost.'

John 6 4040. 'And this also is the will of the Father who sent me, that everyone who receiveth me as the Son of God, and who believeth that I am the Christ, and who obeyeth the laws and ordinances of my gospel, enduring in righteousness to the end, shall have everlasting life; yea, it is his will that all such shall come forth in the resurrection of the just, raised in immortality and unto eternal life.' (D. & C. 29:43-44.)
