Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Feedeth the Four Thousand

Mark 8 1Mark 8 2Mark 8 3Mark 8 4Mark 8 5Mark 8 6Mark 8 7Mark 8 8Mark 8 9Mark 8 10SCMatt 15 32Matt 15 33Matt 15 34Matt 15 35Matt 15 36Matt 15 37Matt 15 38Matt 15 39This miraculous feeding of the four thousand is not a mere duplication or repetition of the feeding of the five thousand which took place a short time before near Bethsaida. Then our Lord was mingling with his own kindred of Israel; now he is teaching other hosts who in substantial part, being inhabitants of Decapolis, are presumed to be Gentile. Then he was laying the foundation for his incomparable sermon on the Bread of Life; now he is prefiguring the future presentation of the living bread to the Gentile nations. And significantly, this mixed multitude from the east of the Jordan were more receptive, and took a more sane and sound view of the matchless miracle of feeding thousands by use of the creative powers resident in him, than did the members of the chosen seed.

Mark 8:1-10. See Matt. 14:13-23a.

Mark 8 22. They have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat] It is difficult to overestimate the transcendent appeal Jesus had for multitudes of the common people. Here we find four thousand men, plus an uncounted host of women and children, staying with him in a solitary area, without food or other necessities for three days; they are now faint from fasting and weary for want of beds and other normal home conveniences, yet they remain to hear every spoken word and rejoice in every gracious healing. Would they so have acted except for the inward assurance that here indeed, as they themselves had frankly avowed, was "the God of Israel"? (Matt. 15:31.)

Mark 8 44. From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?] Those speaking were the apostles who had participated in the feeding of the five thousand. They knew full well the miraculous creative powers of the Master whom they followed. The question as here put is rather an expression of their own inability to feed such a multitude with the scanty provisions at hand. We may suppose also that in their subservient position as followers of him who exceeds all men in power and might, they modestly and properly left to their Lord the decision as to what should be done. It is evident that Jesus did not deem it necessary to test their faith, as he had done before, by saying, "They need not depart; give ye them to eat" (Matt. 14:16); this time he simply asked what provisions were at hand and gave directions as to their distribution.

Mark 8 1010. The parts of Dalmanutha] Matthew says, "the coasts [region] of Magdala [Magadan] "—presumably an area on the west of the Sea of Galilee, which cannot now be located with certainty.
