Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Church Founded on Rock of Revelation

Matt 16 13Matt. 16:13. Coasts of Caesarea Philippi] Not a coastal but an inland area, located some distance north of the Sea of Galilee, near Mount Hermon and the source of the Jordan River. Coasts frequently means territory or region according to the usage of the King James translators. Mark designates the area as "the towns of Caesarea Philippi." (Mark 8:27.)

Luke 9 18Luke 9:18. Luke alone, though his whole account is the briefest of any of the Synoptists, preserves for us the fact that Jesus and the disciples were alone praying when the Master asked the question which elicited Peter's dramatic testimony.

Matt 16 13Matt. 16:13. Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?] That is, 'Who do men say that I the Son of God am?' The name-titles Son of God and Son of Man are synonymous; they are as identical in meaning as two phrases containing different words can be. In the pure Adamic language, the name of Elohim, the Father, is Man of Holiness (signifying that God is a Holy Man), and the name of Christ, the Son, is Son of Man of Holiness or Son of Man. (Mormon Doctrine, p. 671; Moses 6:57.)

Matt 16 1414. Some say that thou art John the Baptist] Apparently others shared the superstitious views of Herod Antipas that the martyred John had been raised from the dead. (Matt. 14:1-2.)

Matt 16 14Elias] Elijah, who as was well known among the Jews, was to return to earth and perform a mighty work before the ushering in of the final Messianic Era. (Mal. 4:5-6; D. & C. 110:13-16.)

Matt 16 14Jeremias] Jeremiah. According to Jewish legends, Jeremiah as well as Elijah, was to return to prepare the way before the Messiah. Jeremiah "was said to have hidden the ark when Jerusalem was captured by the Babylonians, and to have called Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses from their tombs to assist him in mourning for the destruction of the Temple. In the days of the Messiah it was said that he and Elijah would dig up the ark from the cave on Mt. Nebo in which it was concealed, and replace it in the Holy of Holies." (Dummelow, p. 680.)

Matt 16 1616. Thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God] Peter spoke as the Holy Ghost gave him utterance, bearing his own personal testimony and acting as mouth for his brethren of the Twelve. But great and majestic as Peter's confession was, it brought forth no new or novel doctrine; it was not forthcoming as the climax of a long period of training and schooling which convinced the apostles that their Master was the Messiah, as some have falsely supposed. Rather, it was the spoken averment of what had long been in the hearts of each of them; it was a plain and inspired restatement of the same testimony the true disciples had been bearing from the very time of Jesus' birth.

Matt 16 16Shepherds to whom his birth was announced (Luke 2:7-20), Simon and Anna in the temple (Luke 2:25-39), wise men from the east (Matt. 2:1-12), John the Baptist (John 1:1-36; 3:22-36; Matt. 3), Elizabeth (Luke 1:41-45), Andrew (John 1:37-42), Phillip (John 1:43-45), Nathaneal (John 1:46-51), the Samaritan woman (John 4:28-29, 39), the apostles as a group (Matt. 14:33), mortal men possessed with devils (Luke 4:33-37), the people generally (Matt. 9:27; 12:23; 15:22)—all these on previous occasions, using language having exactly the same sense and meaning as Peter's, had born testimony of our Lord's divine Sonship. And for that matter, he himself had taken frequent opportunity, both in plain language and by symbols which were clearly understood by his Jewish hearers, to bear testimony of his own divinity. (Luke 2:41-50; 4:16-32; John 2:13-22; 3:13-21; 4:4-45; 5:17-47; Matt. 12:1-8.)

SCMatt 16 17Matt 16 18Matt 16 1917-19. See Matthew 18:18. Jesus here promises to give Peter, at a future time, the keys of the kingdom by which he shall have power to bind, seal, and loose on earth and in heaven. These keys, and the sealing power which is inherent in them, have been held by righteous men in all gospel dispensations.

SCMatt 16 17Matt 16 18Matt 16 19When Christ, some twenty or more years before his birth into mortality, conferred these same keys upon Nephi the son of Helaman, he described the power and magnitude of them in these words: "Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done; for I have beheld how thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto thee, unto this people. And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments. And now, because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will. Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God. Behold, I declare it unto thee in the presence of mine angels, that ye shall have power over this people, and shall smite the earth with famine, and with pestilence, and destruction, according to the wickedness of this people. Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people. And thus, if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in twain, it shall be done. And if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and become smooth, it shall be done. And behold, if ye shall say that God shall smite this people, it shall come to pass. And now behold, I command you, that ye shall go and declare unto this people, that thus saith the Lord God, who is the Almighty: Except ye repent ye shall be smitten, even unto destruction." (Hela. 10:4-11.)

SCMatt 16 17Matt 16 18Matt 16 19Because of his own unwearying devotion to the Master's cause, and so that he might preside over all the affairs of the kingdom of God on earth, Peter was soon to receive and exercise these same keys and powers, as was to be the case also with all of his brethren of the Twelve. (Matt. 18:18.)

Matt 16 1717. Simon Bar-jona] Literally, Simon son of Jonah (John 1:42), a formal name of Peter, here aptly used to contrast Peter's mortal paternity with Jesus' birth as the literal Son of an immortal Father.

Matt 16 17Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven] Mortal man was not the source of Peter's knowledge that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of the living God." He hid learned it by personal revelation from the Father who hid sent the Holy Ghost to Peter to testify of the Son. The Holy Ghost is a Revelator; one of his chief assigned missions is to bear testimony to receptive mortals that Jesus is the Christ. Peter had received such a revelation on previous occasions (John 6:69), and here we find the Holy Ghost speaking to him again, certifying anew of the divinity of his Lord.

Matt 16 17It is a false notion to suppose that the apostles and other righteous men did not receive revelation from the Holy Ghost while Christ was with them in the flesh. It is true that (with the apparent exception of John the Baptist) they did not enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost, meaning the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead, until after the day of Pentecost. But they did receive flashes of revelation from time to time from the Holy Ghost, as Peter did in this instance. Simeon's testimony, for instance, "was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost." (Luke 2:26); and so it was with the testimonies of all the disciples. John the Baptist, however—because of his position as the Lord's forerunner, and possibly because he did not enjoy the close personal relationship with Jesus that the other disciples had—was "filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb." (D. & C. 84:27.) Jesus himself, of course, had the Holy Ghost with him at all times and operated in all that he did in conformity with that member of the Godhead.

Matt 16 1818. Thou art Peter] That is, 'Thou art a mortal man; Jonah is thy father. I, thy Lord, though I dwell in mortality, am the Son of God in the same sense that thou, Simon, art the son of Jonah; as thou hast testified of my parentage, so I also, by way of contrast, certify of thine. And now, though I have inherited because of my birth the powers of immortality, which sets me apart from thee, yet because of faith and obedience thou shalt receive and exercise the powers and keys which I hold, and in my name thou shalt bind and loose, seal and unseal, both on earth and in heaven. Though thou art mortal, for thou art Peter, the son of Jonah, yet thy power shall prevail in the immortal sphere where I, who have the power of immortality, for God is my Father, reign forever and ever.'

Matt 16 18This same vivid contrast between the powers of mortality and the powers of immortality was made by Christ when he said to Nephi the son of Helaman, "Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God" (Hela. 10:6), and then continued, in effect, to say to Nephi that though he was a man as contrasted with Deity, yet Nephi should exercise the power of God himself, binding and sealing in heaven as on earth, smiting the earth with famine and pestilence, moving mountains and the like.

Matt 16 18Upon this rock I will build my church] "What rock? Revelation!" (Teachings, p. 274.) What church? The Church of Jesus Christ of the Meridian of Time, or of Latter-day Saints, or of whatever dispensation is involved. That is, 'Upon revelation, a rock of secure foundation, I will continue to build up my Church, for that Church which I have already organized among you is not yet perfected, but it shall be perfected in due course, for I will continue to give you revelation after I have ascended unto my Father.'

Matt 16 18This whole passage, containing our Lord's questions and promises and Peter's great confession, is one that has engendered endless wrangling in Christendom. Catholics virtually rest their whole claim to being the true Church upon the contention that Jesus here promised to build the Church upon Peter as an individual. Protestant apologists point out—and their contention is true that the position of Peter in the primitive Church was entirely unlike that of a modern pope and that in fact Peter received no power and no keys that were not held jointly and equally by all of the Twelve, as though proving this would show the divinity of their lost cause.

Matt 16 18But when the passage is considered, as all properly interpreted scripture must be in its context and historical setting, and in its proper perspective and relationship to all of the revealed word—its intent and meaning is so clear that no intelligent person is justified in misunderstanding it. God's work does not rest on individuals, but upon doctrines and principles. The Lord Jesus, himself, standing alone, separate from all other men, is the sole person, under God, in whom faith is or properly can be centered. Peter had his agency; he could have fallen from grace, fought the truth, and become a son of perdition; so could each of the Twelve. There is no compulsion in the gospel of our Lord. Peter was the greatest man of his day, just as Joseph Smith ranks pre-eminent above all others in this dispensation. But neither of them was Christ, and neither of them was God. The work of Deity rests not on the arm of flesh, but upon the eternal principles that he ordained before the world was and in conformity to which he has operated in all dispensations.

Matt 16 18What then is the principle upon which the Lord has built up his Church and established his kingdom in all ages? Always, invariably, eternally, exclusively, Deity has and does operate upon the principle of revelation. By revelation his mind and will is made known and his kingdom established; without it he becomes an unknown God, an immaterial nothing; without it men substitute their own creeds and theories for his plans and purposes. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, the Brother of Jared, Nephi, Joseph Smith, and every prophet through whom the God of heaven set up his earthly kingdom, received their commission and direction by revelation. Where there is revelation, there is the kingdom of God on earth; where there is no revelation, there the kingdom of God is not.

Matt 16 18Thus, by viewing this passage in harmony with the whole body of revealed truth—and any other course will result in a distorted and perverted understanding of it—it is plain beyond question that our Lord is saying to Peter: 'Blessed art thou Peter, for thy unwearying devotion to my cause and for the testimony which thou hast borne of my divine Sonship; and this testimony was not revealed to thee by mortal man, but it came by revelation from my Father, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And now Peter, my chief apostle, know this: It is upon this very rock of revelation that I have built up my Church in all ages past, and upon which I will build and perfect it in this your day; for after I have ascended to my Father, ye and your brethren and all the worthy saints shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, so that you may receive revelation from me and learn all things that are expedient for you to know concerning the building up and rolling forth of my kingdom.'

Matt 16 18It is fruitless for uninspired scriptural exegetes to argue and debate about this passage in an attempt to sustain the particular leanings with which they chance to have encumbered themselves. What does it matter that the name Peter in Greek happens to mean a rock or a stone? What difference does it make that Peter was promised the gift of seership, or anything else for that matter? And what bearing does it have on the problem to show that all of the Twelve held all of the keys of the kingdom? None of these things establish the divinity of any false church.

Matt 16 18But suppose it were true that the wholly untenable apostate view were correct, and that the Lord had set up his kingdom with Peter as the rock, still any church claiming to trace its authority back to Peter would be a false church unless it believed in and operated on the principles of modern revelation. Why? Simply because conditions are so different in the world today that a church without daily revelation cannot make the change necessary to meet those new conditions. How would the modern church know what stand to take with reference to the use of tobacco, or coffee, or the atomic bomb, or motion pictures, or television, or a thousand things that were not so much as known to men in Peter's day?

Matt 16 18Clearly it is only by revelation that the Lord establishes his work among men. In the final analysis, no person can have conclusive knowledge as to the true meaning of this passage without revelation from that God who is no respecter of persons and who giveth wisdom liberally to all who ask of him in faith. And how can those who deny the very existence of revelation for this age, and who deliberately refrain from seeking such for themselves, how can they, in their uninspired state, ever come to a sure knowledge of this or any other eternal, spiritual truth?

Matt 16 18I will build my church] This is not a promise to organize the Church of Christ in a future day. Our Lord had already set up this Church among men; it was the very kingdom of God on earth, the doctrines of which kingdom he and his apostles had been preaching on every hand. Converts baptized by him and his disciples were already members of the Church; persons ordained to offices in the Melchizedek Priesthood, including the apostles themselves, were operating in church offices. By speaking in the future tense, Jesus is conveying the thought that his Church will be amplified and perfected by the apostles after he ascends to his Father. In building up the kingdom both doctrines and matters of organization come line upon line, precept upon precept, as the needs of the growing, spreading kingdom require. It was the same in this day; the Church itself was formally organized on the sixth of April, 1830, but it was still to be built up on earth, as added growth and changing circumstances necessitated the revelation of new doctrines and the addition of new organizations and officers.

Matt 16 18My Church] There is and can be only one true Church, even as there is only one true science of mathematics or chemistry. Two different churches, teaching conflicting doctrines, cannot both be true. If one group of religionists affirms that God is a personal being in whose image man is created, and that he has a body of flesh and bones which is as tangible as man's; and if another assembly of so-called believers professes to think that Deity is a spirit essence which fills the immensity of space, an immaterial nothingness that is everywhere and nowhere in particular present, a spirit that is incorporeal, uncreated, immaterial and unknowable (all of which is found in the false creeds of Christendom)—then both of these concepts cannot be true. Two and two cannot be four and also three.

Matt 16 18Christ's Church is the one true Church. In this dispensation it is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (D. & C. 1:30.) And since truth is eternal, this one true Church, founded as it is upon the rock of revelation, has every key, power, priesthood, grace, and authority, that was enjoyed by the saints of God in any past age. Further, such of the doctrines and principles of salvation as have been revealed in this age are identical with and constitute the same concepts and views that were revealed anciently to men of faith and devotion.

Matt 16 18The gates of hell shall not prevail against it] The gates of hell are the entrances to the benighted realms of the damned where the wicked go to await the day when they shall come forth in the resurrection of damnation. Those beckoning gates prevail against all who pass through them. But those who obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel have the promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. (D. & C. 10:69; 17:8; 21:4-6; 98:22.) In this instance] Jesus is telling Peter that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the rock of revelation; that is, as long as the saints are living in righteousness so as to receive revelation from heaven, they will avoid the gates of hell and the Church itself will remain pure, undefiled, and secure against every evil. But when, because of iniquity, revelation ceases, then the gates of hell prevail against the people and also against the organization of which they are members.

Matt 16 18Similarly, the Lord, by revelation, has said in our day: "Open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; Yea, repent and be baptized, every one of you, for a remission of your sins; yea, be baptized even by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost. Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and remember that they shall have faith in me or they can in no—wise be saved; And upon this rock I will build my church; yea, upon this rock ye are built, and if ye continue, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you,' (D. & C. 33:10-13.)

Matt 16 18Hell] See Luke 16:23.

Matt 16 1919. The keys of the kingdom of heaven] See Matthew 18:18. "Keys are the right of presidency, the directing, controlling, governing power. The keys of the kingdom are the power, right, and authority to preside over the kingdom of God on earth (which is the Church) and to direct all of its affairs." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 377-379.) These keys include the sealing power, that is, the power to bind and seal on earth, in the Lord's name and by his authorization, and to have the act ratified in heaven. Thus if Peter performed a baptism by the authority of the sealing power here promised him, that ordinance would be of full force and validity when the person for whom it was performed went into the eternal worlds, and it would then admit him to the celestial heaven. Again, if Peter used these sealing keys to perform a marriage, then those so united in eternal marriage would continue as husband and wife forever. When they attained their future heaven, they would find themselves bound together in the family unit the same as they were on earth. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 615-616.)

Matt 16 2020. For the time being, to avoid persecution and because the available hearers were not prepared to heed their witness, the apostles were restrained from bearing witness of the divine Sonship of their Master.
