Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Keys of the Kingdom Conferred upon the Brethren

Matt 18 18See Matthew 16:13-20. After Peter uttered his great testimony while in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus promised to give his chief apostle the keys of the kingdom of heaven. These keys include the power and authority to bind and loose on earth and in heaven. (Matt. 16:19.) Thereafter, while on the Mount of Transfiguration, assisted by Moses and Ellas, the Master conferred these keys upon Peter and also upon James and John. (Matt. 17:1-3; Teachings, p. 158.)

Matt 18 18Now we find our Lord announcing that all of the Twelve possessed these same sealing powers and keys; either the remaining nine apostles had received them sometime between the Transfiguration and the occasion of this sermon or they received them at this time. After his resurrection, we shall find Jesus again specifying that all of the Twelve held these keys. (John 20:21-23.)

Matt 18 18"Keys are the right of presidency, the directing, controlling, governing Power. The keys of the kingdom are the power, right, and authority to preside over the kingdom of God on earth (which is the Church) and to direct all of its affairs." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 377-379.) When the ordinances of salvation and exaltation are performed by or at the direction of those holding these keys, such rites and performances are of full force and validity in this life and in the life to come, that is, they are binding on earth and in heaven.

Matt 18 18It should be noted that Peter's position in the primitive Church bore no resemblance to that of a modern pope. No key, power, grace, or authority was conferred upon Peter that was not enjoyed by each of his associates in the apostolic quorum. (Matt. 19:28; Rev. 21:14.) True, as the senior apostle of God on earth, Peter presided over the other members of his quorum so long as he lived. But the priesthood, keys, powers, graces, and prerogatives with which he was endowed were identically the same as those vested in each member of the supreme apostolic quorum. Accordingly, after Peter and James had departed this life, the beloved John, not the Bishop of Rome or of any other locality, served as the presiding officer of the Lord's earthly kingdom, using the same keys and sealing powers which Peter himself had exercised in the days of his presidency.

Matt 18 18In the meridian of time, the Church was built, not upon Peter or upon any special powers given him, nor for that matter upon any one or even all of the Twelve, or any special powers given them, but upon the rock of revelation. Since all of the Twelve—as prophets, seers, and revelators to the Church—held the keys whereby revelation comes from God to man, it follows that any of them could have presided over the Church had the occasion required. Because they, as apostles and prophets, following in the footsteps of their Master, were the agents appointed to receive revelation for the Church, thus keeping the kingdom in the course charted by the Lord himself, Paul properly concluded that the Church was "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Eph. 2:20.)

Matt 18 18Since keys include the right of presidency, and there can never be two equal heads at the same time, it follows that the keys of the kingdom can be exercised in their fulness only by one man at a time on earth. (D. & C. 132:7.) Thus, as far as their full and unlimited exercise was concerned, the keys lay dormant in each of the Twelve as long as Peter lived. Peter's pre-eminence lay in the fact that as the senior apostle who presided over all others, he could direct all of the affairs of the kingdom including the labors of his fellow special witnesses of the Lord.

Matt 18 18In the dispensation of the fulness of times, the keys of the kingdom were restored in much the same way as was the case in primitive times. First Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received them from various angelic ministrants sent by Deity. (D. & C. 13; 27:5-14; 128:18-21; 132:46-47.) Then in the Nauvoo Temple these keys were given to all of the modern Twelve, after which the prophet said: "I have sealed upon your heads all of the keys of the kingdom of God. I have sealed upon you every key, power, principle, that the God of heaven has revealed to me. . .. Ye apostles of the Lamb of God, my brethren, upon your shoulders this kingdom rests; now you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off the kingdom." (G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 72.)

Matt 18 18From that day to this, every man who has been ordained an apostle and set apart as a member of the Council of the Twelve has received all of the keys of the kingdom (including the sealing power), and such of these brethren as have attained the seniority to serve as presidents of the Church have been able to exercise the keys so held in their fulness.

Matt 18 18These sealing keys and powers have been exercised by righteous men in all dispensations from Adam to the present time. They "belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood." (D. & C. 81:2.) Indeed, there can be no true Church and kingdom of God on earth unless the keys of the kingdom are held and exercised by its presiding officers. Where the keys of the kingdom are found, there is the true Church; if these keys are not found, there is no divine Church among men.
