Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus' Kinsmen Believe Not

SCJohn 7 2John 7 3John 7 4John 7 5John 7 6John 7 7John 7 8John 7 9A testimony of the divinity of Christ and of the saving power of his gospel is not bestowed automatically because of family relationship. It comes only by personal obedience to those eternal laws upon which its receipt is predicted. In nearly all ages there have been prophets and righteous men whose sons and daughters have forsaken the faith of their fathers and have chosen to walk after the manner of the world.

SCJohn 7 2John 7 3John 7 4John 7 5John 7 6John 7 7John 7 8John 7 9Frequent special reference is made to the sons of Joseph and Mary as the "brethren" of Jesus, though in fact they were his half-brothers. (Matt. 12:46; 13:55; John 2:12; Acts 1:14; 1 Cor. 9:5.) Though they were reared in the same household and came under the benign influence of Joseph and Mary, though they were aware of the teachings, ministry, and miracles of Jesus himself, yet these his close relatives had not so far accepted him as the Messiah. However, all of them, apparently, were converted later (Acts 1:14); one of them, identified by Paul as "James the Lord's brother" (Gal. 1:19), was to minister in the holy apostleship; and yet another, Judas, who calls himself, "Jude, the . . . brother of James" (Jude 1), wrote the epistle of Jude.

John 7 22. Feast of tabernacles] Three great annual, week-long feasts or "holy convocations" characterized the religious devotions of ancient Israel: (1) The Passover or Feast of Unleavened Bread, which commemorated Israel's deliverance from Egyptian bondage; (2) Pentecost, also known as the Feast of Weeks, or of Harvest, or of First Fruits, which commenced fifty days after the beginning of the Passover and was an agricultural festival; and (3) The Feast of Tabernacles, or of Booths, or of Ingathering, a feast marking the completion of the harvest of fruit, oil, and wine. During this last named holy convocation the people lived in booths for eight days in memory of their wanderings in the wilderness following their Egyptian deliverance. (Ex. 23:14-19; 34:21-26; Lev. 23; Num. 28:16-31; Deut. 16:1-17.)

John 7 2These feasts—comparable in purpose to conferences in latter-day Israel—were occasions of worship, of offering sacrifices, and of paying one's devotions to the God of Israel. The entire male population was obligated to assemble at the temple or other appointed sanctuaries to participate in the solemn and sacred services. Aside from their social and recreational values, these holy convocations, as periods of rest from temporal pursuits, of assembling together in a common purpose, and of worshiping in harmony with the revealed pattern, had the effect of uniting Israel religiously and politically through the ages.

SCJohn 7 3John 7 4John 7 5John 7 6John 7 7John 7 83-8. Jesus' unbelieving kinsmen are apparently chiding him for remaining in Galilee to avoid those in Jerusalem who "sought to kill him." (v. 1.) Their argument: 'If you are what you claim to be, then all men should see your miracles and hear your message. Why then do you hide out here in Galilee, when you could go to Jerusalem where all Israel will be assembled to keep the Feast of Tabernacles?'

SCJohn 7 3John 7 4John 7 5John 7 6John 7 7John 7 8Spurning their presumptuous attempt to interfere in the affairs of his ministry, Jesus replied that he would govern the locale of that ministry and go to Jerusalem at a time of his own choosing. They could go any time for there was no organized campaign of hatred against them; they were of the world, and the world receives its own; but he had testified of the evil in the world, and now he had to arrange his travels in the face of the fierce opposition which that testimony had brought upon him.
