Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Again Proclaims His Divine Sonship

John 7 2727. Apparently two divergent views prevailed as to the place from which the Messiah would come: (1) That as Micah had foretold he would be born in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2-4; Matt. 2); and (2) That his coming would be so hidden in mystery that none could specify the place of his origin. Adhering to this second view and knowing that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee as an ostensible member of the family of Joseph and Mary, these Jews concluded that he could not be the Messiah.

SCJohn 7 28John 7 2928-29. 'Ye know that I am Jesus of Nazareth, that Mary is my mother, that Joseph is supposed to be my father. But know this also, I did not come to you to declare my parentage and origin of my own will, but because my true Father sent me. He is that God whom you know not. But I know him, for as his Son I came forth from him, and he hath sent me to testify unto you.'

John 7 3030. Viewing our Lord's claim to divine Sonship as false, he was, in the Jewish mind, guilty of blasphemy—a fact which led to an immediate attempt to arrest him.

John 7 3131. Sympathetic persons began to reason: 'If this man is not the Christ, what can Christ do when he cometh which will equal the words and deeds of this man?' That is, 'This man must he the Christ, for how could Christ do better than he has done?'

SCJohn 7 32John 7 33John 7 3432-34. Jesus declines to be taken by the officers sent to arrest him, saying rather: 'Your desire to take me is premature; I am to remain with you until the appointed time. Then I shall return to my Father, and we shall part company forever. Though ye then seek me, ye shall not find me, for no unclean thing can come into my Father's kingdom.' Later he would tell his repentant and faithful disciples that where he went they could come also. (John 14:1-6.)

SCJohn 7 35John 7 3635-36. Apparently in a mocking attitude the Jews scoff: 'What! Will he leave us to go to the scattered remnant of Israel among the Greeks? Will he leave us, the assembled and chosen people, to preach to Gentiles?'
