Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

"The Truth Shall Make You Free"

John 8 3131. To those Jews who were beginning to believe, Jesus said: 'If ye continue to believe and obey my words, ye shall establish yourselves as my true followers; ye shall become saints in very deed.'

John 8 3232. Truth] See John 18:38. Ye shall know the truth] How will this knowledge of spiritual truth come? By heeding the words of Christ; by seeking to live in conformity to every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, "for the word of the Lord is truth" (D. & C. 84: 44-45); by devout, personal desire; by sincere scriptural study; and by fervent personal prayer.

John 8 32Spiritual truths are known only by revelation. "The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:11.) "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth." (John 16:13.) "By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.)

John 8 32Christ himself set the pattern; he progressed from grace to grace until "He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth; And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." (D. & C. 93:26-28.)

John 8 32The truth shall make you free] Free from the damning power of false doctrine; free from the bondage of appetite and lust; free from the shackles of sin; free from every evil and corrupt influence and from every restraining and curtailing power; free to go on to the unlimited freedom enjoyed in its fulness only by exalted beings.

John 8 3333. This reply, obviously spoken by unbelievers in the multitude, can not rationally be interpreted as presenting a claim that the Jews had never been subject to temporal bondage. At that very time, they were vassals of Rome, and between that day and the time of Father Abraham, as a nation of slaves, they had bowed in toil through centuries of Egyptian bondage, and had been unrooted and carried bodily into Babylonian captivity.

John 8 33Rather, Jesus' unbelieving respondents were saying: 'We are the chosen seed, and as such we have the truth; never have our minds been darkened by error; our fathers had the truth, and we have it. Why at this late date do you think to reveal to us the truths which will give us that spiritual freedom which we already have?'

Abraham's seed] See John 8:37-50.

SCJohn 8 34John 8 35John 8 3634-36. What masterful analogy, what infallible logic Jesus here uses. As there are restrictions and limitations in temporal matters, so there are also in the spiritual realm. Temporally speaking, only members of the family abide permanently in the house; servants come and go in their menial ministrations; they cannot abide forever in the house unless freed from their station as bondsmen; they remain outside the inner circle unless adopted as members of the family, thus being made legal heirs of all its privileges.

SCJohn 8 34John 8 35John 8 36Similarly in spiritual things, only the family members, the freemen, the sons and daughters of God, shall abide forever in his kingdom; the servants, those bound by the chains of sin, shall minister in their assigned spheres; they cannot abide in the Father's house unless freed from sin through the cleansing power of the Son. To gain an inheritance in the spiritual kingdom, they must be spiritually begotten of the Father, adopted into his family as joint-heirs with the Son.

SCJohn 8 34John 8 35John 8 36Thus Jesus is saying: 'You may belong to the household of Abraham now in mortality, but it may not be so always. Only those who believe in me as the Son of God shall abide in the household of faithful Abraham in the eternal worlds. If ye forsake sin, and believe in the Son, he shall make you free from spiritual bondage, and only the free shall be Abraham's seed hereafter.'
