Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

What Is the Fulness of the Father?

D&C 93 20To gain the fulness of the Father means to attain exaltation and godhood. This fulness consists of (1) all power, both in heaven and on earth, and (2) eternal increase or "a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." (D. & C. 132:19-24; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 275-276.) As is the case with all men, our Lord worked out his own salvation and exaltation. Having been made flesh, he continued in obedience to the whole law, until having overcome all things, he rose in the triumph of a glorious resurrection to receive, inherit, and possess all things, that is, to the "fulness of the glory of the Father." Having set the example himself, our Lord now proclaims: "If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father." (D. & C. 93:20.)

John 1 18I. V. John 1:18. Because the law of carnal commandments, as it prevailed from Moses to Christ, was administered by the Aaronic Priesthood, it was "the administration of death." That is, no one could gain the fulness of the Father by the Mosaic law alone. There is no celestial marriage without the Melchizedek Priesthood, and without celestial marriage and the consequent continuation of the family unit in eternity, men inherit what the Lord calls "the deaths." (D. & C. 132:25.) They do not have spirit children in the resurrection.

John 1 18On the other hand, in the fulness of the gospel, as restored in the meridian of time by the Son, is found "the power of an endless life," meaning that through the Melchizedek Priesthood (which always accompanies the fulness of the gospel) men may gain endless life, or eternal life, or exaltation. In other words they may gain the fulness of the Father, which includes "eternal lives" as contrasted with "the deaths." To inherit "eternal lives" means to have eternal increase or spirit progeny forever. (D. & C. 132:15-32.)

Jacob 1 18D&C 93 13D. & C. 93:13. Continued from grace to grace] From intelligence to intelligence; from achievement to achievement; from obedience to obedience; from glory to glory—such is the process whereby our Lord worked out his exaltation. Similarly, as the prophet taught: "You have got to learn how to be gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." (Teachings, pp. 346-347.)
