Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Sacrifice Required of All Disciples

I. V. Luke 14:26. A true disciple, if called upon to do so, forsakes all—riches, home, friends, family, even his own life—in the Master's Cause. "And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (D. & C. 103:28.)

If any man. .. hate not his father] Not hate in the sense of intense aversion or abhorence; such is contrary to the whole spirit and tenor of the gospel. Men are to love even their enemies, to say nothing of their own flesh and blood. (Matt. 5:43-48.) Bather, the sense and meaning of Jesus' present instruction is that true disciples have a duty toward God which takes precedence over any family or personal obligation. It is in thought content similar to the message previously given the Twelve: "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matt. 10:37.) See Matt. 19:27, 29.

I. V. Luke 14:29-31—Parable of the Rash Builder; Luke 14:31-32—Parable of the Rash King. These two parables teach that converts should count the cost before joining the Church; that they should come into the kingdom only if they are prepared to make the sacrifices required; that they should go the whole way in the gospel cause, or stay out entirely; that they should "not follow him, unless" they are "able to continue" in his word, to "do the things" which he teaches and commands.

Lukewarm saints are damned; unless they repent and become zealous the Lord promised to spue them out of his mouth. (Rev. 3:14-19.) Only the valiant gain celestial salvation; those saints "who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus" can ascend no higher than the terrestrial world. (D. & C. 76:79.)

Those who are not able and determined to keep the commandments are better off outside the Church, "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D. & C. 82:3.)

Luke 14 33Luke 14:33. This law of sacrifice is summarized by the Prophet in these words: "For a man to lay down his all, his character and reputation, his honor, and applause, his good name among men, his houses, his lands, his brothers and sisters, his wife and children, and even his own life also—counting all things but filth and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ—requires more than mere belief or supposition that he is doing the will of God; but actual knowledge, realizing that, when these sufferings are ended, he will enter into eternal rest, and be a partaker of the glory of God....

Luke 14 33"A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary [to lead] unto life and salvation; for, from the first existence of man, the faith necessary unto the enjoyment of life and salvation never could be obtained without the sacrifice of all earthly things. It was through this sacrifice, and this only, that God has ordained that men should enjoy eternal life; and it is through the medium of the sacrifice of all earthly things that men do actually know that they are doing the things that are well pleasing in the sight of God. When a man has offered in sacrifice all that he has for the truth's sake, not even withholding his life, and believing before God that he has been called to make this sacrifice because he seeks to do his will, he does know, most assuredly, that God does and will accept his sacrifice and offering, and that he has not, or will not seek his face in vain. Under these circumstances, then, he can obtain the faith necessary for him to lay hold on eternal life.

Luke 14 33"It is vain for persons to fancy to themselves that they are heirs with those, or can be heirs with them, who have offered their all in sacrifice, and by this means obtained faith in God and favor with him so as to obtain eternal life, unless they, in like manner, offer unto him the same sacrifice, and through that offering obtain the knowledge that they are accepted of him. .

Luke 14 33"From the days of righteous Abel to the present time, the knowledge that men have that they are accepted in the sight of God is obtained by offering sacrifice. .

Luke 14 33"Those, then, who make the sacrifice, will have the testimony that their course is pleasing in the sight of God; and those who have this testimony will have faith to lay hold on eternal life; and will be enabled, through faith, to endure unto the end, and receive the crown that is laid up for them that love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. But those who do not make the sacrifice cannot enjoy this faith, because men are dependent upon this sacrifice in order to obtain this faith: therefore, they cannot lay hold upon eternal life, because the revelations of God do not guarantee unto them the authority so to do, and without this guarantee faith could not exist." (Lectures on Faith, pp. 58-60.)
