Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

The Law and the Prophets Testify of Christ

Luke 16 14Luke 16:14. Jesus has just taught his disciples that unless they use their earthly wealth in accordance with gospel standards they cannot attain the kingdom of heaven. Having overheard his teachings, and being unable to answer them, the Pharisees begin to ridicule the Teacher. As rendered in the Revised Version, this verse reads: "And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things; and they scoffed at him."

Luke 16 1515. "Our Lord's reply to their words of derision was a further condemnation. They knew all the tricks of the business world, and could outdo the righteous steward in crafty manipulation; and yet so successfully could they justify themselves before man as to be outwardly honest and straightforward; furthermore, they made ostentatious display of a certain type of simplicity, plainness, and self-denial, in which external observances they asserted superiority over the luxury loving Sadducees; they had grown arrogantly proud of their humility, but God knew their hearts, and the traits and practices they most esteemed were an abomination in his sight." (Talmage, p. 465.)

I. V. Luke 16:16-18, 20. All of the divine teachings, revelations, visions, prophecies, miracles, and wonders of the past were considered by the Jews to have come through and because of the law and the prophets. Beginning with Adam, their father, the first man, the Lord God had sent prophets, at frequent and recurring intervals, to warn, teach, and guide his people. The whole body of their prophecies and inspired writings were known as the prophets. From the day of Moses, Israel had been under the law—the set of divine requirements and regulations which governed the chosen people in both temporal and spiritual matters.

With all this—the whole body of revealed knowledge about God and salvation and all things incident thereto—why, the Pharisees reasoned, was there a need for this Jesus and his teachings; what right did he have to rule and judge in Israel.

The answer—'The law and the prophets testify of me. Yea, the whole purpose of the law was to teach Israel that I would come to redeem my people; all its requirements and performances were types and shadows of things to come; it was a schoolmaster to prepare Israel to receive me and my gospel. And as to the prophets, all "who have prophesied ever since the world began" have testified of me, of my coming in the flesh, and of the redemption I would make for my people. (Mosiah 13:27-35.) Further: I am he who gave the law and in me it shall be fulfilled; not one tittle shall fail, but it shall all be fulfilled in me. (3 Ne. 12:17-19; 15:2-10.) Why do ye pretend to teach the law when ye condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfil it and to redeem you?'

21-22. Lucifer's agents follow the same pattern in all ages. How like the ancient Pharisees are those who persecute the modern saints, including the fact that persecutions are stirred up by ministers of religion and are carried out by adulterous persons. In Missouri and Nauvoo the mobs were often led by ministers; throughout the whole era when plural marriage was made the pretext for persecution, those who caused the earthly kingdom to suffer violence, who sought to destroy it, who took the children of the kingdom by force, were themselves the most immoral and adulterous of men.
