Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Cleanses Ten Lepers

Luke 17 1212. Lepers, which stood afar off] Jesus had no direct, personal contact with the ten. The law required them to "dwell alone" and not mingle with other people. (Lev. 13:45-46.)

Luke 17 1313. All ten had faith in Christ and believed that he could heal them.

Luke 17 1414. Each instance of a healing by Jesus is unique; each stands alone by itself in the lesson taught and the work wrought. Here, as with Naaman the Syrian who was required by Elisha to bathe seven times in the Jordan before losing his leprosy (2 Kings 5), these ten lepers were not healed immediately, but were told to go and show themselves to the priests. Their faith being thus tested, they were all healed enroute. They were, of course, required to gain priestly approval that they were clean before beginning again to mingle with people generally.

Luke 17 1717. This is an illustration of the gift of seership. The other nine had not been cleansed in the presence of the Master, yet he was fully aware of what occurred at some other place.

Luke 17 1818. This stranger] Prayers of thanksgiving are as important as prayer petitioning divine favor. It is here worthy of note that the cleansed Jewish lepers went on their way and that only a lone Samaritan returned to Pour out his gratitude to the Master Healer. Perhaps this exhibition of gratitude by a Samaritan was another evidence to the apostles that all men are acceptable to the Lord and that the Jewish claim to exclusive superiority as a chosen race was soon to be replaced with a command to take the gospel of peace to all races.

Luke 17 1919. Thy faith hath made thee whole] There are greater blessings than to be healed physically. And after a person has exercised the faith to gain physical well-being, if he is to continue in grace, he must manifest the added faith to receive spiritual blessings. Here all of the ten were cleansed of their physical affliction, but it is evident that the one grateful recipient of our Lord's favor was blessed in a special manner, perhaps being made whole spiritually also.
