Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Elizabeth and Her Unborn Child Salute Mary

Luke 1 41Luke 1:41. The babe leaped in her womb] In this miraculous event the pattern is seen which a spirit follows in passing from his pre-existent first estate into mortality. The spirit enters the body at the time of quickening, months prior to the actual normal birth. The value and comfort attending a knowledge of this eternal truth is seen in connection with stillborn children. Since the spirit entered the body before birth, stillborn children will be resurrected and righteous parents shall enjoy their association in immortal glory. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 693-694.)

3 Ne 1 13Luke 1 41The Book of Mormon account of Christ speaking to Nephi the grandson of Helaman and saying, "On the morrow come I into the world" (3 Ne. 1:13), is not intended to infer that the spirit does not enter the body until the moment of the actual birth. Rather this revelation to the Nephites was itself being conveyed in a miraculous and unusual way. Quite probably the one uttering the words was speaking in the first person as though he were Christ, in accordance with the law enabling others to act and speak for Deity on the principal of divine investiture of authority. (Mormon Doctrine, p. 122.)

Luke 1 4242. Blessed art thou among women] This is a Hebraic way of saying, 'Thou art the most blessed of all women,' a statement which is literally true. As there is only one Christ, so there is only one Mary. And as the Father chose the most noble and righteous of all his spirit sons to come into mortality as his Only Begotten in the flesh, so we may confidently conclude that he selected the most worthy and spiritually talented of all his spirit daughters to be the mortal mother of his Eternal Son. Such an understanding, however, in no way condones or mitigates the unscriptural practice whereunder Mary and graven images of her are worshiped and prayers are offered to her in the false hope that she will intercede with her Son on behalf of those who so pray.

Luke 1 4343. The mother of my Lord] To Elizabeth the Holy Ghost revealed that Mary was to be the mother of the Son of God.
