Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Does Faith Follow Miracles?

John 12 3737. Are there those today who think: 'Had I seen the miracles of Jesus, I would have believed in him?' What causes men to believe? Do miracles create faith?

John 12 37All things operate according to law. (D. & C. 88:13, 36.) Blessings flow from obedience, curses from disobedience. (D. & C. 130:20-21; 132:5.) The law of faith provides that if men do certain things, they will gain faith; otherwise, they will not. See Luke 17:5-6.

John 12 37One of the terms and conditions of the law of faith is: If there is faith, there will be miracles. "These signs shall follow them that believe." (Mark 16:17.) "He that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed. He who hath faith to see shall see. He who hath faith to hear shall hear. The lame who hath faith to leap shall leap." (D. & C. 42:48-51.)

John 12 37But the converse is not true. There is no provision in the law of faith that miracles will create faith. Signs follow; they do not precede. It is true that someone who has seen a sign may thereafter do the things which will enable him to gain faith, but it is not the miracle as such which begets the faith; it is obedience to that law upon which its receipt is predicated. Thus Moroni writes: "Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith. . . . For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them; wherefore he showed not himself until after their faith.... And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith; wherefore they first believed in the Son of God." (Ether 12:6-18.)

John 12 3838. Who hath believed our report?] Truly it is ever thus. Notwithstanding the teachings, testimony, and miracles—all of which bore such powerful witness of Jesus' Messiahship—how few believed! How few saw the "arm of the Lord" in his message and ministry. (Isa. 53:1.) And so today, in nearly all the nations of the earth, how few believe the message of restoration and salvation sent by the same Lord through his servant Joseph Smith.

SCJohn 12 40John 12 4140-41. John's use of this Messianic prophecy is an announcement that Jesus is "the King, the Lord of hosts," the great Jehovah seen by Isaiah in vision. (Isa. 6.) Doctrinally, the inspired utterance teaches that all men are not prepared spiritually to receive the exalting truths of pure religion. Before the light of heaven can infuse a soul, a man must open his eyes, soften his heart, and desire to be converted.
