Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Lord Jesus to Return in Power and Glory

Matt 24 30Matt. 24:30. The sign of the Son of man] In discoursing on the Second Coming of Christ at the April Conference of the Church in 1843, Joseph Smith said: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east." (Teachings, pp. 286-287.)

Matt 24 30They shall see the Son of man] Jesus came once, almost in secret; only a few mortals knew of his birth. At his Second Advent the whole of mankind shall know of his return. This time he will come, not as "a man travelling on the earth" (D. & C. 49:22), but in all the glory of his Father's kingdom. "Prepare for the revelation which is to come," he says, "when . . . all flesh shall see me together." (D. & C. 101:23.)

Matt 24 30With power and great glory] No opposing force can stay the hand of the returning Lord. Having received "all power . . . in heaven and in earth" (Matt. 28:18), he will come in celestial splendor to take vengeance on the ungodly and bestow comfort on his saints. (D. & C. 133:50-52.) How aptly the poetic words of Elder Parley P. Pratt contrast the meridian and millennial ministries of Jesus: "Jesus, once of humble birth, Now in glory comes to earth. Once he suffered grief and pain; Now he comes on earth to reign. "Once a meek and lowly Lamb, Now the Lord, the great I Am; Once upon the cross he bowed, Now his chariot is the cloud. "Once he groaned in blood and tears; Now in glory he appears; Once rejected by his own, Now their King he shall be known. "Once forsaken, left alone, Now exalted to a throne; Once all things he meekly bore, But he now will bear no more."

I. V. Matt. 24:39. Not read, not study, not search, but treasure up the Lord's word. Possess it, own it, make it yours by both believing it and living it. For instance: the voice of the Lord says that if men have faith, repent, and are baptized, they shall receive the Holy Ghost. It is not sufficient merely to know what the scripture says. One must treasure it up, meaning take it into his possession so affirmatively that it becomes a part of his very being; as a consequence, in the illustration given, one actually receives the companionship of the Spirit. Obviously such persons will not be deceived where the signs of the times and the Second Coming of the Messiah are concerned.

40 Gather . . . remainder of his elect] Today the gathering is directed by fallible mortals; some who should come into the kingdom and assemble with the saints are overlooked. Hence, when he comes whose judgment and insight is perfect, he shall send his angels to assemble the remainder of his elect. No worthy person will ever fail to gain the deserved blessing, when the final accounting is made.
