Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Judas Arranges to Betray Jesus

Luke 22 3Luke 22:3. Satan entered into Judas] Is this to be taken literally? Perhaps, for Satan is a spirit man, a being who was born the offspring of God in pre-existence, and who was cast out of heaven for rebellion. He and his spirit followers have power in some cases to enter the bodies of men; they are, also, sometimes cast out of these illegally entered habitations by the power of the priesthood. See Mark 1:21-28.

Luke 22 3But if the body of Judas was not possessed literally by Satan, still this traitorous member of the Twelve was totally submissive to the will of the devil. "Before Judas sold Christ to the Jews, he had sold himself to the devil; he had become Satan's serf, and did his master's bidding." (Talmage, p. 592.)

Luke 22 3All things are governed by law. Through obedience and righteousness men are able to receive revelation from the Holy Spirit; through disobedience and wickedness (which course constitutes conformity to the laws which govern in this field) men are able to receive impressions, guidance, and even revelation from the Evil Spirit. Judas was in this latter category; he had descended to that depth of spiritual depravity where he consorted with and was subject to the will of evil spirits. There is no curtailment of agency in either of these courses; both are pursued by deliberate choice.

SCMatt 26 14Matt 26 15Matt. 26:14-15. Judas took the initiative. He sought out the chief priests; he chose to betray his Lord; he asked for the money. It was a wilful, deliberate, premeditated act; and it is useless to speculate (as so many commentators do) as to why he did it. Such speculation usually seeks to excuse Judas for an act which the scriptural account in no way mitigates. The revealed record lays the onus for the deed on Judas and stops there.

SCMatt 26 14Matt 26 15Chief priests] These are they who incited the people against Jesus. Their teachings, their religious interpretations, their prejudices, their hatred, caused the spiritually illiterate multitudes to reject their King. What dire fate must await religious leaders who keep others from coming to a knowledge of the truth!

SCMatt 26 14Matt 26 15What will ye give me?] They could have said one piece of silver or a thousand. Judas had not come to haggle but to betray. What amount, then, should they set? With devilish cunning they chose that sum which in their law was the fixed price of a slave. "Thirty shekels of silver" would recompense an owner for the death of "a manservant or a maidservant." (Ex. 21:28-32.)

SCMatt 26 14Matt 26 15Thirty pieces of silver! Such would they pay for the life of their God—no more and no less. And by so doing all men ever after would know that they esteemed him as the basest of men. And thus, also, even their attempts to debase and insult would fulfil, in literal detail, the Messianic prophecy of Zechariah which had foretold their evil conspiracy. "If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear," the Lord says of the sum for which he will be sold. "So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver." (Zech. 11:12.)

Matt 26 1616. The betrayal must be secret, away from sympathetic groups; to avoid Roman vengeance there must be no "uproar among the people." (Matt. 26:5.)
