Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Names Judas as His Betrayer

Matt 26 25Matt 26 22Matt. 26:22, 25. Is it I?] In their innocence, not even deigning to impute so dastardly a deed to another, eleven of the Twelve ask: "Is it I?" Judas, however—already the greedy possessor of thirty pieces of silver (the price of a slave!), and knowing his own evil heart—waited till last; then, lest his silence be construed as confession, he too is forced to ask the fateful query: "Is it I?"

Matt 26 24Matt. 26:24. Woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed!] What of Judas? Is he more than a traitor? Is he, perchance, the king of traitors? Surely there are degrees of depravity, varying depths to which even traitors will descend. And Judas fell lower than all his fellows, for he betrayed the Son of God. During three and a half years he had eaten at the Master's table, witnessed his miracles, listened to his teachings; and now he was choosing to turn his back on the Light and go out into the night.

Matt 26 24But evil as was the deed, sad as is his fallen state, was he destined to be a son of perdition, to die eternally the second death? To this it would seem, the answer is, No. President Joseph F. Smith analyzed the problem in this way: "If Judas really had known God's power, and had partaken thereof, and did actually 'deny the truth' and 'defy' that power, 'having denied the Holy Spirit after he had received it,' and also 'denied the Only Begotten,' after God had 'revealed him' unto him, then there can be no doubt that he 'will die the second death.' (D. & C. 76:30-49.)

Matt 26 24"That Judas did partake of all this knowledge—that these great truths had been revealed to him—that he had received the Holy Spirit by the gift of God, and was therefore qualified to commit the unpardonable sin, is not at all clear to me. To my mind it strongly appears that not one of the disciples possessed sufficient light, knowledge nor wisdom, at the time of the crucifixion, for either exaltation or condemnation; for it was afterward that their minds were opened to understand the scriptures, and that they were endowed with power from on high; without which they were only children in knowledge, in comparison to what they afterwards became under the influence of the Spirit. . . .

Matt 26 24"No man can sin against light until he has it; nor against the Holy Ghost, until after he has received it by the gift of God through the appointed channel or way. To sin against the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, the Witness of the Father and the Son, wilfully denying him and defying him, after having received him, constitutes this sin. Did Judas possess this light, this witness, this Comforter, this baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, this endowment from on high? It he did, he received it before the betrayal, and therefore before the other eleven apostles. And if this be so, you may say, 'he is a son of perdition without hope.' But if he was destitute of this glorious gift and outpouring of the Spirit, by which the witness came to the eleven, and their minds were opened to see and know the truth, and they were able to testify of him, then what constituted the unpardonable sin of this poor, erring creature, who rose no higher in the scale of intelligence, honor or ambition than to betray the Lord of glory for thirty pieces of silver?

Matt 26 24"But not knowing that Judas did commit the unpardonable sin; nor that he was a 'son of perdition without hope' who will die the second death, nor what knowledge he possessed by which he was able to commit so great a sin, I prefer, until I know better, to take the merciful view that he may be numbered among those for whom the blessed Master prayed, 'Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.'" (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., pp. 433-435.)

Matt 26 24It had been good for that man if he had not been born] This statement, which should be taken literally, can be understood only in the light of pre-existence. All men earned the right to pass by birth from a pre-existent first estate into this life, to come from the personal presence of God into a life where trials and tests await. Those who fail the tests of mortality go eventually to a telestial sphere of which the revealed word says: "Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end." (D. & C. 76:112.)

Matt 26 24Thus, in the sense here spoken, they would have been better off never to have been born, never to have left their pre-existent home, the home where the Eternal Father presides in glorious immortality. The Book of Mormon presentation of this doctrine is in these words: "And wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day; And it would be better for them if they had not been born. For do ye suppose that ye can get rid of the justice of an offended God, who hath been trampled under feet of men, that thereby salvation might be?" (3 Ne. 28:34-35.)

John 13 18John 13:18. I know whom I have chosen] Judas was a spiritual pygmy from the beginning; as an unrepentant thief, he did not at any time possess apostolic stature. Yet he had his agency; he was free to choose his own course. "All mankind," and there are no exceptions, "may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." (Third Article of Faith.) Judas was no different in this respect than any other man. He could have chosen the course of righteousness; he had sufficient spiritual capacity to work out his salvation with fear and trembling before the Lord. And Jesus knew both the spiritual nothingness of Judas and the elections which that poor soul would make where his own salvation was concerned.

John 13 18A comparable case is Cain. That son of Adam, though a friend of Lucifer in pre-existence, did manage to gain mortal birth. He could have hearkened to his Father Adam and walked in the strait and narrow path. But instead he chose to follow a course which he had already charted, in a very real sense, in his first estate, an estate where he had been known as Perdition. Coming from this background, Cain elected to use his agency to fight the truth in this life, and in his case he became a son of perdition. (Moses 5:16-59.)

John 13 18He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me] King David, whose throne the Son of David inherited, while engaged in civil war in Israel, wrote the Forty-first Psalm. In it he declaimed his betrayal by the traitor Ahithopel in these words: "Mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." (Ps. 41:9.) Interestingly, when Absalom failed to follow Ahithopel's counsel, that traitor, as though his name were Judas, went and hanged himself. (2 Sam. 15:10-12; 17.)

John 13 18Now we find Jesus quoting David's words and ascribing to them Messianic import, a meaning which was of course intended from the beginning. These words thus become a classical illustration of how Messianic prophecies were often given and of why they can be interpreted only by the power of the Holy Ghost.

John 13 1919. 'I tell you now that Judas, mine own familiar friend, shall betray me as David foretold, so that when it comes to pass you will know that I am the Christ of whom David in his great Messianic prophecy spoke.'

John 13 2323. One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved] John the Beloved, who, as author of the account, out of modesty did not name himself.

John 13 2626. Jesus must have spoken these words in a whisper, for the rest of the Twelve did not know at that time that Judas was being singled out as the traitor, a conclusion born out by the following verses. The dipping of the sop was a common practice and would have attracted no unusual attention.

John 13 2727. Satan entered into him] See Matt. 26:14-16.

John 13 3030. And it was night] Both naturally and spiritually it was night. Out into the night, his soul darkened by sin, Judas went, bent on putting out the Light that for a brief ministry had shown forth among men. Truly at this hour, it was night!
