Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Commands Disciples to Love One Another

SCJohn 13 3131. Now is the Son of man glorified] Jesus speaks as though the suffering in Gethsemane and the agony on the cross were past; "now," meaning as the climax of his few remaining mortal hours, Jesus shall be glorified by the Father.

SCJohn 13 31God is glorified in him] Jesus adds to the glory of the Father! True the Father already has all glory in the sense of possessing the fulness of power and might, but even he receives added glory as new kingdoms and dominions become part of his eternal domains. Joseph Smith said: "What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children." (Teachings, pp. 347-348.)

John 13 31This same eternal truth was also revealed to the Prophet in connection with the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. After telling how Abraham had entered into his exaltation and become a possessor of eternal increase, the Lord said: "This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself." (D. & C. 132:29-31.)

John 13 3232. 'If the Father is glorified and exalted to a higher station because of the works and triumphs of the Son, then the Father will further reward the Son with the Father—and the hour for all this is at hand; it shall straightway take place.'

John 13 3333. 'My loved ones, I will only be with you a few more hours and then I go to my Father. Ye shall seek me, but ye cannot now come to me; your work here is not yet finished.'

John 13 3434. A new commandment] Yes, and an old commandment too; a commandment both old and new, a commandment that commences now and yet is everlasting; a commandment that is new each time it is revealed, but is old because it has always been in force. John, who here preserves this saying of our Savior, amplified and explained it in his own writings. Speaking of "the love of God," he said: "Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment, which ye had from the beginning." And then speaking also of the same thing he says: "Again, a new commandment I write unto you." (1 John 2:1-8.)

John 13 34This gospel manner of naming the same thing as being both new and old is nowhere better illustrated than in the designation, "the new and everlasting covenant." The gospel is the everlasting covenant, the covenant of salvation which God always has and always will make with men, but it is a new covenant each time it is revealed. The gospel we have today is new to the world for this era; it is old because it was had anciently; it is everlasting because it is the same from age to age and from eternity to eternity.

John 13 3535. They already were his disciples; they became such in the waters of baptism. Loving one another would not turn them into disciples unless they also accepted his gospel. But through the gospel they would have power to increase their love for each other; and that manifestation of love would be a visible sign to all men that they were in fact his disciples. This statement, tying love and discipleship together, is an ideal illustration of the fact that the gospel changes men's lives. When people join the Church and begin to live the gospel, they become new creatures; changes of character of such magnitude occur in their lives that these differences are visible to all men.
