Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

"In My Father's House Are Many Mansions"

John 14 1John 14:1. Let not your heart be troubled] Why should the saints be in mental turmoil or be upset spiritually; why should they bow to anxiety, uncertainty, or doubt? The gospel assures the faithful of a quiet, serene peace—a peace born of inner conviction.

John 14 1Ye believe in God, believe also in me] How easy it is: all men, almost by instinct, believe in God; why then should they not believe in his Son? If there is a Father surely there is a Son also; and since belief in one is a matter of faith, how easy it is by the same means to believe in the other. Further: Knowledge of the Father and the Son comes by revelation and is heralded to the world by testimony. The same revelation manifests them both, and the same testimony bears record of each of them. It is, therefore, as easy to accept Christ as to believe in God.

John 14 22. In my Father's house are many mansions] No one in mortality can ever know whether there is a heaven or a hell; whether there are degrees of glory hereafter; whether some men will be exalted to thrones of greatness, while others receive lesser rewards—except by revelation. The heavenly heights, if such there be, and the hellish depths, if such exist, are not found in fields of scientific search; they are not in the sphere of mortality; and hence a knowledge of them can come only from God.

John 14 2Joseph Smith said the meaning of Jesus' statement is: "In my Father's kingdom are many kingdoms." (Teachings, p. 366.) All of the prophets have spoken of the heavenly bliss found in the highest kingdom, and have proclaimed to their fellowmen the laws and ordinances by conformity to which such a desired status might be attained. Paul taught that in the resurrection men would be placed in kingdoms whose respective glories were likened to the sun, the moon, and the varying brilliance of the stars. (1 Cor. 15:39-42.) Joseph Smith and Sydney Rigdon saw these kingdoms in vision, described the glory of each, and recorded in the revealed word the kinds of people who would go to each of them.

John 14 2To the celestial kingdom will go the saints of the Most High; those who have believed and obeyed the gospel law; those who have been cleansed from sin by baptism and who' thereafter have endured in righteousness to the end; those who have overcome the world and been sanctified by the Spirit. The terrestrial and telestial kingdoms and there are as many varying mansions or degrees within the telestial as there are stars in the firmament—shall house all the rest of the saved beings of the earth. (D. & C. 76.) Truly there are many mansions.

John 14 2If it were not so, I would have told you] Since the whole gospel system teaches that men will be judged according to their works, it follows that there are degrees of glory hereafter. "From sundry revelations which had been received," Joseph Smith said, "it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body, the term heaven, as intended for the saints' eternal home, must include more kingdoms than one." (Teachings, pp. 9-11.)

John 14 2Strange indeed is the sectarian concept of a heaven for the righteous and a hell for the wicked, two extremes into which men of differing works and varying degrees of righteousness shall be placed. "I do not believe the Methodist doctrine of sending honest men and noble-minded men to hell, along with the murderer and the adulterer," the Prophet said. "I have an order of things to save the poor fellows.... There are mansions for those who obey a celestial law, and there are other mansions for those who come short of the law, every man in his own order." (Teachings, p. 366.) Indeed, some things are so obvious that right thinking people should accept and believe them by instinct. Among such is the doctrine of degrees of glory in the eternal worlds.

John 14 2I go to prepare a place for you] 'I go to prepare a place of exaltation for you, a place with me in the highest heaven of the celestial world (D. & C. 131:1-4), for "the disciple" shall "be as his master, and the servant as his lord." (Matt. 10:25.) "Ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father."' (3 Ne. 28:10.)

SCJohn 14 4John 14 54-5. 'I go to the Father, and the way for you to go to the Father is to follow me.'

John 14 66. I am the way] Christ is the way. He charts the course. Through him salvation comes. To gain the presence of the Father men must come to him and walk in his paths. He is the Redeemer and Exemplar whose cry to all men is: '"Follow thou me" (2 Ne. 31:10), for I am the way.'

John 14 6I am . . . the truth] He is the embodiment and the personification of truth. His word is truth. (John 17:17.) He knows all things and has all truth. (D. & C. 93:26.) All his acts conform to the truth—the truth that makes men free, the truth by which progression comes, the truth that saves, the truth that leads to the Father. Christ is the truth.

John 14 6I am ... the life] "In him was life; and the life was the light of men." (John 1:4.) He is the Creator and life exists because of him. He is the Redeemer and men are saved from temporal and spiritual death because of him. All men gain immortal life and the saints inherit eternal life through him. He is truly the life.

John 14 6No man cometh unto the Father but by me] No man who has ever lived—neither Jew nor Gentile, pagan nor Christian, saint nor sinner—can come unto the Father (and thereby be saved) until he accepts Christ, believes and obeys his laws, and walks in the way he has appointed. He is the Savior of all men; unto him every knee shall bow and every tongue confess; his is the only name whereby salvation comes; and his laws apply to all, both in and out of the Christian community. "I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord." (D. & C. 132:12.)
