Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Saith: "My Father Is Greater Than I"

John 14 27John 14:27. My peace] Christ is "The Prince of Peace" (Isa. 9:6), the revealer and dispenser of inner spiritual peace, that "peace of God, which passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7), that peace which is a gift of God to the obedient. "Those who gain this peace in this life shall die in peace (D. & C. 45:46), continue in peace in the paradise of God (Alma 40:12), and then rise in the resurrection to inherit eternal peace in the kingdom of God. 'Learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come.' (D. & C. 59:23.)" (Mormon Doctrine, p. 508.)

John 14 27Not as the world giveth] Not the salutation, "Peace be with you," which was common among the Jews; not merely the absence of war; not an enforced or voluntary armistice between armed belligerents; not worldly peace. Rather, an inner peace born of the sure conviction of the divinity of the Lord's earthly kingdom; a peace which carries an assurance of a better world to come; a peace that dwells in the souls of men though they may be in the midst of war and turmoil.

John 14 27Let not your heart be troubled] See John 14:1.

John 14 2828. Ye would rejoice] Jesus and his intimate friends are to part company for a time. In the very nature of things dear friends sorrow at separation. When our loved ones die we weep. And yet because Jesus goes back to the Father, he will be crowned with glory and exaltation. In connection with his death, resurrection, and return to his eternal throne, he will do the things which will bring blessings and rewards to all men. Surely the disciples, from the eternal perspective, should have rejoiced at this; and in a similar sense we too should rejoice when righteous loved ones go on to their abodes in the realms of glory.

John 14 28My Father is greater than I Are they not one? Do they not both possess all power, all wisdom, all knowledge, all truth? Have they not both gained all godly attributes in their fulness and perfection? Verily, yes, for the revelations so announce and the Prophet so taught. (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 492-493.) And yet our Lord's Father is greater than he, greater in kingdoms and dominions, greater in principalities and exaltations. One does and shall rule over the other everlastingly. Though Jesus is himself God, he is also the Son of God, and as such the Father is his God as he is ours. "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (John 20:17), he is soon to say.

John 14 28Joseph Smith, with inspired insight, tells how Jesus is God's heir; how he receives and possesses all that the Father hath, and is therefore (as Paul said) "equal with God" (Philip. 2:6), and yet at the same time is subject to and less than the Father. These are his words: "What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children." (Teachings, pp. 347-348.)

John 14 2929. 'And now I have told you in advance that I shall die and be resurrected; that I shall then return to my Father; that later I shall come again—all to strengthen your faith in me when these things do take place.'

John 14 3030. Prince of this world] Lucifer, "the prince of darkness, who is of this world." (I. V. verse 30.)

I. V. John 14:30. Hath no power over me, but he hath power over you] 'I have overcome the world, so that the prince of darkness, who is of this world, has no power over me, but he still has power over you because you have not as yet overcome the world.'

Matt 26 30Matt. 26:30. Sung an hymn] This was part of the prescribed Passover procedure and would have been Psalms 115- 118, which accompanied the fourth Passover cup. See Matt. 26:26-29.
