Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Discourses on Perfect Law of Love

SCJohn 15 9John 15 109-10. Which is greater and more to be desired, to love God or be loved by him? In his providences the one grows out of the other, for Deity reciprocates in full and abundant measure the love his children confer upon him. And Jesus here speaks, not of the divine decree that men should love God, but of the special and preferential love bestowed by the Lord upon those who love and serve him. Such are singled out by Deity to receive special grace and goodness because they are in process of becoming one with him.

John 15 1111. Your joy might be full] Jesus amplified, to three of the Nephite Twelve, the promise here given to his Old World special witnesses: "Ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand," he said unto them. "And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:9-10.)

John 15 11This promise, in principle, is available to all saints, for "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25), and that God who is no respecter of persons desires to reward all his children with the choicest blessings of time and eternity. "Obtaining exaltation consists in gaining a fulness of joy; it is to enter into the joy of the Lord. (D. & C. 51:19.) The saints are to 'reap eternal joy' for all their sufferings (D. & C. 109:76), though their joy is not to be full in this life. (D. & C. 101:36.) A fulness of joy is found only among resurrected, exalted beings. (D. & C. 93:33.) 'Those who have died in Jesus Christ may expect to enter into all that fruition of joy when they come forth, which they possessed or anticipated here.' (Teachings, p. 295.) Christ himself endured all things, including the cross, 'for the joy that was set before him' (Heb. 12:2), and he has obtained a fulness of joy. (3 Ne. 17:20; 28:10.)" (Mormon Doctrine, p. 364.)

SCJohn 15 12John 15 1312-13. As with all goodly graces and godly attributes, love comes in varying degrees and amounts; and also, as with all these, love was perfected in the person and life of the great Exemplar.

SCJohn 15 14John 15 1514-15. Friends of the Lord, what a salutation this is! Our Lord's friends are those who, having overcome all things, having kept his commandments to the full, having made their callings and elections sure, are the ones he will call to dwell and associate with him in glorious exaltation.

SCJohn 15 14John 15 15This same gladsome salutation has been given to men in this dispensation also. To selected elders of his latter-day kingdom came these words from his mouth: "As I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me; ye are my friends, . . . for from henceforth I shall call you friends." (D. & C. 84:63, 77.) Also: "Verily, I say unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., or in other words, I will call you friends, for you are my friends, and ye shall have an inheritance with me—I called you servants for the world's sake, and ye are their servants for my sake." (D. & C. 93:45-46.)

John 15 1515. All things that I have heard of my Father I have made known to you] This statement, undoubtedly part of a digested and summarized account of Jesus' statements to his friends, must be interpreted and understood along with the statement he was shortly to make about saying many additional things to them. (John 16:12-15.) The meaning is: 'I have told you and will tell you all things I have heard from my Father which you are able to bear at this time. When you receive the enlightening power of the Holy Ghost, then, through him as my revealer and witness, I shall have many more things to teach you.'

John 15 1616. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you] Christ chooses his own ministers. Men can no more choose to serve as apostles, prophets, elders, or ministers of spiritual concerns, than they can appoint themselves kings, presidents, rulers or magistrates in civil affairs. True ministers of revealed religion become such, not because of some feeling (falsely considered to be a "call") that comes into their hearts, but because the Almighty by revelation selects them for his service, by his own voice, through the ministering of angels, or by the power of the Holy Ghost operating upon prophets previously called.

John 15 16Ordained you] God's ministers are ordained. They have the holy priesthood conferred upon them and are ordained by the laying on of hands to officiate in specific offices and callings. Priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to actin all things for the salvation of men; it is divided into two orders—Aaronic and Melchizedek. These apostles had been chosen by revelation and ordained by Jesus to their high and holy ministry in the Melchizedek Order. And as it is with them, so it is with all true representatives of the Lord, for Paul said: "No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) Unless the Lord's ministers actually have this authority from the Lord they cannot cast out devils, heal the sick, confer the Holy Ghost, perform a baptism that will be recognized in heaven, or do any of the host of things reserved for performance by legal administrators in the Lord's earthly kingdom. See Luke 9:1-6.
