Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Examined and Smitten Before Annas

SCJohn 18 12John 18 13John 18 14John, and he only, tells us that Jesus was taken before Annas, who then sent him to Caiaphas. Whether the questioning and smiting, of which John speaks, took place before the one or the other is not entirely clear. Elder James E. Talmage takes the view that the events occurred before Caiaphas and that "No details of the interview with Annas are of record," a conclusion he qualifies later by saying it "is a matter of inference" as to which Jewish functionary was involved. Edersheim also concludes that Caiaphas was the high priest involved. (Talmage, pp. 621-622; 643-644.) President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., on the other hand, places the episode before Annas (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Our Lord of the Gospels, pp. 416-417), as do also both Dummelow and Jamieson.

SCJohn 18 12John 18 13John 18 14Two reasons are offered for concluding that the events here involved occurred before Caiaphas. (1) After reciting what took place John says, "Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest." (V. 24.) Both Dummelow and Jamieson, however, explain that the correct translation is, "Annas, therefore, sent him bound unto Caiaphas," thus making it a happening which took place after the interrogation rather than before. (Dummelow, p. 805; Jamieson, p. 91.) (2) Edersheim's argument is: "For as, according to the three synoptic Gospels, the palace of the high priest Caiaphas was the scene of Peter's denial, the account of it in the fourth Gospel must refer to the same locality, and not to the palace of Annas." (Edersheim, cited, Talmage, pp. 643-644.) Both Dummelow and Jamieson answer this by explaining that Annas and Caiaphas lived in different parts of the same building and that the same court served them both. (Jamieson, p. 162; Dummelow, p. 805.) Thus the great probability is that Jesus was in fact examined and smitten in the presence of Annas before he was taken to Caiaphas. There would seem to be no other reason for John to make special mention that Jesus was taken before Annas unless something there occurred which was important to his narrative.

John 18 1212. This was a formal, organized arrest, one where ample force was available to overcome any uprising among the people.

John 18 1313. Annas] "No figure is better known in contemporary Jewish history than that of Annas; no person deemed more fortunate or successful, but also none more generally execrated than the late high priest. He had held the pontificate for only six or seven years; but it was filled by not fewer than five of his sons, by his son-in-law Caiaphas, and by a grandson. And in those days it was, at least for one of Annas' disposition, much better to have been than to be high priest. He enjoyed all the dignity of the office, and all its influence also, since he was able to promote to it those most closely connected with him. And while they acted publicly, he really directed affairs, without either the responsibility or the restraints which the office imposed. His influence with the Romans he owed to the religious views which he professed, to his open partisanship of the foreigner, and to his enormous wealth. .. . We have seen what immense revenues the family of Annas must have derived from the Temple booths, and how nefarious and unpopular was the traffic. The names of those bold, licentious, unscrupulous, degenerate sons of Aaron were spoken with whispered curses. Without referring to Christ's interference with that Temple-traffic, which, if his authority had prevailed, would of course have been fatal to it, we can understand how antithetic in every respect a Messiah, and such a Messiah as Jesus, must have been to Annas." (Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, vol. 2, pp. 547-548, cited, Talmage, p. 643.)

John 18 1414. See John 11:47-54. 19-21. Annas knew the conspirators were seeking excuses to put Jesus to death. (Matt. 26:59.) This line of questioning was a search for self-incriminating testimony. Further: this "preliminary inquiry was utterly unlawful; for the Hebrew code provided that the accusing witnesses in any cause before the court should define their charge against the accused, and that the latter should be protected from any effort to make him testify against himself." (Talmage, p. 622.)

John 18 2020. In secret have I said nothing] 'I have never said anything in secret which is different in nature from my public utterances. In public and in private my doctrine is the same.'

SCJohn 18 22John 18 2322-23. "That Jesus maintained his equanimity and submissiveness even under the provocation of a blow dealt by a brutish underling in the presence of the high priest, is confirmatory of our Lord's affirmation that he had 'overcome the world' (John 16:33). One cannot read the passage without comparing, perhaps involuntarily, the divine submissiveness of Jesus on this occasion, with the wholly natural and human indignation of Paul under somewhat similar conditions at a later time (Acts 23:1-5). The high priest Ananias, displeased at Paul's remarks, ordered someone who stood by to smite him on the mouth. Paul broke forth in angry protest: 'God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?' Afterward he apologized, saying that he knew not that it was the high priest who had given the command that he be smitten." (Talmage, p. 644.)
