Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Tried and Condemned by Sanhedrin

Matt 15 1Matt. 15:1. When the morning was come] During the night Jesus was examined and smitten before Annas, examined again and maltreated before Caiaphas, with the chief priests, scribes, and elders, including the members of the Sanhedrin, being present on both occasions. Now it is morning, and in an apparent attempt to comply with the law forbidding night trials though they had in effect been holding a trial upon their pre-condemned Prisoner during all the long night hours—the same group of persecutors go through the ritual of a formal trial and condemnation.

Mark 15 1Mark 15:1. A consultation with . . . the whole council] This is the formal Sanhedrin trial. "The following account of the judicial procedure of the Sanhedrin in capital cases is abridged from Schurer, who follows the Mishna. The members of the court sat in a semi-circle. A quorum of 23 was required. In front of them stood the two clerks of the court, of whom the one on the right hand recorded the votes for acquittal, and the one on the left hand the votes for condemnation. The 'disciples of the wise' (pupils of the scribes) occupied three additional rows in front. It was required to hear the reasons for acquittal first (a regulation violated in the case of Jesus) and afterwards the reasons for condemnation. The 'disciples of the wise' could speak, but only in favor of the prisoner. Acquittal could be pronounced on the day of the trial, but condemnation not till the following day (this regulation also was violated, though some suppose that there were two meetings, one on Thursday night, the other on Friday morning to render the proceedings technically legal). Each member stood to give his vote, and voting began with the youngest member. For acquittal a simple majority sufficed; for condemnation a majority of two was necessary." (Dummelow, p. 713.)

Luke 22 67Luke 22:67. If I tell you, ye will not believe] How sad and how true! Gospel truth is taught by testimony: the spiritually alive, believe; the spiritually sick, question; the spiritually dead, deny and reject. And here stands the Lord Omnipotent, the being by whose hands all things are, the being through whom salvation comes, ready to testify again of his divine Sonship with full knowledge that his testimony will avail his hearers nothing.

Luke 22 71Luke 22 7070. Ye say that I am] 'I am the Son of God.' 71. "Jehovah was convicted of blasphemy against Jehovah. The only mortal Being to whom the awful crime of blasphemy, claiming divine attributes and powers, was impossible, stood before the judges of Israel condemned as a blasphemer." (Talmage, p. 629.)
