Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Pilate Sentences Jesus to Be Crucified

John 19 4John 19:4. I find no fault in him] Jesus is innocent. Pilate knew it; Herod knew it; Caiaphas knew it; the Sanhedrin knew it; the mob-multitude knew it—and Satan knew it. Yet he is to be pronounced guilty and sentenced to death.

John 19 55. Behold the man!] "Pilate seems to have counted on the pitiful sight of the scourged and bleeding Christ to soften the hearts of the maddened Jews. But the effect failed. Think of the awful fact—a heathen, a pagan, who knew not God, pleading with the priests and people of Israel for the life of their Lord and King!" (Talmage, p. 639.)

John 19 66. Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him] Pilate gave the order; no one else had the power. Pilate sentenced an innocent Man to be crucified—and he knew it! Is there a better example in all history of judicial murder?

SCJohn 19 7John 19 8John 19 9John 19 10John 19 117-11. Jesus' sentence by the Sanhedrin was for blasphemy, a Jewish crime; Pilate's sentence was for sedition, a Roman offense. Now that our Lord's death has been ordered, the Jews seek to make it appear that Pilate had endorsed their Jewish death decree. Their mention of "the Son of God" increases Pilate's fears for having ordered an unjust execution. He asks, 'Are you a man or a demigod?' Jesus disdains to answer. Pilate is piqued and boasts of his power to save or destroy Jesus. Then our Lord becomes the Judge and places Pilate before the judgment bar: 'Against me you have only such power as Divine Providence permits; your sentence is unjust, but Caiaphas who delivered me to thee has the greater sin for as a Jew he knows of my divine origin.'

John 19 1212. Pilate sought to release him] Sought the consent of the chief priests and scribes to release him, for the Procurator had the power, if he chose to use it, to either save or destroy.

John 19 12If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend] This clinched the matter. Any complaint to Caesar that Pontius Pilate was anything but ruthless in destroying claimants to kingly office was the last thing the Roman procurator wanted. The Jews had given Pilate a selfish interest in the death of the Man whose life they sought. Pilate was prepared, reluctantly, to let his prior death decree be enforced.

John 19 1515. We have no king but Caesar] "With this cry Judaism was, in the person of its representatives, guilty of denial of God, of blasphemy, of apostasy. It committed suicide; and ever since has its dead body been carried in show from land to land, and from century to century, to be dead and to remain dead, till he come a second time, who is the resurrection and the life." (Edersheim, vol. 2, p. 581, cited, Talmage, p. 648.)

Matt 27 24Matt. 27:24. At this point (or perhaps earlier, as the Inspired Version account indicates) Pilate, following the Jewish practice in such cases (Deut. 21:1-9), performed the ritualistic ceremony designed to free him from responsibility for Jesus' death.

Matt 27 2525. "The Mishna tells us that, after the solemn washing of hands of the elders and their disclaimer of guilt, priests responded with this prayer: 'Forgive it to thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, O Lord, and lay not innocent blood upon thy people Israel.' But here, in answer to Pilate's words, came back that deep, hoarse cry: 'His blood be upon us,' and—God help us!—'on our children.' Some thirty years later, and on that very spot, was judgment pronounced against some of the best in Jerusalem; and among the 3,600 victims of the governor's fury, of whom not a few were scourged and crucified right over against the Pretorium, were many of the noblest of the citizens of Jerusalem. (Josephus, Wars, xiv, chap. 8:9) A few years more, and hundreds of crosses bore Jewish mangled bodies within sight of Jerusalem. And still have these wanderers seemed to bear, from century to century, and from land to land, that burden of blood; and still does it seem to weigh 'on us and on our children'." (Edersheim, vol. 2, p. 578, cited, Talmage, p. 648.)

John 19 16John 19:16. "Pilate knew what was right but lacked the moral courage to do it. He was afraid of the Jews, and more afraid of hostile influence at Rome. He was afraid of his conscience, but more afraid of losing his official position. It was the policy of Rome to be gracious and conciliatory in dealing with the religions and social customs of conquered nations. Pontius Pilate had violated this liberal policy from the early days of his procuratorship. In utter disregard of the Hebrew antipathy against images and heathen insignia, he had the legionaries enter Jerusalem at night, carrying their eagles and standards decorated with the effigy of the emperor. To the Jews this act was a defilement of the Holy City. In vast multitudes they gathered at Caesarea, and petitioned the procurator that the standards and other images be removed from Jerusalem. For five days the people demanded and Pilate refused. He threatened a general slaughter, and was amazed to see the people offer themselves as victims of the sword rather than relinquish their demands. Pilate had to yield. (Josephus, Ant. xviii, Chap. 3:1; also Wars, ii, Chap. 9:2, 3). Again he gave offense in forcibly appropriating the Corban, or sacred funds of the temple, to the construction of an aqueduct for supplying Jerusalem with water from the pools of Solomon. Anticipating the public protest of the people, he had caused Roman soldiers to disguise themselves as Jews; and with weapons concealed to mingle with the crowds. At a given signal these assassins plied their weapons and great numbers of defenceless Jews were killed or wounded (Josephus, Ant. xvi,,, chap. 3:2; and Wars, ii, chap. 9:3, 4). On another occasion, Pilate had grossly offended the people by setting up in his official residence at Jerusalem, shields that had been dedicated to Tiberius, and this 'less for the honor of Tiberius than for annoyance of the Jewish people.' A petition signed by the ecclesiastical officials of the nation, and by others of influence, including four Herodian princes, was sent to the emperor, who reprimanded Pilate and directed that the shields be removed from Jerusalem to Caesarea. (Philo. De Legatione ad Caium; sec. 38).

John 19 16"These outrages on national feeling, and many minor acts of violence, extortion and cruelty, the Jews held against the procurator. He realized that his tenure was insecure, and he dreaded exposure. Such wrongs had he wrought that when he would have done good, he was deterred through cowardly fear of the accusing past." (Talmage, pp. 648-649.)
