Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Taken to Golgotha and Crucified

John 19 17John 19:17. He bearing his cross] Jesus bore his own cross from the hall of judgment to the city gate. Matt. 27:32. As they came out] As they left the city. Executions were not performed within the city walls. (Num. 15:35; 1 Kings 21:13; Acts 7:58.)

Matt 27 31Luke 23 26Luke 23:26. Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country] From Mark's reference (Mark 15:21), and the possible reference of Paul (Rom. 16:13), to others of Simon's family, it is assumed that he was then or later became a Christian. The indication is he was born in Cyrene, North Africa, as part of the Jewish colony there. On this memorable day, apparently he had been working in the fields and was returning to the city. Matt. 27:31. Him they compelled] He did not volunteer; everything associated with a crucifixion was considered to be degrading.

Matt 27 3232. Cross] "The cross was regarded as the most horrible and most degrading form of punishment, fit only for slaves. 'It is an outrage for a Roman citizen to be bound; a crime for him to be scourged. It is almost parricide to have him put to death. What can I call having him crucified? No word can be found adequate to describe so monstrous a proceeding' (Circero). Crucifixion was not a Jewish punishment. It originated among the Phonicians, from whom it passed to the Greeks and Romans. Alexander the Great once crucified 2,000 Tyrians. After the death of Herod the Great, Varus crucified 2,000 rioters. The crucifixion of Jesus was unconsciously avenged by the Romans, who, after the fall of Jerusalem, crucified so many Jews that there was neither wood for the crosses nor room to set them up.

Matt 27 32"The cross consisted of two parts, a strong stake or pole 8 or 9 ft. high, which was fixed in the ground, and a movable cross-piece (patibulum), which was carried by the criminal to the place of execution. Sometimes the patibulum was a single beam of wood, but more often it consisted of two parallel beams fastened together, between which the neck of the criminal was inserted. Before him went a herald bearing a tablet on which the offense was inscribed, or the criminal himself bore it suspended by a cord round his neck. At the place of execution the criminal was stripped and laid on his back, and his hands were nailed to the patibulum. The patibulum, with the criminal hanging from it, was then hoisted into position and fastened by nails or ropes to the upright pole. The victim's body was supported not only by the nails through the hands, but by a small piece of wood projecting at right angles (sedile), on which he sat as on a saddle. Sometimes there was also a support for the feet, to which the feet were nailed. The protracted agony of crucifixion sometimes lasted for days, death being caused by pain, hunger, and thirst." (Dummelow, pp. 716-717.)

Matt 27 32Crucifixion "was unanimously considered the most horrible form of death. Among the Romans the degradation was also a part of the infliction, and the punishment if applied to freemen was only used in the case of the vilest criminals. The one to be crucified was stripped naked of all his clothes, and then followed the most awful moment of all. He was laid down upon the implement of torture. His arms were stretched along the cross-beams, and at the center of the open palms the point of a huge iron nail was placed, which, by the blow of a mallet, was driven home into the wood. Then through either foot separately, or possibly through both together, as they were placed one over the other, another huge nail tore its way through the quivering flesh. Whether the sufferer was also bound to the cross we do not know; but, to prevent the hands and feet being torn away by the weight of the body, which could not 'rest upon nothing but four great wounds,' there was, about the center of the cross, a wooden projection strong enough to support, at least in part, a human body, which soon became a weight of agony. Then the 'accursed tree' with its living human burden was slowly heaved up and the end fixed firmly in a hole in the ground. The feet were but a little raised above the earth. The victim was in full reach of every hand that might choose to strike.

Matt 27 32"A death by crucifixion seems to include all that pain and death can have of the horrible and ghastly—dizziness, cramp, thirst, starvation, sleeplessness, traumatic fever, tetanus, publicity of shame, long continuance of torment, horror of anticipation, mortification of untended wounds, all intensified just up to the point at which they can be endured at all, but all stopping just short of the point which would give to the sufferer the relief of unconsciousness. The unnatural position made every movement painful; the lacerated veins and crushed tendons throbbed with incessant anguish; the wounds, inflamed by exposure, gradually gangrened; the arteries, especially of the head and stomach, became swollen and oppressed with surcharged blood; and, while each variety of misery went on gradually increasing, there was added to them the intolerable pang of a burning and raging thirst. Such was the death to which Christ was doomed.—Farrar's 'Life of Christ.'

Matt 27 32"The crucified was watched, according to custom, by a party of four soldiers (John 19:23), with their centurion (Matt. 27:54), whose express office was to prevent the stealing of the body. This was necessary from the lingering character of the death, which sometimes did not supervene even for three days, and was at last the result of gradual benumbing and starvation. But for this guard, the persons might have been taken down and recovered, as was actually done in the case of a friend of Josephus. Fracture of the legs was especially adopted by the Jews to hasten death. (John 19:31.) In most cases the body was suffered to rot on the cross by the action of sun and rain, or to be devoured by birds and beasts. Sepulture was generally therefore forbidden; but in consequence of Deut. 21:22, 23, an express national exception was made in favor of the Jews. (Matt. 27:58.) This accursed and awful mode of punishment was happily abolished by Constantine." (Peloubet's Bible Dictionary, pp. 130-131.)

SCLuke 23 27Luke 23 28Luke 23 29Luke 23 30Luke 23 31Luke 23:27-31. "The time would come, when the Old Testament curse of barrenness (Hosea 9:14) would be coveted as a blessing. To show the fulfilment of this prophetic lament of Jesus it is not necessary to recall the harrowing details recorded by Josephus (Wars, vi, 3:4), when a frenzied mother roasted her own child, and in the mockery of desperateness reserved the half of the horrible meal for those murderers who daily broke in upon her to rob her of what scanty food had been left her; nor yet other of those incidents, too revolting for needless repetition, which the historian of the last siege of Jerusalem chronicles. But how often, these many centuries, must Israel's women have felt that terrible longing for childlessness, and how often must the prayer of despair for the quick death of falling mountains and burying hills rather than prolonged torture (Hosea 10:8), have risen to the lips of Israel's sufferers! And yet, even so, these words were also prophetic of a still more terrible future. (Rev. 6:10.) For, if Israel had put such flame to its 'green tree' how terribly would the divine judgment burn among the dry wood of an apostate and rebellious people, that had so delivered up its Divine King, and pronounced sentence upon itself by pronouncing it upon Him!" (Edersheim, vol. 2, p. 588, cited, Talmage, pp. 666-667.)

Luke 23 3131. A green tree] Christ himself was the Green Tree. "If Israel's oppressors could do what was then in process of doing to the 'Green Tree,' who bore the leafage of freedom and truth and offered the priceless fruit of life eternal, what would the powers of evil not do to the withered branches and dried trunk of apostate Judaism?" (Talmage, p. 654.) The same inspired figure was used in announcing the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch of this dispensation: "If the fire can scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the dry trees to purify the vineyard of corruption." (D. & C. 135:6.)

Matt 27 34Matt. 27:34. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall] Apparently those women, "which also bewailed and lamented him" (Luke 23:27), with the merciful intent of deadening his senses to pain, offered him a drugged cup. Jesus tasted but did not drink; he chose to suffer and die with his mind clear and his senses unimpaired. Their intended kindness fulfilled the Messianic utterance: "They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." (Psalm 69:21.)

SCJohn 19 19John 19 20John 19 21John 19 22John 19:19-22. In Hebrew, Greek, and Latin—as though to symbolize the tact that here was a message for all nations and tongues—Pilate bore a written testimony of the divine Sonship of our Lord, a testimony which he obdurately refused to change, a testimony which is true and so stands everlastingly.

SCMark 15 27Mark 15 28Mark 15:27-28. To degrade and debase, to prove as it were guilt by association, Rome chose to crucify Christ between two thieves, thereby fulfilling Isaiah's Messianic prophecy: "And he was numbered with the transgressors." (Isa. 53:12.)
