Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

"Father Forgive Them"

Luke 23 34Seven "words" or utterances were made from the cross:

Luke 23 34(1) "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

Luke 23 34(2) "Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise." (Luke 23:43.)

Luke 23 34(3) "Woman, behold thy son! . . . Behold thy mother!" (John 19:26-27.)

Luke 23 34(4) "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matt. 27:46; Psalm 22:1.)

Luke 23 34(5) "I thirst." John (19:28.)

Luke 23 34(6) "It is finished." (John 19:30.)

Luke 23 34(7) "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." (Luke 23:46; Psalm 31:5.)

Luke 23 34This first "word" from the cross is equally as important for what it does not say as for what it does. It is not an utterance whereby anyone's sins are forgiven, but it is a petition asking for forgiveness in a particular and limited sense of the word. Jesus was the Son of God; as such he had power to forgive sins, a power which he had freely exercised in proper cases. See Matt. 9:2-8.

Luke 23 34But no such power is exercised here. He does not say, 'Thy sins be forgiven thee,' as had been his wont on other occasion. Nor does he ask the Father to forgive the sins of those involved, in the sense of cleansing them from sin so as to qualify them for church membership or celestial inheritance. The law whereby such forgiveness is gained requires repentance and baptism. But he says, rather, 'Father lay not this sin to their charge, for they are acting under orders, and those upon whom the full and real guilt rests are their rulers and the Jewish conspirators who caused me to be condemned. It is Caiaphas and Pilate who know I am innocent; these soldiers are just carrying out their orders.'

Luke 23 34Jesus did not, it should be noted, pray for Judas who betrayed him; for Caiaphas and the chief priests who conspired against him; for the false witnesses who perjured their souls before the Sanhedrin and in the judgment halls of Rome; for Pilate and Herod, either of whom could have freed him; nor for Lucifer whose power and persuasive ability underlay the whole wicked procedure. All these are left in the hands of Eternal Justice to be dealt with according to their works. Mercy cannot rob justice; the guilty do not go free simply because the righteous bring no railing accusation against them.

Luke 23 34Here on the cross Jesus is simply complying with his own command to forgive your enemies and to bless those who curse you. President Joseph F. Smith, who himself was the victim of much vicious and intemperate reviling and Gentile hatred, expressed the same general principle in these words: "I feel in my heart to forgive all men in the broad sense that God requires of me to forgive all men, and I desire to love my neighbor as myself; and to this extent I bear no malice toward any of the children of my Father. But there are enemies to the work of the Lord, as there were enemies to the Son of God. There are those who speak only evil of the Latter-day Saints. There are those—and they abound largely in our midst—who will shut their eyes to every virtue and to every good thing connected with this latter-day work, and will pour out floods of falsehood and misrepresentation against the people of God. I forgive them for this. I leave them in the hands of the just Judge. Let him deal with them as seemeth him good, but they are not and cannot become my bosom companions. I cannot condescend to that. While I would not harm a hair of their heads, while I would not throw a straw in their path, to hinder them from turning from the error of their way to the light of truth; I would as soon think of taking a centipede or a scorpion, or any poisonous reptile, and putting it into my bosom, as I would think of becoming a companion or an associate of such men." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., p. 337.)
