Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Our Lord Hangs in Agony upon Cross

Matt 27 45Matt. 27:45. Darkness over all the land] Jesus was crucified at about 9 a.m.; the darkness lasted from about noon to 3 p.m.; for it there is no known scientific explanation. That it was not a solar eclipse is shown from the fact that the Passover occurs when the moon is full; indeed the first full moon after the spring equinox is what determines the time of the Passover. The three synoptists say the darkness began "the sixth hour"; John's account, into which error apparently has crept, places it some hours later. (John 19:14.)

Matt 27 45A comparable but more extended sign was given on the Western Hemisphere. Zenos and Samuel the Lamanite both prophesied, not of three hours, but of three days of darkness, darkness which was to last while the crucified Lord's body lay in the tomb. (1 Ne. 19:10; Hela. 14:20.) The nature of this darkness, which may have been similar to that in Palestine, is thus described: "There was thick darkness upon all the face of the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof who had not fallen could feel the vapor of darkness; And there could be no light, because of the darkness, neither candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceedingly dry wood, so that there could not be any light at all; And there was not any light seen, neither fire, nor glimmer, neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars, for so great were the mists of darkness which were upon the face of the land. And it came to pass that it did last for the space of three days that there was no light seen." (3 Ne. 8:20-23.)

Matt 27 45Why should darkness attend the crucifixion? In answer, we might ask: In what more fitting manner could the very earth itself manifest gloom at the death of its Creator? It is as though the forces of nature were dramatizing the depths to which men had sunk.

Matt 27 4646. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?] These are the exact words of the Messianic prophecy found in Psalm 22:1. "What mind of man can fathom the significance of that awful cry? It seems, that in addition to the fearful suffering incident to crucifixion, the agony of Gethsemane had recurred, intensified beyond human power to endure. In that bitterest hour the dying Christ was alone, alone in most terrible reality. That the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn the support of his immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death." (Talmage, p. 661.)

Matt 27 4747. This man calleth for Elias] This was said in mockery, there being a Jewish tradition that Elijah often had appeared to save those in peril.

John 19 28John 19:28. I thirst] Jesus so spoke to fulfil to the full yet another of the many detailed Messianic prophecies: "They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." (Psalm 69:21.)
