Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

"It Is Finished, Thy Will Is Done"

I. V. Matt. 27:54. Father, it is finished, thy will is done] Jesus' mortal work was done; he had paid the price for the sins of the world; man was ransomed from the spiritual and temporal death brought upon him by the fall; the infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice had been made—all according to the will of the Father.

Matt 27 51Matt. 27:51. The veil of the temple was rent] Once each year in ancient Israel the high priest passed through the veil of the temple into the Holy of Holies. This solemn act was part of the sacrificial rites performed in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Son of God, and these rites were performed for the remission of sins. (Lev. 16.) "For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord." (Lev. 16:30.)

Matt 27 51But Christ is now sacrificed; the law is fulfilled; the Mosaic dispensation is dead; the fulness of the gospel has come with all its light and power; and so—to dramatize, in a way which all Jewry would recognize, that the kingdom had been taken from them and given to others—Deity rent the veil of the temple "from the top to the bottom." The Holy of Holies is now open to all, and all, through the atoning blood of the Lamb, can now enter into the highest and holiest of all places, that kingdom where eternal life is found. Paul, in expressive language (Heb. 9 and 1 0), shows how the ordinances performed through the veil of the ancient temple were in similitude of what Christ was to do, which he now having done, all men become eligible to pass through the veil into the presence of the Lord to inherit full exaltation.

Luke 23 46Luke 23:46. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit] A perfect benediction for a perfect life, a benediction promised and foretold in a Messianic prophecy of olden time: "Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou has redeemed me, O Lord God of truth." (Psalm 31:5.)

Luke 23 46He gave up the ghost] Not he died; not he was slain, or crucified; not that his life was taken; but he "gave up" his spirit; the act was voluntary; he could have chosen to live. "I lay down my life. ... No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." (John 10:17-18.)

Matt 27 51Matt. 27:51. The earth did quake, and the rocks rent] These scenes were foreseen by Enoch; he "beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men; And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent." (Moses 7:55-56.)

Matt 27 51Samuel the Lamanite also, speaking particularly of the earthquakes and destructions which would occur on the American continent, prophesied of these things. "At the time that he shall yield up the ghost there shall be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours, and the earth shall shake and tremble; and the rocks which are upon the face of this earth, which are both above the earth and beneath, which ye know at this time are solid, or the more part of it is one solid mass, shall be broken up; Yea, they shall be rent in twain, and shall ever after be found in seams and in cracks, and in broken fragments upon the face of the whole earth, yea, both above the earth and beneath. And behold, there shall be great tempests, and there shall be many mountains laid low, like unto a valley, and there shall be many places which are now called valleys which shall become mountains, whose height is great." (Hela. 14:21-23.) Nephi and Zenos also foresaw these scenes. (1 Ne. 12:4; 19:12.)

Matt 27 51As with all prophecies, the fulfillment came with total and unerring certainty. The Book of Mormon account, for the year 34 A. D., recites: "Behold, the rocks were rent in twain; they were broken up upon the face of the whole earth, insomuch that they were found in broken fragments, and in seams and in cracks, upon all the face of the land. And it came to pass that when the thunderings and the lightnings, and the storm, and the tempest, and the quakings of the earth did cease—for behold, they did last for about the space of three hours; and it was said by some that the time was greater; nevertheless, all these great and terrible things were done in about the space of three hours—and then behold, there was darkness upon the face of the land." (3 Ne. 8:18-19; 10:9.)
