Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Magdalene, Peter, John Find Empty Tomb

John 20 1John 20:1. First day of the week] Sunday, the Lord's day. God's plan for mortal man calls for six days of labor, and one of rest. In the wisdom of the great Creator, such a schedule provides needed physical refreshment. This day of rest from servile work, also in the wisdom of Deity, is appointed as a day for spiritual feasting, a holy day, a Sabbath.

John 20 1From Adam to Moses the decree was: Work six days and rest on Saturday, the seventh day; do it in commemoration of the fact that "in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day." (Ex. 20:8-11.)

John 20 1From Moses to this resurrection morning the decree was: Work six days and rest one day, in commemoration of the deliverance of Israel from Egyptian bondage. (Deut. 5:11-15.) Since Israel was freed from bondage on a specific day of the year, it follows that the commanded Sabbath fell on a different day each year, just as Christmas day does. In order to make the schedule come out provision was made in the Mosaic Law for a forty-eight hour Sabbath once each year. (Samuel Walter Gamble, Sunday the True Sabbath of God.)

John 20 1Because Jesus came forth from the grave on the first day of the week, to commemorate that day and to keep in remembrance the glorious reality of the resurrection, the ancient apostles, as guided by the Spirit, changed the Sabbath to Sunday. That this change had divine approval we know from latter-day revelation, in which Deity speaks of "the Lord's day" as such and sets forth what should and should not be done on that day. (D. & C. 59:9-17.)

John 20 22. They have taken away the Lord] The empty tomb! Glorious thing! Christ is risen! A reality soon to burst with heart—cheering reality upon this Mary of Magdala! See John 20:11-18.

SCJohn 20 3John 20 4John 20 5John 20 6John 20 7John 20 8John 20 9John 20 103-10. What a picture John has left us of this unique moment in history. Fear fills the hearts of Peter and John; wicked men must have stolen the body of their Lord. They race to the tomb. John, younger and more fleet, arrives first, stoops down, looks in, but does not enter, hesitating as it were to desecrate the sacred spot even by his presence. But Peter, impetuous, bold, a dynamic leader, an apostle who wielded the sword against Malchus and stood as mouthpiece for them all in bearing testimony, rushes in. John follows. Together they view the grave-clothes-linen strips that have not been unwrapped, but through which a resurrected body has passed. And then, upon John, reflective and mystic by nature, the reality dawns first. It is true! They had not known before; now they do. It is the third day! Christ is risen! "Death is swallowed up in victory." (1 Cor. 15:54.)
