Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Herod Murders Innocent Children

Matt 2 1616. Herod] "Herod was professedly an adherent of the religion of Judah, though by birth an Idumean, by descent an Edomite or one of the posterity of Esau, all of whom the Jews hated; and of all Edomites not one was more bitterly detested than was Herod the king. He was tyrannical and merciless, sparing neither foe nor friend who came under suspicion of being a possible hindrance to his ambitious designs. He had his wife and several of his sons, as well as others of his blood kindred, cruelly murdered; and he put to death nearly all of the great national council, the Sanhedrin. His reign was one of revolting cruelty and unbridled oppression. .

Matt 2 16"The mortal end of the tyrant and multi-murderer is thus treated by Farrar in his Life of Christ, pp. 54-55: 'It must have been very shortly after the murder of the innocents that Herod died. Only five days before his death he had made a frantic attempt at suicide, and had ordered the execution of his eldest son Antipater. His deathbed, which once more reminds us of Henry VIII., was accompanied by circumstances of peculiar horror; and it has been asserted that he died of a loathsome disease, which is hardly mentioned in history, except in the case of men who have been rendered infamous by an atrocity of persecuting zeal. On his bed of intolerable anguish, in that splendid and luxurious palace which he had built for himself, under the palms of Jericho, swollen with disease and scorched by thirst, ulcerated externally and glowing inwardly with a "soft slow fire," surrounded by plotting sons and plundering slaves, detesting all and detested by all, longing for death as a release from his tortures yet dreading it as the beginning of worse terrors, stung by remorse yet still unslaked with murder, a horror to all around him yet in his guilty conscience a worse terror to himself, devoured by the premature corruption of an anticipated grave, eaten of worms as though visibly smitten by the finger of God's wrath after seventy years of successful villainy, the wretched old man, whom men had called the Great, lay in savage frenzy awaiting his last hour. As he knew that none would shed one tear for him, he determined that they should shed many for themselves, and issued an order that, under pain of death, the principal families of the kingdom and the chiefs of the tribes should come to Jericho. They came, and then, shutting them in the hippodrome, he secretly commanded his sister Salome that at the moment of his death they should all be massacred. And so, choking as it were with blood, devising massacres in its very delirium, the soul of Herod passed forth into the night.'" (Talmage, pp. 97-98, 106-108.)

Matt 2 16Evil and wicked though his reign was, we need not suppose that Herod was in a class by himself. In ordering the slaughter of a host of innocent children, he was but following the iniquitous path of all autocratic rulers, rulers whose thrones rest on the bones and are bathed in the blood of the slain. Ghengis Kahn, Caesar, Nero, Gadianton, Hitler, Stalin, Kruschev, and thousands of others, are guilty of similarly gross crimes and mass murders.

Matt 2 1616. Two years old and under] When did the wise men come to Jerusalem and Bethlehem, and how old was the child Jesus when they bowed before him? Though this date cannot be known with certainty, there is strong reason to suppose that more than seven weeks and quite possibly several months or even nearly three years elapsed between this visit and the nativity. It could not have taken place during Mary's forty days of purification, because immediately following them the holy family went to Nazareth to live (Luke 2:21-24, 39) Whereas following the visit of these eastern prophets, Joseph, Mary, and Jesus, fled into Egypt for a season.

Matt 2 16It is worthy of note that the wise men found Jesus in a house, not a stable, inn, or temporary abiding place; that he is called a "young child," not a baby, a total of seven times in the course of fourteen consecutive verses; that Matthew makes two pointed references to the diligent nature of Herod's inquiry as to the actual time of the birth; and that a child is two years of age until the time of his third birthday. Now assuming that Herod would order the massacre of all young children in the general age bracket involved, still the presumption arises that a number of months or even one or two years may have elapsed before the arrival of the eastern visitors.

Matt 2 1717. Jeremy] Jeremiah.
