Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Preaches and Heals in Galilee

Though others before and since have preached the gospel and healed the sick, yet none ever wrought so ably and effectively as the man Jesus. "Never man spake like this man" (John 7:46), and never was the healing power of faith so abundantly attested as in his ministry.

Perhaps these very Galilean multitudes were the ones Nephi saw in vision more than six hundred years before. "I beheld the Lamb of God going forth among the children of men," he recorded. "And I beheld multitudes of people who were sick, and who were afflicted with all manner of diseases, and with devils and unclean spirits; . . . And they were healed by the power of the Lamb of God; and the devils and the unclean spirits were cast out." (1 Ne. 11:31.)

Matt 4 23Matt. 4:23. All Galilee] It would take several months for Jesus to travel, preach, and heal in the cities of Galilee.

I. V. Matt. 4:22. Which believed on his name] Healings were not showered upon people promiscuously; they were reserved solely and exclusively for those who had faith in Christ.

Matt 4 25Matt. 4:25. Though miracles were performed for believers only, yet the fact of their performance attracted great multitudes to hear the Master's teachings. It was to such assembled hosts, for instance, that the Sermon on the Mount was delivered. And who knows what other great truths saluted the ears of the scores of thousands who came to see manifestations of his healing power? The synoptists condense whole months of preaching and teaching with the simple statement that he proclaimed "the gospel of the kingdom."

I. V. Mark 1:27; Luke 4:38. They besought him for her] Since administrations and healings follow the exercise of faith, and since the condition of the sick person sometimes precludes a personal request for the blessings of the priesthood, it is proper for friends and loved ones to make such requests and use their faith for the ailing person.
