Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Promises to Take Gospel to the Dead

John 5 25"God is not the God of the dead, but of the living" (Matt. 22:32), for all live unto him; all are alive in his eyes, whether their spirits are temporarily housed in mortal tabernacles or imprisoned in the spirit sphere awaiting the day of the resurrection. And the salvation of all men—living or dead (as men count death)—is centered in and comes because of the Son.

John 5 25Now he announces that the long promised hour has almost arrived when the Son of God shall go personally to the spirits in prison, preach the gospel to them, organize his kingdom among them, and send forth legal administrators to preach repentance and in all things prepare the way for the great work of salvation for the dead.

John 5 25Enoch had foreseen that those who perished in the flood of Noah should remain in prison, in torment, until the Son ministered among the waiting spirits and opened the prison doors; now that ministry was at hand. (Moses 7:37-39.)

John 5 25Isaiah had foretold that the dead, gathered as prisoners in a pit, should be visited after many days (Isa. 24:22), that to them the Messiah would come "to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isa. 61:1), that he would "bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house" (Isa. 42:7); now Jesus announced that he, as the Son of God, would soon undertake that work.

John 5 25Abraham had received the promise that his literal seed should be heirs of salvation and eternal life through the gospel, whether they had opportunity to hear it in this life or not (Abra. 2:10-11); now the gospel was to be preached to the dead.

John 5 25After millenniums of waiting, the hour had now almost come in which the Messiah, while his crucified body lay in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, would herald the glad tidings of salvation to the spirits in prison. (1 Pet. 3:18-21; 4:6.)
