Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 1 ( 1965)

Jesus Contrasts Law of Moses and Law of

I. V. Matt. 5:23-24. Though murder is prohibited by both the Mosaic law and the gospel, yet the gospel does more than prohibit and punish. It seeks to remove the cause of murder so that men living by the higher standard will not harden themselves to the point of being able to take life.

Matt 5 2224. Raca, or Rabcah, . . . Thou fool] Expressions current in Jesus' day which, according to the then common phraseology, were used to indicate unholy and contemptuous feelings. Profane and vulgar expressions vary from nation to nation and age to age, but the intent of this passage is to condemn any language which coveys improper feelings about another.

Matt 5 22Matt. 5:22. Without a cause] Deleted from both the Inspired Version and the Book of Mormon accounts. According to the gospel standard, unrighteous anger is evil whether provocation precedes it or not.

I. V. Matt. 5:23-25; 3 Ne. 12:23-24. Members of the Church, and those who desire such affiliation, who have differences among themselves, or who bear grudges one toward another, have an affirmative obligation to resolve their difficulties, so that perfect peace, love, and charity will prevail in the kingdom.

I. V. Matt. 5:25. Thy brother hath aught against thee] Not a remembrance that you are angry with your brother, for it is assumed that the true saint will have overcome his own ill feelings, but a remembrance that your brother hath aught against you! The command: 'Go to him; do not wait for him to come to you, simply because you are the one who has been wronged.' How often one person supposes he has been wronged, or imagines another is offended at him, when a simple brotherly explanation would remove the source of all possible ill feeling. Or, how often are actual cases of resentment and antagonism cleared up when the hand of fellowship, literally and verbally, is extended.

3 Ne 12 253 Ne 12 26SCMatt 5 25Matt 5 26Matt. 5:25-26; 3 Ne. 12:25-26. Counsel to avoid law suits and entangling legal difficulties, lest fine and imprisonment result, is directed particularly to the apostles and missionaries as they go forth to carry the gospel message to a wicked world. It is more important that they suffer legal wrongs than that their ministries be hindered or halted by legal processes.
