David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

2

Eyewitnesses of the Lord's Majesty

Shortly before the Savior's betrayal and his crucifixion and subsequent resurrection, an event now known as the Transfiguration occurred, which I am sure was meant for the spiritual enlightenment of us as well as for those who were personal witnesses.

The New Testament writers tell us the Savior went up a lofty mountain (Luke says simply "a mountain") to find a secluded spot where he could kneel in prayer and prepare for the events to come. He took with him the three dearest and most enlightened of his apostles.

It must have been early evening when Jesus ascended the mountain with those three chosen witnesses—James and John, the "Sons of Thunder," and Peter, the "Man of Rock." Perhaps Jesus felt not only a sense of the heavenly calm that that solitary opportunity for communion with his Father would bring but also a sense that he would be supported in the coming hour by ministrations not of this earth. He was to be illuminated with a light that needed no aid from the sun or the moon or the stars. He went up to prepare for his coming death. He took his three apostles with him in the belief that they, after having seen his glory—the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father—might be fortified and their faith strengthened to prepare them for the insults and humiliating events that were to follow.

We learn from the scriptures that the Savior, finding a secluded place, knelt and prayed; and as he prayed to his Father, he was elevated far above the doubt and wickedness of the world that had rejected him. As he prayed, he was transfigured. His countenance shone as the sun, and his garments became as white as the snow fields above them. He was enwrapped in an aura of glistening brilliance; his whole presence reflected such a divine radiance that the light of the sun or the white of the snow is the only thing to which the Evangelists can compare that celestial scene. Two figures appeared by his side: Moses and Elias (Elijah). When the prayer was ended and the coming ordeal accepted, the full glory fell upon him from heaven—a testimony of his divine Sonship and power.

Luke's account indicates that the three apostles did not witness the beginning of this marvelous transfiguration. They were heavy with sleep, as they would later be at Gethsemane, but they were suddenly startled into wakefulness (Luke 9:32). Then they saw and heard. In the darkness of the night they saw an intense light and the glorified form of their Lord. Beside him, in that same glory of light, were the two ancient prophets.

As the vision began to fade, Peter, we are told, apparently anxious to delay the departure of the heavenly visitors, expressed the first thought that came to his mind: "Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias" (Luke 9:33).

They may have been surprised at the inappropriate proposal made by the eager Peter, who would yet learn the meaning of the night's events. But even as Peter spoke, a bright cloud of brilliant light overshadowed Jesus and his heavenly visitors, Moses and Elijah, and also the three apostles. Then a voice was heard: "This is my beloved Son: hear him" (Luke 9:35).

The three apostles fell prostrate and hid their faces. How long it was before Jesus came to them and touched them is not clear; but when they raised their eyes, it was all over. The bright cloud had vanished; the gleams of light, the shining countenances had passed away; and they were alone with Jesus. Only the light from the stars shone on the mountain slopes.

After such an experience, the apostles may have hesitated to rise; but Jesus, now appearing as they had seen him before he knelt in prayer, touched them and said, "Arise, and be not afraid" (Matthew 17:7). He was their dear friend.

The day was probably dawning as they descended the mountain. Jesus instructed them to tell no one until he had risen from the dead. The vision was for them; they were to ponder it in the depths of their own hearts. They were not even to tell the other apostles. The three disciples kept Christ's instructions but could not understand the full meaning. They could only ask each other, or wonder in silence, what this resurrection from the dead could mean. But they now knew more fully than ever that their Lord was indeed the Christ, the Son of God.

Though it may be difficult for us to understand, Jesus himself must have been strengthened and sustained by Moses and Elijah in preparation for the suffering and agony ahead of him in working out the infinite and eternal atonement of all mankind. In a few days an angel from heaven would again strengthen him when he would sweat great drops of blood in the Garden of Gethsemane.

The three chosen apostles were taught of his coming death and also his resurrection, teachings that would strengthen each of them in the eventful days ahead.

Testifying later, John said, "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father" (John 1:14). The apostle Peter, speaking of this personal experience, wrote: "We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount" (2 Peter 1:16-18).

Peter, James, and John. They alone beheld the glory and majesty of the transfigured Jesus and undoubtedly received the keys of the kingdom. These three were yet to be taken to a spot in Gethsemane where they would behold his suffering as he took upon himself the sins of the world so that he might redeem us from the fall, demonstrate to us through his resurrection that he is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, and show us that he is the Redeemer of the world.

These same three witnesses who were on the mount—Peter, the senior apostle, and James and John—appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1829 to confer upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood and give to them the keys of the kingdom and apostleship. Christ himself, followed by Moses, Elias, and Elijah, appeared to Joseph and Oliver in the Kirtland Temple, giving authority and committing other essential keys of this dispensation. The Prophet wrote of this event:

"In the afternoon, I assisted the other Presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us" (headnote to D&C 110).

"The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. . . .

"His voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. . . .

"After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel. . . . After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

"After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: . . . Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (D&C 110:1-4, 11-13, 16).

The divine keys, power, and authority have been committed by heavenly messengers to Joseph Smith in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times. Those keys—the same that were delivered to Peter, James, and John on the mountain—authorize us to carry the true gospel to all nations to declare the power, glory, and majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ and to warn that the day of his coming is near. A prophet of God holds these keys of authority today. We invite people everywhere to inquire further into this divine message we have to offer to all mankind.
