David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

3

In Him Shall We Have Life

In the hearts of all persons, of whatever race or station in life, there are inexpressible longings for something they do not now possess. This longing is implanted by a concerned Creator.

A loving Heavenly Father's design is that this longing of the human heart should lead to the one who alone can satisfy it—even Jesus of Nazareth, who was foreordained in the Grand Council before the earth was created. To the brother of Jared, the premortal Jesus said: "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . In me shall all mankind have life, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name" (Ether 3:14).

As members of his restored Church, it is imperative that we do our utmost to expand our understanding of his premortal commission, his earthly ministry, his unjust crucifixion, the agony of his suffering, his final sacrifice, and his resurrection. Each of us is profoundly indebted to him, for we were purchased by the shedding of his own precious blood. We are surely obligated to follow his admonition, to believe on his name, and to testify of him and his word.

I am indebted for some of my remarks to eyewitness accounts of Christ's life as recorded in the New Testament; to prophets ancient and modern, especially to the Prophet Joseph Smith for his personal witness that God the Father and his Son live, and for his faithfully following divine instructions in bringing forth the fulness of the everlasting gospel as contained in the Book of Mormon and other latter-day scriptures; to the apostolic writings of Elders James E. Talmage and Bruce R. McConkie; and to others, including theologian and believer Frederic Farrar. Our scriptures teach us gospel truths, and inspired writers add to our understanding.

We have learned that during the last days of his mortal life, Jesus withdrew from all public teaching and spent the Wednesday before Passover in Bethany in seclusion. The next day, Thursday, he instructed Peter and John to go to Jerusalem, where they would find a room prepared so they could meet together. In that room Jesus met with the Twelve, and they sat down to eat.

It was customary that as a person entered a room, he laid aside his sandals at the door and his feet were washed to remove the dust from his travels. A servant usually performed this lowly task, but on this sacred night, "Jesus Himself, in His eternal humility and self-denial, rose from His place at the meal to do [this] menial service" (Frederic W. Farrar, The Life of Christ [1874; reprint, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994], 557).

Jesus said to them: "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet" (John 13:13-14).

"He their Lord and Master had washed their feet. It was a kind and gracious task, and such ought to be the nature of all their dealings with each other. He had done it to teach them humility, . . . self-denial, [and] love" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 559).

During the course of the meal, Jesus revealed the terrible news that one among them would betray him, and a deep sadness fell over all of them. He then said to Judas, "That [which] thou doest, do quickly" (John 13:27). And Judas left the room to do his awful deed.

Conscious of the impending events, Jesus opened his heart to his chosen eleven, saying: "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. . . . Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: [but] whither I go, ye cannot come. . . . A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:31, 33-35).

While in that upper room, Jesus—initiating the sacrament—took bread, brake it, prayed over it, and passed it to the disciples, saying, "This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me." And then, passing the cup, he said, "This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you" (Luke 22:19-20).

The Savior prayed to the Father for the apostles and all believers, saying: "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:1-3).

The time that remained for him to be with them was short. He told them of the Holy Ghost, whom he would send to comfort and guide them in truth. He taught them many things that night as he tried to prepare them for the things he knew were coming. They then rose from the table, united their voices in a hymn, and left the room together to walk to the Garden of Gethsemane and all that awaited them there.

"The awful hour of His deepest [suffering] had arrived— . . . nothing remained . . . but the torture of physical pain and the poignancy of mental anguish. . . . He . . . calm[ed] His spirit by prayer and solitude to meet that hour in which all that is evil in the Power of [Satan] should wreak its worst upon the Innocent and Holy [One]. And He must face that hour alone. . . . 'My soul,' He said, 'is full of anguish, even unto death.'" It was not the anguish and fear of pain and death but "the burden . . . of the world's sin which lay heavy on His heart" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 575-76, 579).

"From the terrible conflict in Gethsemane, Christ emerged a victor. Though in the dark tribulation of that . . . hour He had pleaded that the bitter cup be removed from His lips, . . . the Father's will was never lost sight of" (James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977], 614).

And then came Judas with his betraying kiss; Christ's surrender to his enemies; the arrest of the Son of God and three sham trials before the priests in the Sanhedrin; the insults and the derision of the multitudes; Christ's appearance before Pontius Pilate, then Herod, then again before Pilate. Then came the final pronouncement of Pilate. After three appeals to the multitude of Jews to spare one of their own fell upon deaf ears, he delivered Jesus to be scourged.

"Scourging was the ordinary preliminary to crucifixion. . . . The . . . sufferer was publicly stripped, was tied . . . to a pillar, and then . . . blows were inflicted with leathern thongs, weighted with jagged . . . bone and lead [or rock]. . . . The victim generally fainted, often died" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 624).

When the cross had been prepared, the soldiers placed it upon his shoulders and led him to Golgotha. "But Jesus was enfeebled . . . by [hours] of violent . . . agitation, by an evening of deep . . . emotion, . . . by the mental agony of the garden, by three trials and three sentences of death before the Jews. . . . All these, [added] to the [wounds] of the scourging [and loss of blood], had utterly broken down His physical strength" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 634-35). So a bystander was enlisted to carry the heavy cross.

At Calvary, Christ was laid down upon the cross. "His arms were stretched along the cross-beams; and at the center of the open palms, the point of a huge iron nail was placed [and driven through the quivering flesh] into the wood." His feet were also nailed to the cross, which was slowly raised and fixed firmly in the ground. Every movement would be agony to the fresh wounds in his hands and feet. "Dizziness, . . . thirst, . . . sleeplessness, . . . fever, . . . long [hours] of torment. . . . Such was the death to which Christ was doomed" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 639, 641).

Jesus was nailed to the cross on that fateful Friday morning, probably between nine and ten o'clock. "At noontide the light of the sun was obscured, and black darkness spread over the whole land. The terrifying gloom continued for a period of three hours. . . . It was a fitting sign of the earth's deep mourning over the impending death of her Creator" (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 660).

At the ninth hour Christ uttered that anguished cry, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46). "In that bitterest hour the dying Christ was alone. [So] that the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn . . . His immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death" (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 661).

Later, "realizing that He was no longer forsaken, but that His atoning sacrifice had been accepted by the Father, and that His mission in the flesh had been carried to glorious consummation, He exclaimed in a loud voice of holy triumph: 'It is finished.' In reverence, resignation, and relief, He addressed the Father saying: 'Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.' He bowed His head, and voluntarily gave up His life" (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 661-62).

"At that moment the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom. An earthquake shook the earth. . . . The multitude, [now] utterly sobered from their furious excitement and frantic rage, . . . returned to Jerusalem" (Farrar, Life of Christ, 651-52).

Christ's body was lovingly taken from the cross, placed on fine linen purchased by Joseph of Arimathaea, covered with rich spices, and carried to a nearby garden where a new tomb belonging to Joseph was located.

The next day Pilate gave permission for the tomb to be carefully guarded until the third day, so that the disciples could not steal the body and then tell the people that Jesus had risen from the dead, as had been prophesied. The chief priests and Pharisees made the tomb secure, sealing the stone and leaving a guard on watch (Matthew 27:62-66).

Before daylight the following morning, Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James, having prepared fresh spices and ointments, went to the tomb and found that the stone had been rolled away. Looking in and not finding the body, they hurried to find Peter and the apostles and told them what they had found. Peter and John hastened at once to the tomb. John outran his older companion. Stooping down, he gazed in silent wonder into the empty tomb. Peter entered the tomb, where he saw the burial clothes lying where the body of Jesus had once lain. Then John followed him in. Despite their fear, there dawned upon them the hope, which later would become an absolute knowledge, that Christ had indeed risen, but as yet no one had seen him. The two wondering apostles returned to their brethren.

Mary stayed at the tomb and was grieving at the entrance when someone approached. Thinking it was the keeper of the garden, she asked where he had laid her Lord. A voice said to her, "Mary" (John 20:16).

Jesus himself was standing before her, but he did not appear as she had known him; he was now risen and glorified. She then recognized our Lord and must have attempted to embrace him, for he said, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God" (John 20:17).

Filled with amazement, she hastened to obey and repeated that glorious message which would give hope through all future ages. To it she added her personal declaration that she had seen the Lord (John 20:18).

Later, women carrying spices for the final preparation of the body for burial looked into the tomb and witnessed angels, who said, "Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified. Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen" (Mark 16:6; Luke 24:6). The angels told the women to go and notify the disciples, but the men did not believe them (Mark 16:7; Luke 24:9-11).

The Gospel according to Luke relates that on that same day, two of Jesus' followers were on their way to a village called Emmaus, about eight miles from Jerusalem. As they walked and conversed, a stranger joined them and walked along with them. Though this stranger was indeed the resurrected Christ, they did not recognize him.

As the two men approached the village to which they were going, Jesus acted as if he were going further, but they persuaded him to stay, saying, "Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent" (Luke 24:29). So he stayed with them. As he ate the simple meal with them, he took the bread and blessed it; then he broke the bread and gave it to them. As he did this, their eyes were opened, and they recognized the Lord; and then he vanished from their sight.

Stunned, the two men said in amazement to each other, "Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32). They hurried back to Jerusalem, where they found ten of the apostles and some other disciples gathered together behind closed doors for fear of the Jews (John 20:19).

They declared, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon" (Luke 24:34). Then they explained what had happened on the road and how they had recognized the Lord when he broke the bread.

As the disciples listened, the Lord himself suddenly stood in their midst and said, "Peace be unto you" (Luke 24:36).

They were terrified and supposed that they were seeing a spirit, but he said to them, "Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:38-39). He showed them his hands and his feet. They still could not believe, so he asked, "Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and . . . honeycomb." He took the food and ate before them. Then he told them, "These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me" (Luke 24:41-42, 44).

He opened their minds to understand the scriptures, saying, "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." He reminded them, "Ye are witnesses of these things" (Luke 24:46-48).

One of the Twelve, Thomas, was not with them when Jesus came. When the other disciples told him they had seen the Lord, he replied, "Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe" (John 20:25).

A week later the disciples were again gathered together indoors, and Thomas was with them. The doors were locked, but Jesus came and stood among them and said, "Peace be unto you." Then he said to Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing" (John 20:26-27).

I have often pictured in my own mind the depth of remorse that must have been burning within Thomas's soul as his doubting heart, now purified, attempted to find a reply to his Lord. Finally he said, "My Lord and my God." And Jesus said to him, "Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed" (John 20:28-29).

Perhaps no clearer declaration of fact has ever been made than those facts which tell of the literal resurrection of Christ. The record of appearances to the apostles during the forty days following his resurrection—leaves no cause for doubt. John informs us that "there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written . . . even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written" (John 21:25).

Shortly after his appearance to his disciples in the Eastern Hemisphere, Jesus appeared to the Nephites in the Western Hemisphere. God himself introduced his Son to the multitude: "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him" (3 Nephi 11:7).

Elder James E. Talmage has beautifully described the scene: "While gazing upward in reverent expectation, the people beheld a Man, clothed in a white robe, who descended and stood among them. He spake, saying: 'Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.' [3 Nephi 11:10-11.] The multitude [knelt] in adoration for they remembered that their prophets had foretold that the Lord would appear among them after His resurrection and ascension. As He directed, the people arose, and one by one came to Him, and did see and feel the prints of the nails in His hands and feet and the spear-wound in His side. . . . With one accord they cried: 'Hosanna! blessed be the name of the Most High God' [3 Nephi 11:17]. Then, falling at the feet of Jesus, they worshipped Him" (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, 673-74).

When Joseph Smith was visited by the Father and the resurrected Christ in 1820, the latter was introduced by the Father, thus ushering in the marvelous events of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Our resurrected Lord was seen in a vision by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in 1832. Joseph recorded: "The Lord touched the eyes of our understandings. . . . And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; and saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony . . . which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:19-24).

These fragmentary events that I have briefly portrayed bear record and witness that resurrection and eternal life come to us because of what Christ our Lord did for each of us. He declared, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" (John 11:25-26). To this declaration of truth I bear my solemn witness.
