David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

4

The Mission of Joseph Smith

Since my early youth, I have always believed and carried in my mind a vivid picture of the youthful Joseph Smith finding a secluded spot, kneeling in the quiet grove, and in faith asking the desire of his heart. He must have felt assured that the Lord would hear and somehow answer him. There appeared to him two glorious personages, a description of whom, he said, was beyond his ability to express.

As the years have passed, with my many experiences with people, places, study, prayer, and personal events of an intimate, spiritual nature, I have been blessed with an ever-deepening faith and knowledge and witness of this heavenly restoration of the Lord's work. The events of the Restoration related by Joseph Smith are true. We who labor in this cause can develop in our bosoms an uplifting, sanctifying, and glorifying feeling of its truth. The Holy Ghost will reveal and seal upon our hearts this knowledge.

Our understanding of and belief and faith in the vision of the Father and the Son to Joseph, which ushered in this final dispensation with its great and precious truths, are not only essential but are also the basis for the authority to proclaim to the people of the world that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son in the flesh of our Eternal Father and is the Redeemer of the world. We declare that salvation comes only through him and that Joseph Smith is the instrument, or revealer, of that knowledge. We declare that Joseph was given the keys of salvation for all mankind and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord's church and kingdom on earth, the only true and living church having the power to teach and administer saving ordinances on the earth.

We testify and teach that God did reveal himself unto Joseph Smith, the witness of this final dispensation. God has made known unto us that Jesus Christ is in the express image of the Father, and we now know something of the form, features, and even character of that mighty intelligence whose wisdom, creation, and power control the affairs of the universe.

In the Prophet Joseph Smith's own words, the brightness of his vision was above anything he had ever known. He looked up and beheld two glorious personages. One of them, pointing to the other, said, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith-History 1:17). Surely it must have seemed inconceivable to young Joseph that he was looking upon God our Father and his Son, and that the Lord had come to visit and instruct him.

The Son, being bidden by the Father, spoke to the kneeling boy. Joseph was told that all the churches were wrong. They had corrupted the doctrine, broken the ordinances, and lost the authority of the priesthood of God. He was told that the leaders of the man-made churches were displeasing to the Lord, collecting money that should be given freely; and that the time of the restoration of all truth and authority had come, including the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ. Then, to his infinite astonishment, Joseph learned that he—humble, unlearned, young—was to be the instrument through whom the Almighty would reestablish his work in these, the latter days. Such was the beginning of the restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Some three years later, Joseph Smith had another heavenly visitation, this time from an angel sent from the presence of God. The angel, who informed Joseph that his name was Moroni, revealed the resting place of a set of gold plates upon which certain ancient inhabitants of America had recorded the history of their peoples. In course of time, these records were to be translated by Joseph, through the gift and power of God. The manuscript was published early in 1830 as the Book of Mormon. It is the most remarkable book in the world from a doctrinal, historical, or philosophic point of view. Its integrity has been assailed with senseless fury for over a century and a half, yet its position and influence today are more impregnable than ever.

The Book of Mormon did not come forth as a curiosity. It was written with a definite and very important purpose, a purpose to be felt by every reader. From the title page, we read that it was written "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." The message it contains is a witness for Christ and teaches the love of God for all mankind. Its purpose is to bring people to accept Jesus as the Christ. The most important part of the book tells of the actual visit of Christ to ancient America and records the teachings and instructions he gave in clarity and great power to the people. The Book of Mormon substantiates the Bible in its teachings of the Savior; it speaks of Christ more than any other subject and teaches that he is the Redeemer and Atoner of mankind, the central figure in God's plan of salvation.

I have marveled at God's wisdom in bringing forth this ancient record in the manner in which it was accomplished, for it becomes the powerful witness of the divine mission of Joseph Smith.

On Sunday, 28 November 1841, the Prophet wrote: "I spent the day in council with the Twelve Apostles at the house of President Young, conversing with them upon a variety of subjects. . . . I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book" (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:461).

Joseph Smith was foreordained to be the duly appointed leader of this, the greatest and final of all dispensations. After the angel Moroni's visit, other heavenly messengers conferred upon him holy priesthood authority, divine keys, power, and numerous revelations from God.

Not only was the Church organized under inspiration and divine direction but through Joseph Smith, the necessary body of doctrine for guidance of the Church was also revealed. Faith and light were again available to dispel the darkness that had been upon the earth. Joseph Smith, after seeking and being taught by the Author of Truth, learned that:

Joseph also learned about a new concept of man—his past, present, and future state—with an understanding of the continuity of intelligence and eternal progression. And though Hebrew scriptures refer to temples and baptism for the dead, Joseph Smith was the first person in this dispensation to have revealed to him the purpose of temples and salvation for the dead and the eternal marriage covenant and sealing of man and woman as the foundation for exaltation.

Under the inspiration of Almighty God, the Church began to flourish. The Lord had promised that a great and "marvelous work is about to come forth" (D&C 4:1), and it was spreading rapidly and in a miraculous way. The missionary spirit was touching hearts. The Book of Mormon was being read. Tens, then hundreds, and then thousands joined the Church. Politicians began worrying over this new phenomenon. Enemies were organizing, and by 1844 the Prophet's life was in serious danger.

In his last public address to a large congregation in Nauvoo, Joseph said: "I do not regard my own life. I am ready to be offered a sacrifice for this people; for what can our enemies do? Only kill the body, and their power is then at an end. Stand firm, my friends; never flinch. Do not seek to save your lives, for he that is afraid to die for truth will lose eternal life. . . . God has tried you. You are a good people; therefore I love you with all my heart. Greater love hath no man than that he should lay down his life for his friends. You have stood by me in the hour of trouble, and I am willing to sacrifice my life for your preservation" (History of the Church, 6:500).

This statement is all the more remarkable because the Prophet was still in the morning of life—only thirty-eight years old—and great as he had already become, the zenith of his mental and spiritual powers had not yet been reached. Life, with all its possibilities of future achievements, was precious to him. Yet he was willing to give it up, willing to forgo all the honors that might be his, the greatness that would come to him if he lived.

Parley P. Pratt declared: "Had he been spared a martyr's fate till mature manhood and age, he was certainly endued with powers and ability to have revolutionized the world in many respects, and to have transmitted to posterity a name associated with more brilliant and glorious acts than has yet fallen to the lot of mortals" (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985], 32).

As Joseph Smith left Nauvoo for Carthage that 24th day of June, he would have looked for the last time on the city and the magnificent temple that he loved. He knew that he would never look upon it again. To his companions who were accompanying him, he gave these prophetic words: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. . . . It shall be said of me 'He was murdered in cold blood!'" (History of the Church, 6:555).

Why did he not turn back? There was time to escape. He was not yet in the hands of his enemies. Friends were at his side who would die for him, if necessary. Some suggested that he flee across the Mississippi, where he would be safe. But he continued on to Carthage.

Joseph must have recalled some of the dangers through which he had passed, such as the winter night when a mob broke into his home, tore him from the bedside of his wife and sick children, and dragged him over the frozen ground for a hundred yards or more, kicking and beating him until he fainted. When consciousness returned, they stripped him of his clothing and covered his naked body with a coat of tar and feathers, forcing open his mouth to fill it with the same substance. Then they left him on the frozen ground to die of cold and exposure.

He might have recalled the time in Missouri when he and some of his brethren had been betrayed into the hands of their enemies by a traitor in the Church. The leader of the mob convened a court-martial, and Joseph and his associates were placed on trial for their lives. They were not even permitted to be present at the trial. They were convicted and all sentenced to be shot at eight o'clock the next morning on the public square in Far West. At the appointed hour they were duly led forth to be murdered, but a dispute among the mob leaders saved them for the time being. The sentence was not revoked, however. Without even being permitted to bid farewell to their families, they were taken from place to place and exhibited to jeering crowds, while the Saints were told that they would never see their leaders again.

While in prison, Joseph cheered his fellow prisoners by announcing that none of them would suffer death. "Be of good cheer, brethren," he said; "the word of the Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, . . . not one of our lives shall be taken" (History of the Church, 3:200n).

As Joseph contemplated those dreary months of imprisonment, he must have recalled that one night when, confined in a dungeon, he rebuked the guards. He and his brethren were trying to get a little sleep, but they were kept awake by the awful blasphemies and obscene jests of their jailers, who told of the dreadful deeds of robbery and murder that they had committed among the Mormons. This was no idle boast, for these awful crimes had actually been committed. Suddenly Joseph rose to his feet and, in a voice that seemed to shake the very building, cried out: "Silence, ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!" (History of the Church, 3:208n).

The effect must have been electrifying. Some of his jailers begged his pardon; others slunk into the dark corners of the room as if to hide their shame. The power of Jesus Christ, whose name Joseph had invoked in his rebuke, was upon him. His hands and feet were in chains, but these the guards did not see. They saw only the righteous anger in his shining face, and felt the divine power in his voice as he rebuked them.

But if Joseph's voice was as terrible as a roaring lion in his rebuke of the wicked, it was as soothing as a mother's voice in comfort to the righteous. In that same name and by the same authority with which he silenced the blasphemies of the guards, he blessed little children, baptized repentant sinners, conferred the Holy Ghost, healed the sick, and spoke words of comfort and consolation to thousands.

At midnight, when the wagon journey from Nauvoo ended, Joseph and his brethren entered Carthage, and his fate was sealed. His enemies had awaited their coming with great anxiety. The governor, who was present, persuaded the mob to disperse that night by promising them that they should have full satisfaction. The next day, after a hearing, Joseph was released on bail, but he was subsequently rearrested on a trumped-up charge of treason. Bail was now refused, and he was placed in Carthage Jail.

The last night of Joseph's life on earth, he bore a powerful testimony to the guards and others assembled at the door of the jail, telling them of the divinity of the Book of Mormon and declaring that the gospel had been restored and the kingdom of God had been established on the earth. It was for this reason that he was incarcerated in prison, not because he had violated any law of God or man.

Late at night Joseph and his companions tried to get some rest. At first Joseph and his brother Hyrum occupied the only bed in the jail cell, but a gunshot fired during the night and a disturbance led Joseph's friends to insist that he take a place between two of them on the floor. They would protect him with their own bodies. Joseph asked Stephen Markham to use his arm for a pillow while they conversed; then he turned to Dan Jones, on the other side, and whispered, "Are you afraid to die?" And this staunch friend answered, "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause, I do not think death would have many terrors." Joseph replied, "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die" (History of the Church, 6:600-601).

The next morning, the fateful 27th of June, 1844, three of the brethren left the prison, and only four remained—Joseph and Hyrum Smith, John Taylor, and Willard Richards. They spent the day in writing letters to their wives, conversing on principles of the gospel, and singing. Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon, the Prophet asked Elder Taylor to sing "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief." This comforting song breathes in every line the very spirit and message of Christ. Only a person who loved his Savior and his fellowmen could have desired to hear these words at such a time.

When Elder Taylor had finished the song, Joseph asked him to sing it again, which he did. This time his voice was more sad and tender than at first, and when he concluded, all voices were hushed, but four hearts beat quicker as they listened to the fateful words:

My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked, if I for him would die; The flesh was weak; my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, "I will!"

While this spirit of love and service for men, expressed in song and prayer, filled the hearts of all within the jail, the mob was gathering. Within little more than an hour, Joseph and Hyrum had been killed and John Taylor wounded. Only Willard Richards was unharmed.

When the news of the awful crime reached Nauvoo, the citizens were overcome with grief and horror. Probably such universal sorrow had never been known in an American city before. Their prophet and their patriarch were dead. What else mattered?

When the wagon carrying the bodies from Carthage was still a long way off, the entire population of Nauvoo went out to meet it. No greater tribute was ever paid to mortal man than was paid that day to Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Such universal love from those who loved them best could never have been won by selfish and designing men. Only love begets love. Once when Joseph was asked how he got so many followers and retained them, he replied, "It is because I possess the principle of love. All I can offer the world is a good heart and a good hand" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], 313).

John Taylor wrote of him: "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood" (D&C 135:3).

I testify that in the year 1820 God the Eternal Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to Joseph Smith, who was foreordained to be the instrument of the Restoration, which is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and that this Church, by divine direction, is preparing for Christ's second coming.
