David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

5

We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet

Friends who are not members of our church have asked me, "How do you justify your declarations of your church being the true church? Is your claim of authority more valid than that of other churches?" My answer is always, "Yes. We possess the same divine priesthood authority that was held anciently."

At the time the Savior and his twelve apostles were laboring along the coast of Caesarea Philippi, the Savior asked them, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" They answered: "Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets." He asked them, "But whom say ye that I am?" Peter answered, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."

Jesus responded: "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:13-19).

The Lord's statement teaches that it was upon the power of revelation that the Church should be built. The keys of the kingdom were to be given to Peter; and later, as he associated with the other members of the Twelve, he exercised this power as he presided over them.

The Bible describes a number of occasions when the Savior took only Peter, James, and John with him and evidently gave them additional instructions. He took these three apostles up on the Mount, where they were witnesses of his glorified transfiguration, and where they received the promised keys of the priesthood. This heavenly event included the appearance of Moses and Elias. The apostles also heard the voice of the Father bearing witness that Jesus is his beloved Son, and the command that they were to listen and obey.

In September 1830, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood by Peter, James, and John, and the keys were restored to Joseph Smith.

By revelation the Lord told the Prophet, "I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, . . . and also with Peter, James and John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry . . . ; unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth" (D&C 27:5, 12-14).

When the Lord by revelation called Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon to serve as counselors to Joseph Smith, he said, "Hearken to the calling wherewith you are called, even to be a high priest in my church, and a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun.; whom I have given the keys of the kingdom, which belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:1-2).

In the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836, the heavenly beings who had appeared to the Savior and his three apostles on the Mount appeared and conferred additional priesthood authority and keys upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, for the gathering of Israel, the saving work for the dead, and the building up of the Church preparatory to the coming of Christ to rule and reign on the earth forever.

These keys of the kingdom that were held by Peter, James, and John, who served as the First Presidency in the dispensation of the meridian of time, and that were conferred upon Joseph Smith, are held by the president and prophet of the Church today. He holds this supreme authority. He holds the right of revelation and of decision for the priesthood and for the Church.

William Fowler, a British convert of 1849, was so moved by the very thought of a prophet of God living among the people that he wrote these stirring words: "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days."

Through our prophet we receive the tried and proven principles of the gospel. In a revelation given through Joseph Smith a few months after the Church was organized, the Lord gave careful instructions and counsel to the new leaders to "ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart. . . . Seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given; . . . they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments."

The Lord goes on to explain: "For all have not every gift given unto them; . . . [but] to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God. . . . To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. . . . To others it is given to believe on their words" (D&C 46:7-9, 11, 13-14).

The work we have been assigned to do has been placed by the Almighty in the hands of a prophet. He is the mouthpiece of the Lord for today. The Lord, speaking to the Church in this dispensation and referring to the early leaders, said: "They shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation" (D&C 68:3-4).

How are we to know and receive direction for ourselves and our families? By personal revelation in answer to our humble prayers and by being in tune with the counsel of our prophet. The Lord has always communicated to his people through his prophets. The Lord's spokesmen are not self-appointed but are called of God. When Joseph Smith was called to be "a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ," the Lord declared in a revelation: "Wherefore, . . . thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; for his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory" (D&C 21:1, 4-6).

Our prophet holds all the keys for the Church to accomplish its divine mission: to preach the gospel to every nation and people, to organize stakes of Zion throughout the world, for the gathering of Israel, to build holy temples for performing of sacred ordinances for the living and for the dead, and for the worldwide gathering of the Lord's people in preparation for the second coming of the Savior. There is only one person at the head of the Church on the earth at one time. No man can take it unto himself. He must be called of God as was Aaron (see Hebrews 5:4).

On 6 April 1830, the day the Church was organized, the Lord gave this commandment to the Church: "For his [the Church president's] word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith. . . . For thus saith the Lord God: Him have I inspired to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good" (D&C 21:5-7).

Our fifth Article of Faith declares: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

The revealed process by which a man becomes the president of the Church begins when he is called, ordained, and set apart to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles—a call that is inspired of the Lord. That calling and ordination place the newly called apostle in a priesthood quorum with eleven other men who hold the apostleship. Each apostle is ordained under the direction of the president of the Church, who holds the keys of all of the kingdom of God. He gives to each new apostle the priesthood authority necessary for him to hold every position in the Church.

We declare that the authority to administer in the name of God is operative in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today. We further testify that this power, or commission, was conferred on the first officers of the Church by ordination under the hands of those who held the same power in earlier dispensations. Joseph Smith received the keys of the apostleship from Peter, James, and John, who held the authority of the apostleship in the New Testament times. This authority has come down from the Prophet Joseph Smith to our current president.

During the days of Joseph Smith, there were some who were pretenders to apostolic authority. One such was an elder who was sent by Joseph Smith to preach the gospel. It was not long until this elder proclaimed himself a high priest and said he had been ordained by an angel from heaven. He deceived some Church members. He was called back to Ohio by the Prophet Joseph Smith and questioned about his claims. He soon confessed that he had lied, and he begged forgiveness. Orson Hyde, one of the Twelve Apostles, recorded the principle that the Prophet then taught all those who were assembled in the School of the Prophets:

"No true angel from God will ever come to ordain any man, because they have once been sent to establish the priesthood by ordaining me thereunto; . . . the priesthood being once established on earth, with power to ordain others, no heavenly messenger will ever come to interfere with that power by ordaining any more. . . . You may therefore know, from this time forward, that if any man comes to you professing to be ordained by an angel, he is either a liar or has been imposed upon in consequence of transgression by an angel of the devil, for this priesthood shall never be taken away from this church" ("Although Dead, Yet He Speaketh," Millennial Star, 20 Nov. 1846, 139).

These instructions should be a warning and testimony to any pretender who claims apostolic authority on the basis that he has been visited by angels. It should also be a warning to anyone who may be so deceived as to follow these false shepherds.

I have been impressed with all of the prophets since the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith—he who by revelation received the message, the visit from God the Father and his Son. I know that in order to usher in this work, that visitation took place, giving the Prophet Joseph Smith the vision and the determination and the ability to withstand all that he did to help bring about the Restoration. Heavenly messengers and revelations came to the Prophet Joseph Smith to help usher in this great work, which we declare to all the world and which I know to be true. I know that the prophets who have followed since the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith were all called of God.
