David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

6

This Work Is True

A short time ago I stood in a family circle while the husband of one of our granddaughters blessed their new little son, Mark. As he blessed Mark, he prayed that he would someday go on a mission and, when he returned, find a sweet, young companion and be sealed in the temple. As he pronounced these blessings upon little Mark, I had the desire that he might know what I know and feel what I feel about some of the spiritual blessings that have entered into my life. I desired that his life would also be filled with spiritual experiences similar to one I had when I was called to be an assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

I remember the details well. I was called to the First Presidency's office to meet with President Joseph Fielding Smith. His name would be presented the next day for sustaining as the new president and prophet of the Church. Harold B. Lee was to be sustained as the first counselor and N. Eldon Tanner as the second counselor in the First Presidency. They spent a few moments with me, extending the call, and then reminded me that the next morning my name would be read in the conference.

After that call was extended to me, I walked down the granite steps of the Church Administration Building. I felt amazement and wonder. How could this happen? How could this come to me? As I walked around the block, I thought and wondered about the changes that would come into my life now. How would I ever measure up to the responsibility that would now rest upon me? How could I go out in the world and represent this great and glorious organization? I was so overcome with my feelings as I walked around the block that I didn't want to meet anyone I knew. I just wanted to find my wife, Ruby, and tell her what had happened. I went up to the ninth floor of the Hotel Utah, where Ruby was visiting with some family members. I remember knocking on the door and opening it just a couple of inches so I could motion for her to come out. Of course, she wondered what was happening and came out into the hall.

I took her by the hand, and as we walked along the hallway, all I could do was squeeze her hand. I was so overcome with what had happened that I had trouble even getting the words out to tell her about it. Finally she stopped me and said, "Well, say something." Then I looked at her, put my hands on her shoulders, and told her what had happened. She started to cry. The two of us stood there with our arms around each other. Our lives had been changed. The next day, my name was read to be sustained, and I was asked to come up and take one of those red chairs. I did so in all amazement. And then the Tabernacle Choir sang "O Divine Redeemer." I thought my heart would break in the pleading of those words: "Remember not, remember not, O Lord, my sins."

I would hope someday that our great-grandson Mark and others of our posterity would have similar spiritual experiences and that they would feel the spiritual power and influence of this gospel. I hope that Mark and others will have the opportunities such as I had when I was in the temple when President Spencer W. Kimball received the revelation regarding the priesthood. I was the junior member of the Quorum of the Twelve. I was there. I was there, with the outpouring of the Spirit in that room so strong that none of us could speak afterwards. We just left quietly to go back to the office. No one could say anything because of the powerful outpouring of the heavenly spiritual experience.

Just a few hours after the announcement was made to the press, I was assigned to attend a stake conference in Detroit, Michigan. When my plane landed in Chicago, I noticed an edition of the Chicago Tribune on the newsstand. The headline in the paper read "Mormons Give Blacks Priesthood." And the subheading said "President Kimball Claims to Have Received a Revelation." I bought a copy of the newspaper and stared at one word in that subheading—claims. It stood out to me just as if it had been in red neon. As I walked along the hallway to make my plane connection, I thought, Here I am now in Chicago walking through this busy airport, yet I was a witness to this revelation. I was there. I witnessed it. I felt that heavenly influence. I was part of it. Little did the editor of that newspaper realize the truth of that revelation when he wrote, " . . . Claims to Have Received a Revelation." Little did he—or the printer, or the man who put the ink on the press, or the one who delivered the newspaper—little did any of them know that it was truly a revelation from God. Little did they know what I knew because I was a witness to it.

President Spencer W. Kimball was a great influence in my life. How he taught us! In his wonderful manner, he taught from the scriptures and discussed principles and policy and doctrine in a way that would help lift our hearts and souls. He told a story of a young soldier who had gone into the army. He had written a letter home to his parents saying that he had been at the shooting range learning how to handle a rifle and that he had been taught how to handle a hand grenade. This young man wrote, "In learning how to handle a hand grenade, we were throwing duds, ones that weren't real." Then he said, "When we were throwing duds, I was able to get thirty-five feet away, but today they gave us the real thing and I got eighty feet away." President Kimball could touch our lives in a way that helped us see and understand things to be done.

On 1 October 1994, we sustained as God's prophet on earth another kind, sensitive servant of God—Howard William Hunter. He was a humble, faithful, scholarly, and gentle soul, one who experienced deep sorrow and suffered serious infirmities and even a threat upon his life, but, with his Scottish ancestral determination, he never gave in or gave up.

President Hunter understood compassion, thankfulness, graciousness, charity, and gratitude toward individuals and toward mankind, and he had the saintly bearing of a prophet of God. He was in my estimation, truly Christlike.

In calling him to the apostleship in October 1959, President David O. McKay said to him, "The Lord has spoken. You are called to be one of his special witnesses, and tomorrow you will be sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve" (quoted in Eleanor Knowles, Howard W. Hunter [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994], 144).

A prophet is one who knows by personal revelation from the Holy Ghost that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, for "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy," as the Prophet Joseph taught us (Revelation 19:10; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], 119). Thus every prophet bears record of Jesus Christ. The sermons, writings, and teachings of President Hunter attest that he was indeed a prophet and a special witness of our Lord and Savior. He declared:

"As one called and ordained to bear witness of the name of Jesus Christ to all the world, I testify . . . that he lives. He has a glorified, immortal body of flesh and bones. He is the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh. He is the Savior, the Light and Life of the world. Following his crucifixion and death, he appeared as a resurrected being to Mary, to Peter, to Paul, and to many others. He showed himself to the Nephites. He has shown himself to Joseph Smith, the boy prophet, and to many others in our dispensation. This is his church; he leads it today" (Ensign, May 1988, 17).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was." He continued, "I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365). God's hand directs this work. He prepares his servants. He knows their hearts. He knows the end from the beginning and raises up those servants who will carry out his designs.

An early apostle, Elder Orson Hyde, said: "It is invariably the case, that when an individual is ordained and appointed to lead the people, he has passed through tribulations and trials, and has proven himself before God, and before His people, that he is worthy of the [position] which he holds. . . . Some one that understands the Spirit and counsel of the Almighty . . . is the [one] that will lead the Church" (in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86], 1:123).

No man better understands the Church, nor is better known to the members of it, than our living prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley.

I testify that he has been carefully prepared for this divine calling from before the foundations of the earth in heavenly councils.

He was born into a family of faith, people who were devoted to the precious truths of salvation as contained in the holy scriptures and the revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith. His parents set lofty examples and taught him how to work and to finish a task, which inspired him to attain a good education and a desire to serve mankind.

He accepted the challenges of missionary work and gained the blessings of sharing the gospel with others when called as a missionary to England.

New talents were developed as he assisted his mission president in London in developing Church publicity for the media and for the members of the Church and for the world. That interest has continued throughout his years and continues on to the present day.

His responsibilities in the Church missionary program added new methods and opportunities to proclaim gospel principles, and he was instrumental in expanding missionary work, particularly throughout the vast, teeming Orient, in a most remarkable way.

He has participated in the dedication and rededication of more temples than any other presiding officer in the Church. That is not only indicative of his love for temple work, but it reflects the necessity for us to be actively involved in the work of redeeming our deceased ancestors.

His marriage on 29 April 1937 to his sweetheart, Marjorie Pay, added spiritual strength and increased desire to advance our Lord's work. She has been a most inspiring companion these many years.

President Hinckley is not only a man for all seasons—but for all the world!

In April 1996, following the Sunday sessions of general conference, we went home to watch a television program. We were concerned for President Hinckley, who was to appear on a nationwide television program. We knew of the importance of this appearance and what it would mean to us. We knew of the work and the hours of prayer and meditation and study that our prophet and leader had done in being prepared for this exposure, which would reach some 35 million people.

After that program was over, my heart was beating fast, and I felt it would burst. I was filled with joy and thanksgiving to the Lord for the way our prophet and our leader had handled the interrogation by one who had a reputation of attempting to ask questions that might be difficult to handle. What a joy it was for us to witness how our prophet and our leader had been blessed and magnified! As I watched his face on the television, I realized that a vast number of people were seeing what a prophet of God looked like: a kind, good, and handsome man, clean and intelligent. You could see the outstanding character, the personality of our prophet and leader. And then when the interrogator asked him, "Do you really believe that story that heavenly beings appeared to that young boy in that grove of trees? Do you really believe that to be true?" our prophet instantly said, "Of course I do. Isn't it great?"

Those words have been ringing through my ears ever since that happened: "Of course I do. Isn't it great?" He made that pronouncement with such confidence and with that wonderful personality he has, declaring it to all of the world. Since that time, missionary activity in the United States in the areas where people who heard that program reside has picked up, and member activity has picked up, too. More people have become interested in the Church because they have seen a living prophet in the flesh stand before that immense audience and declare to the world, "Of course I do. Isn't it great?" We hope and pray that the missionaries throughout the world have that same feeling and that same understanding and that same determination—to want to so declare this message of hope and salvation and eternal life to all the world.

I thank the Lord every day for the health and determination I have to make the best use of every hour I have upon the earth to help in the spreading of this work. I know it is true.
