David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

Light Is Come into the World

John 3:19

10

Missionary Work: Our Responsibility

Some time ago, joy and nostalgia dominated our conversation as Sister Haight and I drove to the airport to see our eleventh grandchild leave for his mission. During our brief visit—with warm greetings and emotional embraces—we recalled some of the historical accounts of how the message of the restoration of the gospel had influenced our family, of how our missionary grandson's great-great-grandfather, Joseph Toronto, heard and believed the message of the gospel from missionaries in Boston in 1843.

Joseph Toronto assisted with the building of the Nauvoo Temple. Brigham Young had made a strong appeal on Sunday, 6 July 1845, for the Saints to remember to pray for the temple and to pay their tithing. The Saints were anxious that the temple be finished sufficiently so that ordinance work might begin before the exodus westward. More workers and tithing were desperately needed. Joseph Toronto, a new convert, visited Brigham Young after the meeting and declared that "he wanted to give himself and all he had to the kingdom of God." He handed President Young twenty-six hundred dollars in gold coins. President Young blessed the Italian convert, proclaiming that "he should stand at the head of his race and that neither he nor his family should ever want for bread." Later, in 1849, Joseph was called to accompany the new apostle Lorenzo Snow to his native Italy to open that land for the preaching of the gospel ("Italian Pioneer," Church News, 20 June 1981, 16; Joseph Toronto: Italian Pioneer and Patriarch, Toronto Family Organization, 1983, 10).

My wife and I also spoke of Hector C. Haight, another ancestor, called from his home in Farmington, Utah, to preside over the Scandinavian Mission in 1856 with little or no ability to speak Danish, Swedish, or Norwegian. But trusting in the Lord and with the assistance of the Scandinavian Saints, he accomplished his assignment. He reported in 1858 that "2,610 souls had been baptized . . . and [that] 990 members had emigrated to Zion" (Andrew Jenson, History of the Scandinavian Mission [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1927], 128).

These ancestors, along with many others, gave inspiration and set the precedent of love for the gospel and its divine truth and for missionary service, which our children and grandchildren inherit but must personally acquire for themselves.

Our hearts were filled that morning as we again witnessed the miracle that had already begun and that we knew would continue—not only for the next two years but for the rest of his life—the transformation of a fine young man into a powerful proclaimer and believer of our Lord Jesus Christ. Our gratitude for and trust in the missionary program of the Church, in all of its spiritual dimensions, and for its continuing influence on our family were deepened and strengthened.

While watching family expressions of love and joy and tears at the airport, I thought of the hundreds of young men and women and couples who, week after week, leave our missionary training centers around the world to embark on the grandest experience of their lives: going forth to serve our Heavenly Father with all of their heart, might, mind, and strength. That is indeed one of the great miracles of our time.

An article in the Church News told of Aaron Thatcher, a young man with a love for baseball. Many baseball scouts had observed Aaron's unique talents, but he told them repeatedly that he would not sign a professional contract until after he had fulfilled his obligations to the Lord by serving a two-year mission.

"How could a young man turn down such an offer?" people asked. But he did! His desire to serve the Lord was greater than his desire for instant fame. Aaron explained, "I'm going on this mission not because . . . my dad went. I'm going because I have a testimony of the gospel and the prophets have told us that every worthy and healthy young man should serve a full-time mission. I want to with all of my heart" (in Quig Nielsen, "Baseball 'On Hold' While He Serves Mission," Church News, 4 Sept. 1993, 5).

The Lord is opening the way and making it possible to expand his work throughout the world, and what a blessing it is for all of us—each in his own way—to take part.

In recent years, the number of missionaries serving throughout the world has grown to more than fifty thousand. The number of missions has increased to more than three hundred. Nearly one and one-half million new converts joined the Church in a recent five-year period. And our missionaries or representatives have been teaching in more than forty additional countries where they were not serving five years before.

Who but the prophets of God could have foreseen the miracle of the rapid expansion of the work of the Lord? Truly, as the Lord foretold in Section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, he is hastening his work in its time (D&C 88:73).

I am inspired as I continue to understand more and more the depth and significance of the vision and inspiration the Prophet Joseph Smith received from heavenly messengers as he carefully laid in place the foundation stones of the restored Church. After what he had experienced and knew, the Prophet Joseph Smith could boldly write in March 1842:

"Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, . . . the Standard of Truth has been erected; . . . the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done" (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 4:540).

There is a spirit moving upon our people to want to live their lives in harmony with truth, that they may someday respond to an opportunity to serve. This is the same spirit and heavenly influence that directed John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and others to take leave of the Saints from the city of Far West, Missouri, early on the morning of 26 April 1839, as they departed for their missions to Great Britain (D&C 118:4-5). On that occasion each prayed in turn at the temple site and bore testimony. Then, after a song, they took leave, directed by revelation, filled with the blessings of heaven and the confirming influence of the Holy Ghost. These early apostles departed for their missions having been spiritually fed and blessed in a manner that would sustain them and their families throughout their many hardships and inspire their powerful testimonies of the truthfulness of the message of the restored Church upon the earth.

What a privilege and a blessing to be a small part of this great work! With that heritage, however, comes a great responsibility. The Lord needs messengers to match his message. He needs those who are able to wield the mighty and eternal influence that he has placed in their hands. In Section 88, where the Lord speaks of hastening his work, he gives to the laborers of his kingdom a commandment to "prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean" (D&C 88:74).

The calling to serve the Lord places a tremendous, ennobling responsibility upon each of us. President Spencer W. Kimball ushered in a new era of missionary work when he proclaimed:

"When I ask for more missionaries, I am not asking for more testimony-barren or unworthy missionaries. I am asking that we . . . train our missionaries better in every branch and every ward . . . that [our] young people will understand that it is a great privilege to go on a mission and that they must be physically well, mentally well, spiritually well, and that 'the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance.'

"[We are] asking for missionaries who have been carefully . . . trained through the family and the organizations of the Church, and who come . . . with a great desire" ("When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign, Oct. 1974, 7).

And further: "We must prepare our [young] missionaries better, not only with language but with scripture and above all with a testimony and a burning fire that puts power to their words" (address delivered at Regional Representatives' seminar, 5 Apr. 1976, 14).

To serve the Lord as a full-time missionary is a privilege; the primary purpose of full-time missionary service is the building up of the kingdom of God. And the Lord needs his best. Young men and young women who respond to the call must be prepared for the most rigorous challenge of their young lives—prepared spiritually, intellectually, emotionally, and physically.

Although our missionaries are strengthened, elevated, and magnified by their service, that is not their primary purpose, and neither they nor their families nor their leaders should regard a mission as the solution to unresolved problems. The Lord needs our best; he needs those who can run—not just walk, but run—physically and spiritually, those who can wield eternal influence with purity and strength and conviction.

Does this mean that those who are not yet ready should be turned away or rejected? Of course not! It means that our young people, their families, and their leaders should each accept the personal responsibility for preparing worthy, able, and committed volunteers for the Lord's royal army.

As we shoulder this great responsibility, the Lord will magnify our efforts and he will magnify our missionaries. They will become the instruments through which he will perform his miracles.

In 1980 President Kimball urged that "every family, every night and every morning, . . . pray to the Lord to open the doors of other nations so that their people, too, may have the gospel of Jesus Christ" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 586). During the past few years we have seen the fruition of his vision.

In 1989, during the brief period of weeks, we witnessed some phenomenal changes in the world, particularly in the Eastern bloc countries, changes that God-fearing people attribute to the hand of the Almighty in bringing about his glorious purposes to fill the earth with the knowledge of the Lord. Walls came down, gates opened, and millions of voices chorused the song of freedom. We rejoice in the dawning of a brighter day.

The news media made the events in eastern Europe appear as purely political revolutions, even though many of the oppressed have recognized it as a "religious renaissance" and have acknowledged the influence of divine intervention (USA Today, 16 Mar. 1990).

A prominent national magazine editorialized on the reasons for this sudden, dramatic change. It was "an idea—. . . democracy—and its phenomenally successful application in America" and some other parts of the world. The article concluded: "America's contribution to the world will continue to be in the realm of ideas and ideals" ("An American Vision for the 1990s," Fortune, 26 Mar. 1990, 14).

The peoples in eastern Europe have slowly but effectively been exposed to ideals of truth and basic rights through messages by satellite, radio, printed materials, even programs and recordings of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, word of mouth, heart-to-heart contacts, and the light of Christ encouraging seeds of truth to seep into their consciousness—a precept here and a precept there. And when the opportunity arrived, they confidently seized upon it.

The transformation of once-mighty man-made empires with such speed and determination released new springs of faith and hope in the hearts of hundreds of millions of oppressed souls. Where there was despair, now the bright light of freedom shines forth. This could have happened in such a miraculous way only by the intervening hand of the Almighty. "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (Genesis 18:14).

The Bible is replete with admonitions to remember the mighty acts of God as he has intervened in history for his people. We are witnesses of his mighty, intervening hand in the world even today.

President Joseph F. Smith declared: "The Almighty raised up [America] by the power of his omnipotent hand, that it might be possible in the latter days for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. . . . His hand has been over this nation, and it is his purpose and design to enlarge it, make it glorious . . . to the end that those who are kept in bondage and serfdom may be brought to the enjoyment of the fullest freedom and liberty of conscience possible for intelligent men to exercise in the earth" (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939], 409).

The religious freedom established in America made possible the coming forth of the plain and precious truths of the Book of Mormon "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations" (Preface to the Book of Mormon). These writings are to come unto the Gentiles that they may "know the decrees of God" and repent (Ether 2:11).

It is incumbent upon the members of the Church who have had the gift of religious freedom to share this knowledge and testimony with the peoples of the world. Do not underestimate the profound influence—politically and socially—of the principles of the restored gospel upon all of mankind.

The opportunity for meaningful service to others is expanding rapidly. To some of us, it's just across the street; to others, across the ocean. The destiny of many nations is now being decided. Every generation is crucial. We may not be responsible for past generations, but we cannot escape the responsibility for this present one. It is beyond our comprehension to imagine the billions of souls who depend upon us to bring them—some way, somehow—this glorious message of the gospel. Of course, not all people will accept, but all must be given the opportunity to hear and respond after being taught by the Spirit of Christ.

We declare in all solemnity that the Lord is now preparing the nations of the earth to receive the truth he desires them to have. But in order for a person to accept the truth, he must prepare himself by exercising faith in the Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Such faith accepts the existence of God our Father, the teachings of Jesus concerning man's dealings with his fellowmen, and the teachings concerning Christ's relationship to God as his Son. Once a person has prepared himself to receive and accept truth, it is then sealed upon his heart by the power of the Holy Ghost, who is the Testifier of Truth. It is then incumbent upon him to so conform his life to those standards of truth. This may require fundamental changes in lifestyle and the seeking of repentance for sins committed.

The Lord's power is at hand and evident. True believers will have unusual opportunities to be of service. I am convinced that those who labor unselfishly in behalf of others, with no thought of remuneration, will be physically and spiritually refreshed and renewed. We must prove ourselves, have the desire, and be found worthy to assist the Lord in accomplishing his purposes with men on earth.

The Lord instructed his young prophet, Joseph, in October 1831: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2).

I testify we are witnessing the fulfillment of this promise, and that this work, given by Almighty God to his Son to proclaim, to teach, and finally to judge, will be done with eternal love.
