David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

11

Love, the Key to Conversion

Charity, or the pure love of Christ, is the greatest and most powerful motive in spreading the gospel. "A new commandment I give unto you," said the Savior, "that ye love one another, as I have loved you" (John 13:34).

A man "must needs have charity," Mormon taught, or "he is nothing" (Moroni 7:44). Charity is especially important in missionary work. Its influence, radiated by the missionary, helps to create within the investigator a desire to learn and softens his heart to the truth. Charity can fill the missionary with an unquenchable desire to serve his fellowmen. Without it, as difficulties arise and proselyting seems unfruitful, he may lose interest and slacken his pace. But with Christlike love, the missionary will persevere through adversity because he becomes a caring and dutiful messenger of Christ. A Christlike love for others can purify a missionary's motives and consecrate his labor and true desire to share the gospel.

Recently, a university professor in California found the Church. He had been taught by many sets of missionaries over a long period of time. Why did he finally see the light? He replied, "I felt the love of Christ through this team of new missionaries. As they taught me, I understood."

While Sister Haight and I were in Japan, the mission president told us about a new convert to the Church who, when the missionaries came to her door, started to cry. Asked why, she told about being in the hospital, where she was seriously ill, and one night she couldn't sleep. Her grandfather, who had been dead many years, appeared to her and told her that "two young men in Western clothes with a strange new book will come. Listen! Be kind! The message is true!"

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "It is a time-honored adage that love begets love. Let us pour forth love—show forth everlasting increase; cast our bread upon the waters and we shall receive it after many days, increased to a hundredfold. Friendship," he continued, "is like Brother Turley in his blacksmith shop welding iron to iron; it unites the human family with its happy influence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], 316).

The story is told about a family from Southern California who, while on a vacation, passed through St. George, Utah. They hadn't been there before, and the man, who had some interest in architecture, was intrigued by the St. George Temple. He parked the car by the temple and got out and walked around the building, along with his wife and their two little girls. Finally the parents went into the visitors center at the temple, and the two girls went across the street to sit in the shade of a tree on the lawn of a Latter-day Saint meetinghouse.

Primary was about to start, and the Primary teacher came out and rounded up all of the children and asked them to come in to Primary. Seeing those two strange girls, she said, "Come on in to Primary." The girls went in.

When the parents came out of the visitors center about an hour later, they couldn't find their children. They looked and searched, and the father, anxious to get on his way, was becoming a little upset. Finally he saw his daughters coming out of the building across the street. "Where have you been?" he asked them.

"We've been to Primary," said the girls.

"Primary? What's Primary?"

"Primary, Daddy, is where they teach about Jesus. And besides that, you shouldn't be smoking." He almost swallowed the cigar that he had in his mouth.

He said, "Come on and get in the car. Let's be on our way."

And the little girls said, "We can't go."

"We can't go? Why not?"

They said, "We're in a play."

"A play?"

"Yes, Daddy, we're in a play, and we have to stay all week and rehearse."

The family stayed all week and rehearsed, two Latter-day Saint missionaries met them, and they were all baptized. Why? Because of the love they found in the Church.

Hollywood would never be able to produce the thrilling stories, the real-life dramas, the diaries, the letters home, the testimonies locked in hearts that have resulted from following the Savior's instruction: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (Matthew 28:19). The Savior explained what might happen to some of our efforts. He said: "A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden down, . . . and some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away. . . . and other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold" (Luke 8:5-6, 8). Imagine the quantity of seed planted over the years by the tens of thousands of missionaries. Some seeds lie dormant for years—others spring forth immediately. Some years ago such a precious seed was planted in fertile soil in Germany.

Robert Frederick Lippolt, his wife, and their daughters lived in a small city in central Germany. One Sunday, while Robert's wife was on her way to the Protestant church, she was approached by Latter-day Saint missionaries, who invited her to attend sacrament meeting. She attended and was impressed. After subsequent visits to her home by the missionaries, she was baptized and became active in the Church. From the moment of his wife's baptism, the husband grew bitter toward the Church. Their daughters were also baptized, resulting in more bitterness.

Robert could bear the Mormons no longer; he moved his family from Germany to Vera Cruz, Mexico, and then on to Porto Alegre, Brazil. As soon as they were settled, his wife continued to spread the news of the gospel. She caused excitement in Brazil, for the doctrine she preached was completely new. Bitterness filled Robert. He hated the Mormons. He refused to let his children go to public schools for fear they would learn to read and would thus be further indoctrinated with Mormon literature. Finally, in desperation, he took his family away from civilization to the interior of Brazil. They settled in the remote, peaceful valley of Ipomeia in the state of Santa Catarina.

Filled with a burning testimony and a desire to share the "good news," Robert's faithful wife wrote to the mission president in Germany, who in turn referred her to the Argentine Mission president. She asked that he visit Brazil. President Reinhold Stoof visited Brazil in 1927 and reported that much success could be realized among the German-speaking people of Brazil. From the tiny seeds sown by missionaries in Germany and carried across the Atlantic, the First Presidency established a mission in Brazil in February 1935. The work flourished. Hundreds and then thousands heard the good news.

Even Robert Frederick Lippolt, the once-bitter husband and father, was eventually touched by the seed of truth, for at the age of eighty-three he was carried in his wooden rocking chair to the nearby River Rio de Peixe and was baptized a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. How could one ever describe the deep, abiding love of Robert's faithful wife for the gospel and for her family?

We have been a missionary church from the beginning. I thank the Lord that we will always be a missionary church. The first conversions in this dispensation came through the humble testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith. His efforts were directed first to those he loved most. He converted his father, his mother, and his brothers and sisters. He converted his wife, his neighbors, then Martin Harris, and the schoolteacher, Oliver Cowdery, as well as the Whitmer family. They all felt of the truth and power of his simple testimony:

"On Sunday, 11 April 1830, Oliver Cowdery preached the first public discourse that was delivered by any of our number," wrote the Prophet. Then it was recorded that six were baptized following the service.

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, under divine instruction, began to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize and to set the pattern for our modern missionary service. Now, more than 150 years later, we see the fruits of missionary efforts in our own families, in our wards and branches, and in the stakes and missions throughout the world.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is the hope and everlasting salvation for all mankind. Our young people should be reared under the loving guidance and influence of good homes—homes where the blessing of a mission is part of their life's goal, homes where plans for a future mission become part of their lives.

People are exposed to the gospel in interesting ways. President Lawrence R. Flake, who was the mission president in Independence, Missouri, told me about meeting a man on an airplane. As they were seated and having a little conversation on the plane, the stranger asked President Flake, "What is your business?" President Flake said, "Well, I'm in an interesting business. I have a hundred and sixty young college students who work for me for nothing." This man said, "I'm interested in that. Can you tell me more about it?" He developed an interest right away.

A few years ago I was on an airplane, and after I had sat down, a flight attendant came along. It was a warm day and she had a tray of cool drinks. She stood and looked at me for a moment, then asked, "What would you like?"

"Do you have a Seven-Up?"

"Yes." As she handed it to me, she said, "What is on that tie pin you're wearing?"

I have a little pin that has the emblem of the London Temple on it, so I said, "That's a temple."

"A temple? A temple of what?"

"That's the temple of the Lord."

Then she asked, "What church do you belong to?" I told her, "I belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the Mormon church."

She said, "After I get through passing out these drinks, could I come and talk to you?"

I replied, "I'd be happy to talk with you."

When she came back later, she knelt in the aisle beside me, looked into my face, and said, "I saw you when you came on the plane, and when you sat down in this seat I had a feeling that I needed to get acquainted with you. Then I saw that tie pin. Could you tell me a little bit about your church?"

I told her briefly that this was the only true church on the face of the earth. And then I asked, "Are you married?"

"No."

"Do you have a steady boyfriend?"

"No."

I said, "I'm impressed to make you a promise. If you'll give me your name and address, I will have somebody come and tell you about this temple. The promise I want to make is that if you will listen, and do what they ask you to do, you'll find a young man who will marry you in one of these temples."

She said, "Just a minute while I get a paper and pencil." She came back and handed me a piece of paper on which she had written her name, Penny Harriman, and her address.

Months later I received a telephone call. The voice at the other end said, "My name is Penny Harriman. Do you remember me?"

"Yes, I remember you."

"Would you perform a wedding for us in the Salt Lake Temple?"

And I said, "I'd be thrilled to."

When I entered the special room in the temple, the young man had many of his family and friends seated on one side. Penny was alone; none of her family belonged to the Church. I said, "Penny, before we begin, why don't you tell how we met?" She told this story and how she had had a feeling in her heart that she should talk to me.

There is something unusual about this work. It is special. But we have to live for it, and we have to develop a life pattern so that the gospel becomes a part of it.

The message we take to the world through our missionary efforts is divine and must be accepted by all people if they are to be saved. Our message is

The message is true. Millions of God's children are waiting to hear it. May we accept the challenge and show our love for our fellowmen by increasing our efforts to find and teach them.
