David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

12

A Challenge for Future Missionaries

While I was attending a regional conference in Mesa, Arizona, several years ago, a young girl of about nine or ten years of age handed me a letter and asked if I would please give it to President Ezra Taft Benson, who was then president of the Church. I said, "Of course I will." As I read the letter, written in her childish handwriting, I was touched by her simple, direct, but unquestioned testimony. Let me read it to you:

"Dear President Benson:

"My name is Megan Freestone and I wanted you to know that I love you as a great leader of the Church and as my brother in Christ.

"I would like to bear my testimony to you that I know that this Church is the true and living Church on earth and that Jesus Christ is the head of this Church and I know that you lead the Church under him.

"I love my family. I love you. I love all my brothers and sisters all around the world, and I love my Savior.

"I have a witness and testimony that the Book of Mormon is the word of God and that if I follow God's word I will make it back home to live with my Father again.

"Again, I love you and my prayers are with you and all the leaders of this Church. And I know that you love me. All my love, Megan."

How beautiful, plain, and simple are these words of a sweet child—but how powerful the message.

Another powerful message was delivered in the prayer of a six-year-old Primary girl. The Sharing Time presentation had centered on how careful planning makes things run smoothly and peacefully in our lives, and then it related this to God's plan of salvation for us. The little girl stood at the close of Primary and said:

"Dear Heavenly Father, Help us to plan better so we can be happier. I love you. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen."

How wonderful and refreshing are the humble, unrehearsed words of children. How many of us tell Heavenly Father that we love him? Or do we feel that we have outgrown the need for simple expressions of love and appreciation to our Creator, or that we are too sophisticated for such emotions and feelings? We might all learn great lessons from the children around us.

I am a witness of miracles from our Savior in guiding this work. I have been associated with thousands of faithful young men and women who have diligently prepared themselves to serve a mission, with wonderful results.

In 1839 the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young as president of the Quorum, mailed out an epistle that was addressed "To the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the Churches Scattered Abroad and to All the Saints."

The epistle was directed particularly to "the elders"—or those called and ordained to proclaim the gospel of Jesus Christ to the world. Sisters had not been called at that time, but I believe that these words are addressed just as well to them. I quote those stirring words written by those called and trained and schooled by the Prophet Joseph himself:

"We would say to the Elders, that God has called you to an important office. He has laid upon you an onerous duty; He has called you to an holy calling, even to be the priests of the Most High God, messengers to the nations of the earth; and upon your diligence, your perseverance and faithfulness, . . . hang the destinies of the human family. You are [those whom] God has called to spread forth His kingdom. He has committed the care of souls to your charge, and when you received this [calling] you became the [official emissaries] of heaven, and the Great God demands it of you, that you should be faithful" (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 3:395).

The message we have been given to proclaim is the grandest in all the world. The proclaiming of this message is not merely the most important work in the world; we, with our knowledge, say it is the very reason the world was created. There is no loftier work than to teach inspired words that change lives and bring happiness and even transformation in personalities as we assist our Savior Jesus Christ in bringing to pass the eternal life of man.

Many years ago a best-selling book about the noble and courageous people who conquered the western areas of the United States was entitled Men to Match My Mountains.

The Lord needs "messengers to match his message!" He needs each of us to be the messenger able to wield the powerful message that he has placed in our hands. I would hope that we are serious in our commitment to want to further the work of the Lord, that we will prepare ourselves spiritually and physically to be able to be the kind of messenger required in this period of uncertainty in much of the world, to bring the gospel of salvation into the lives of those who may have lost hope and who are wondering, "Have we heard all there is to hear? There must be more—a clearer message to lift our souls."

In a letter dated 4 March 1993, the First Presidency emphasized that "Full-time missionary service is not a right, but a privilege . . . [That] Missionary service is for the benefit of the Lord and His Church to fulfill His purposes." The letter then went on to reemphasize the importance of preparing worthy, qualified individuals for the sacred responsibility of missionary service.

The responsibility for that preparation lies, first of all, with each individual young person. Each one should ask himself or herself, Am I doing all in my power to keep myself clean and pure before the Lord, or have I allowed myself to be beguiled by the adversary's lie that I can "eat, drink, and be merry; . . . there is no harm in this; . . . and if it so be that [I am] guilty, God will beat [me] with a few stripes," and then all will be well? (2 Nephi 28:8). How can we believe that we can sin for a season, with the intention of eventually repenting, and still go forth to effectively proclaim the gospel of repentance?

Such individuals do not realize the price that may be asked of them in order to resolve those "innocent sins." Those who think they can bring their lives back into order merely by desisting for a period of time from certain activities (which they really would rather indulge in, if they could have their own way) betray a lack of understanding of gospel principles and a superficial faith in the Lord. They are confusing refraining for true repenting.

We need young men and women who are willing to set aside the things that may have filled their lives thus far—in the apostle Paul's words, to put away "childish things" and become strong individuals (1 Corinthians 13:11). We need individuals today who are willing to withstand the immoral influences of the world and to commit themselves to hard work, individuals who are willing to stretch themselves beyond even the best that they have ever done before and to change the rest of their lives in the process.

The lives of many are filled with a variety of wants and desires and interests and pursuits: family, friends, school, sports, music, hiking, clothes, television, movies, cars, Church activities, food, reading, and so on. For each, the menu may be a little different, but for most it will be fairly long. This diversity of interests is part of what makes our lives so rich and rewarding.

Some of those things may be good and positive, perhaps among the most enduring and rewarding things in a person's life. Others may be neither good nor bad, depending on the use they are put to. Moreover, I presume that most of us have had at least a few things in our lives that were not so good, perhaps a few bad habits or personal weaknesses, or perhaps a transgression that has needed to be resolved through the bishop or stake president—but that causes us to repent and change.

As young people prepare themselves to serve the Lord, we hope that they are beginning to realize that there are things to do with their time and energy beyond those things that give them just personal pleasure. We hope that they are in the process of correcting wrongs and strengthening the moral fibers of their character through thorough soul-searching and repentance, if necessary. We hope that they are beginning to concentrate their efforts toward building a store of knowledge through scripture reading, study, and service to someone else, and that they are really learning the power and blessings of personal progress that will benefit them throughout their lives and that will help lift and inspire others.

Have you ever noticed that any individual who yearns to excel in any field undergoes a radical simplification of his or her focus? Take the young person dedicated to becoming a concert pianist. How many hours each day does he practice? How much time is left for all the things with which you and I fill our lives, many of which are trivial or unessential?

Take the student who is dedicated to winning a highly prestigious scholarship. How much time and energy is committed to this goal? How much is left over for other things?

Take the young girl who yearns to become an Olympic figure skater. Where is she every morning at four or five o'clock? Of course, down at the skating rink. Then she dashes off to school, but as soon as school is over, she's right back at the rink—a break for dinner, and then either back to the rink or some time for school work. How diverse, how complicated has her life become? It has been pared down to just a few essentials. All else has been sacrificed for the cause, for the lofty goal that is her life's central focus.

Focus is the key word. And that focus has been won through a lot of discipline and hard work.

When any individual pays that sort of price—when any of us sacrifices to achieve that sort of discipline and focus in our lives—there is some pain and suffering, but there is a pay-back, and we see it in the tremendous growth, the lofty level of excellence that such people attain. How many of us in those rare moments of insight can taste just a bit of the yearning desire that is the source of their sacrificing, their commitment, their focus?

As individuals accept calls to serve in the mission field, they are asked to leave behind most of those desires and yearnings and interest that filled their lives before. They will take with them their scriptures, their gosepl knowledge, and their testimony—and little else. The good, the bad, the indifferent—everything—will be left behind as they begin to experience that sharpening of focus that is usually the experience only of those few who have committed themselves to excellence in their chosen pursuits.

As they experience this refining of their focus, they can begin to understand what the prophets have recorded when they have written about giving all our heart, might, and mind to the Lord, when they have written about singleness of heart and of mind.

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind" (Matthew 22:37).

"Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart" (Psalm 119:2).

"I would that ye should come unto Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption. Yea, come unto him, and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him, . . . and as the Lord liveth ye will be saved" (Omni 1:26).

Does that sound rather all consuming? Well, how about these words:

"No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon" (Matthew 6:24).

And finally, that rather high and hard standard the Lord himself set for those who would embark on his service: "No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:62).

Do you catch something of the vision of what the Lord expects of us? Does that vision seem somewhat intimidating? Or can you glimpse the way in which it can liberate us from the shackles of the world?

Latter-day Saints are among the good, the worthy, the honorable of the earth—among the best that dwells on the earth at this time. But to become a mighty instrument of the Lord's power takes unusual discipline—the discipline of the committed, dedicated scholar, musician, or athlete—and even more!

No one has ever said that a mission is easy. If they did, they weren't telling the whole truth. During the eighteen months or two years that missionaries serve, they are likely to face more opposition than ever before in their lives. That's part of the plan that each of us sustained and accepted. In the book of Abraham we read: "And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:24-25; emphasis added).

We are in the midst of a test. We are being proved, to see whether we will do all things that the Lord asks of us. Why is it so important that we be proved, tried, and tested? Partly, of course, to indicate to the Lord, and prove to ourselves, that the eternal reward we will receive is justified. It is but part of the price that must be paid for the heavenly rewards that lie in store.

But perhaps even more important is this principle: through the trying and the testing we are refined and purified and strengthened and magnified, just as a metal is purified and tempered in the refiner's fire.

The numerous challenges the Prophet Joseph faced all of his life strengthened and prepared him for his ultimate destiny. The tremendous faith and courage of the early Brethren called to missions in Europe— England, Italy, Denmark, and Sweden—enabled the newly established Church to gain a strong foothold. Imagine the faith and testimony of young Samuel Smith, the first missionary in this dispensation, that allowed him to set out with only his testimony of the restored gospel and the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph, and a Book of Mormon under his arm!

Serving a mission may be one of the greatest experiences of a person's life, but part of the reason for that will be the opposition the missionary may face and struggle with and overcome. But please rest assured, this will be for his or her good, and none of us will ever need to face that opposition alone as long as we do not move away from the Lord. Whom the Lord calls, he will magnify.

These are challenging opportunities. But the challenge pales in comparison to one of the most beautiful promises in all the scriptures: "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:67-68).

There is much work to be done. We need many more laborers in the vineyard. We need to make our work more effective and productive. We need to better prepare ourselves to not only sow the seeds of the gospel of Jesus Christ, but to reap the harvest of more solid, faithful members.

The Lord has entrusted the salvation of the souls of people into our hands. President Spencer W. Kimball said: "Please do not confuse this straightforward emphasis on missionary work with mere statistics. Our concerns are with souls, not statistics. We desire growth only because that will mean that we are reaching our Father's children who desperately need the gospel and Church in their lives. . . . What we have been doing in our missionary efforts is good, but it is not good enough. It is time to stir ourselves, and then we can stir others" (mission presidents' seminar, June 1979).

I encourage all Latter-day Saints everywhere to study the Book of Mormon and other scriptures, to be diligent in their prayers, to bear their testimonies often, to develop sensitivity to the Spirit and the faith to follow the promptings of that Holy Spirit, and to experience the effects of Christ's atonement in their own lives.
