David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

13

A Challenge for Older Couples

A few years ago Sister Haight and I drove along the coast of Chile with one of the mission presidents in that country. In large cities and small villages, we saw the fruits of our missionary proselyting efforts. We met with many new members and were deeply impressed with their faith and humble desire to learn more about the gospel they have accepted. As we continued the journey, our concern centered on ways we could help this growing number of new members to increase and strengthen their faith so they could hold on to the iron rod and continue to grow in knowledge. We reflected on the many priesthood, Relief Society, and Sunday School classes back home attended by husbands and wives trained in the gospel, many of them with unusual talents not now being used. Many stakes are crowded with mature couples fully prepared to accept a mission call, couples who could enthusiastically help not only in spreading the gospel but also in strengthening new members in areas of the world where we are growing so rapidly.

The thousands of newly baptized members, now in a new church that has somewhat unfamiliar ways, might be encouraged and trained by people who today are sitting comfortably at home. We thought, if only we could transplant hundreds of our faithful, well-prepared couples out into one of the greatest chapters of their lives! Amulek taught concerning the Savior, "He shall come into the world to redeem his people" (Alma 11:40). Should we not encourage "his people" and help prepare them for his coming?

Many Latter-day Saints think of full-time missionary service as being suitable only for young single men and women; however, a new social pattern is emerging in our society: the number of men and women retiring from active employment or professions is continually increasing. Many of them are healthy and vigorous, ready for new challenges.

Some time ago I received a query from friends in California. The husband was retiring from schoolteaching and indicated a desire to return to Utah. He asked, "What can we do for the Church when we return?" My answer was, "Don't come to Utah. Your Church experience is needed out in the world. Brush up on the Norwegian you learned as a missionary years ago." They were soon on their way to the mission field. He was thrilled with this opportunity to serve a second mission, this time with the additional blessing of having the same companion for his entire mission.

Many couples are prepared and waiting for their bishop to extend a mission call. Perhaps the bishop, busy with other duties, has overlooked them. Those who desire to serve the Lord need not wait for the bishop but should knock on his door and say, "We feel we are ready to go."

Several years ago, President Spencer W. Kimball announced:

"We could use hundreds of couples, older people like some of you folks, whose families are reared, who have retired in their business, who are able to go and spend their own money, to teach the gospel. We could use hundreds of couples. You just go and talk to your bishop," he continued, "that is all you need to do. Tell him, 'We are ready to go, if you can use us.' I think you will probably get a call" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 551).

Since President Kimball made that plea, the demand has continued to increase, and today we could use not only hundreds but thousands of prepared couples.

There are many hundreds of experienced, devoted couples—those whose hair may be graying and perhaps with a wrinkle here or there—you know, those distinguishing features of maturity—that are retiring from their professional careers but with several productive years still remaining before their golden years, whose children have made lives of their own, who are in good health, and who dream of that eventful moment when they say to their bishop, "We're ready—ready to do something really important—to go on a mission, to go anywhere the Lord needs us."

Such was the situation of Hollis and Gwen Kersey, who sold their home, bought a little farm, fixed up the house to be warm and comfortable, cleared the land, and planted a garden. "We settled down to be retired," they said. They were Baptists and had no thought of changing religions this late in life. But missionaries and a neighbor family touched their lives, and they were baptized. On their fortieth wedding anniversary they were sealed in the Atlanta Temple. They were soon called as stake missionaries and later called to serve a full-time mission.

As they arrived at the Missionary Training Center, the Kerseys remarked: "We gave away the chickens, turkeys, rabbits, took the pony and two dogs . . . [to our] son, . . . emptied the freezers and gave away the cats, . . . boarded up the windows, nailed up the sheds, had everything turned off, went and kissed our ten grandchildren good-bye and here we are!"

What a marvelous attitude!

In Mexico I had the opportunity of meeting a wonderful, mature missionary couple, Brother and Sister John Fossum, who commented: "Our great need is for trained leadership. Married couples with years of experience in Church work could literally work miracles. We have twenty-two scattered branches but have not been able to adequately train the branch leaders. We are growing so rapidly that leaders with experience are not available."

The Fossums continued: "Many blessings have come to us as a result of our mission, blessings we receive from the Lord whenever we serve without restraint. Some people shrivel up and die in beds and rocking chairs. We didn't want that kind of retirement. The Lord knew we wanted to go on a mission—and we received a call. Some couples imagine they can't live without their families close by, and some fear for their own physical well-being. It was reassuring when our stake president set us apart; he promised us that the Lord would look after our family and that we would have good health to the end of our mission. At our age it's difficult to live up to missionary schedules, but we have found it's possible, and it has its rewards."

Brother Fossum told me, "Fifty years ago I served a mission in Hawaii and learned to speak Hawaiian. It was difficult then, and it was difficult at our age now to go through the Missionary Training Center and learn Spanish, but we did it. It has been a great learning experience. The spiritual treasures alone are worth the effort." Sister Fossum added, "It's really hard on a grandmother to be away from twenty-six grandchildren, but I'm coming through with flying colors—sometimes at half-mast but always flying." Then this dedicated couple concluded, "A mission for those of mature years is a rich, rewarding experience. It is for those who want to live out their retirement and not just exist."

We need more—many more—couples like the Fossums, people who are willing, wondering, and asking, "What can I do for the Lord?" We need couples who are willing to use part of their golden years in the Lord's vital service.

In the early days of the Church, the Lord's work urgently required the sacrifice and best efforts of the Saints. A company of brethren commanded to leave their families and go to Missouri in 1831 were admonished: "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days" (D&C 64:33-34).

To every married couple, I would say: Don't wait until your retirement dinner and the traditional gold watch to make plans, but start now. Prepare for what may be the most rewarding experience of your life. Begin now to expand your horizons, to increase your knowledge. Why not learn another language? You might start with Spanish or German. My wife, Ruby, after a fifty-year lapse, returned to the university to take Spanish 101. Hard work? Of course! Long hours of study to keep up? Many. Who does the cooking? Sometimes I do. Rewarding? I am very proud of her when she bears a humble testimony that our members in Argentina or Mexico can understand.

We are witnessing a continuing unfolding of the Lord's work in this, the last dispensation. Millions are waiting and want to improve their lives. The Lord will bless us if we ask in faith. Mature couples are needed everywhere, particularly experienced members with family ties to other lands. A spiritual rebirth can be theirs as they serve the Lord in total service. Prayer will have a deeper dimension. Scriptures will be pondered and more deeply appreciated. The Holy Ghost will become more evident. Their capacity to love will increase. Their families at home will be blessed.

Moroni, the Book of Mormon prophet, taught about the careful attention given the newly baptized person in his day: "After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the Church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer" (Moroni 6:4). In many areas of the world, we have converts who need to be remembered with care and love, who need to be encouraged and kept in the right way, as Moroni stated. But the couples with experience usually live elsewhere. We need the help of seasoned members who can provide training, encouragement, and, above all, compassionate concern.

To show what can be accomplished with such love and dedication, let me share with you again the words of Brother and Sister Fossum: "To visit one of our branches, we get up at 4:00 a.m. on Sunday to catch an early bus. Sister Fossum started a little music class for the sisters and taught them the basics of directing music. One thirteen-year-old girl with a perfect sense of time now leads the singing in sacrament meeting.

"I was invited to attend their branch presidency meeting," Brother Fossum continued, "to show how we do some things. A few months ago in this branch, home teaching and visiting teaching were just words in a book, but now nine pairs of home teachers are making their visits, and visiting teachers will soon be organized. But these are incidental rewards. The great rewards come when the service we give and the love we feel for the humble members result in a change in their lives for the better. Then we too are enriched."

While firefighters were battling roaring forest fires in the West a few years ago, two grandmothers—Altha Clark, from Texas, and Hazel Stills, from Florida—kindled countless spiritual flames by creating new "interest in people who [had] investigated the Church for years, but who needed a firm, loving nudge to accept baptism," and, with caring fellowshipping, reached out to the less-active members.

"They don't take no for an answer," the second counselor in the Altamont Utah Stake presidency said, "and they [teach] without offending anyone." A rancher said the two sisters "have kept us so busy I don't have time to get my hay in. We . . . keep them [booked with people] to teach. In this stake, the full-time missionaries teach very few discussions without a stake missionary or fellowshipper going along."

The two grandmothers traveled about one hundred miles a day on unpaved country roads, and the dust and ruts didn't slow them down. While visiting a member's home, these remarkable missionaries asked if she knew someone they could teach. The sister replied, "My husband." Directed by the Spirit how to approach this husband, they taught him the gospel and rejoiced with his wife at his baptism.

Fourteen families became active and went to the temple because of the efforts of these full-time grandmother missionaries coordinating with the stake missionaries and properly following a plan in fellowshipping new members (Church News, 10 Sept. 1988, 8, 9, 12).

When people are taught and then fellowshipped with warmth and continued interest until they are integrated into the mainstream of the Church, they are "remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way" (Moroni 6:4). By working together, stake missionaries and full-time missionaries are able to keep new converts involved as they gain gospel knowledge and a needed testimony. They are also bringing back into fellowship less-active members.

In stressing the need for mature men and women to be about the work of the Lord, President Benson related the experience of his two widowed sisters. One was the mother of ten children and the other the mother of eight. After they had sent their children on missions, they approached their bishops about going on missions themselves. President Benson related that he remembered well the day a number of years ago when they called him and said, "Guess what? We've received our missionary calls." President Benson said, "What missionary calls?" And they replied, "We're both going to your old field of labor in England" ("Our Commission to Take the Gospel to All the World," Ensign, May 1984, 45).

They did go to England and served as companions for twenty months.

Thousands of devoted mature couples and single sisters have touched the lives of many for good. We are grateful for their dedication and courage and oftentimes great personal sacrifice. One couple indicated on their missionary form that they would be ready to go just as soon as they were able to find a home for their eighty hives of bees.

There is an unusual opportunity for qualified individuals to do their utmost to fulfill the Lord's injunction to preach his gospel to the ends of the earth and not only to teach but convert, as Alma said, that as many "as believed in their preaching, and were converted unto the Lord, never did fall away" (Alma 23:6).

The Lord instructed in the Doctrine and Covenants, "If ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work" (D&C 4:3). Many undoubtedly have the desire but may need some gentle encouragement to complete their decision.

I challenged eight couples in my former home stake in California to set aside their comfortable lives of planned retirement and to bless the Scottish Saints with their gospel knowledge and service. Arthur Thulin had been a bishop, his wife, Myra, a skilled teacher. Arthur anxiously wrote that he was nearing seventy and might die in Scotland. I replied, "Arthur, you are going to die somewhere; Scotland is a great place to die—but when you die, die with your boots on, not in a comfortable rocking chair." The Thulins went, blessed the lives of many, and Arthur lived several years after their two-year mission.

Many couples have concerns about leaving their homes and families, or being sent to a developing area of the world, or struggling to learn a new language, or trying to keep up with the younger missionaries' tracting and pace of work.

It is not necessary for couples to proselyte in the same way as our young elders and sisters. Couples are often among the most fruitful missionaries because their maturity, seasoned experience, insight, and compassion open many doors in unusual ways.

An example of this comes from a mission president as he describes an unforgettable couple: "I confess," he said, "that when Elder and Sister Leslie arrived, I wondered how well they would do. He was seriously overweight and wore a hearing aid. She was limited with two artificial knee implants. But their spirit was sweet and their enthusiasm so strong. Two wonderfully ordinary people—full of love.

"I felt inspired to send them to Jamestown, Tennessee," he said, "where we had a tiny, struggling branch that had been without missionaries for years. I knew they couldn't tract, and for the first few weeks nothing was noted on their weekly reports. Their letters said, 'We are getting to know the people.'

"After a few weeks their letters told of nonmembers who were attending church with them—at first two, then four, then seven. They had as many as twenty-four investigators at church on one occasion. Soon the baptisms started to flow. No set of missionaries, young or old, equaled the baptisms they brought about."

And the mission president went on to say, "I doubt that either of them could give the missionary discussions in a way that closely resembled the suggested form that we have for the regular missionaries. What they had was a great love for the people. They wove themselves into the fabric of that little community, winning them over with friendship, compassionate service, and understanding hearts.

"Today, the Jamestown Branch is thriving, with a new building and more than 100 members attending. Many contributed their faith and works, but none more significantly or generously than Harry and Frances Leslie."

Compassion . . . service . . . caring—these are qualities of those who truly love their neighbors as themselves.

Though couples such as these have had many years of married life together, they discover new blessings. A husband and wife who serve a mission together will never work so closely and so intensely with one another in such a rewarding effort. Their love will deepen and they will each discover wonderful new dimensions of their companion's inner soul. They will have a greater feeling of unity, and a heavenly relationship will be strengthened.

When Lynn and Dorothea Shawcroft arrived in Ecuador, they were in a state of cultural shock for two weeks and were unable to communicate very well. "We thought, '[Eighteen] months [will be] a very long time,'" they wrote. But then they went on to say, "We saw vividly the conditions in which [some of the] missionaries lived. . . . Our first thoughts were—until we learned more of our own duties—we could at least make life more pleasant for the [full-time missionaries]. So we shopped for pans and ingredients to make cookies and cinnamon rolls. We bought chocolate bars and cut them up to make chocolate chip cookies.

"We learned so much from the [missionaries]. It didn't matter that they learned the language more quickly than we did. Seeing the joy . . . on their faces as they enjoyed a chocolate chip cookie was worth every effort. We represented a bit of home, a bit of something they missed.

"It [may] sound like we did nothing but make cookies for the missionaries. Not so! . . . [We worked] with the [local Church] leaders in activation, teaching, music, . . . genealogy, and welfare. We had open house each week for the . . . missionaries and their investigators. We worked together. . . .

"After teaching a young couple to read or seeing the happiness in a family [because] the father was again attending church, we would walk back to our apartment with a heart that was singing and feet that hardly touched the cobblestone street. Seeing a young mother clap her hands with joy as she truly realized that she was reading, or watching a baby . . . and knowing that perhaps [this child] wouldn't be alive now had we not [been there at that time]. These experiences, each and every one, made our mission worth every minute of it.

"Was it worth it to struggle with [another] language? It certainly was! . . . Did we feel that we had to keep up with [the younger missionaries]? No. We worked in our own way. . . . Were we accepted? Were we ever!"

Sister Shawcroft recommends that every couple take on their mission a good chocolate chip cookie recipe, lots of love, a good recipe for cinnamon rolls, a strong testimony of the gospel, the scriptures, and then more love.

Each of these couples exemplifies the Savior's teaching to give of ourselves, to reach out to people. In doing so they achieved value to themselves, their families, and to the Church for missionary service rendered in the golden years of their lives.

Deep inside the human soul is a longing to be identified with and involved in something really important. There comes a time in our lives when we are spiritually prepared and ready to be lifted from comfortable and sometimes mundane activities and to make a major decision to respond to a call from our prophet that will ennoble our souls as well as bless others.

The goal of every physically able couple in the Church, just as it is for every nineteen-year-old young man in the Church, should be to serve a mission. No finer example can be given, no finer testimony can be borne by parents to children or grandchildren, than through missionary service in their mature years.

The Savior taught that the first and great commandment is to love the Lord with all our heart, our soul, and our mind. "And the second is like unto it," he said. "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself" (Matthew 22: 37-39). Who are our neighbors? They are all of our Father's children. What a blessing we can be to them as we, with mature wisdom and love, bring them the gospel of our Savior, with its eternal covenants and blessings.

We invite bishops to prayerfully review possible calls with appropriate couples, who, after following our Savior's promise to the Nephites to "pray unto the Father in my name; . . . believing that ye shall receive, [and] it shall be given unto you," will know by the Spirit how to respond (3 Nephi 18:19-20).

Great joy and fulfillment will come to them as they humbly serve in their newly expanded world of neighbors.
