David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

16

Bringing the Sheep Back to the Fold

In chapter 15 of Luke, we find three parables of the Savior that impress upon his followers the importance and urgency of searching for that which is lost.

The first parable talks about the lost sheep: "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing." Jesus then declares: "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance" (Luke 15:4-7).

In the second parable, Jesus talks about the lost coin: "What woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost." The Savior concludes, "Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" (Luke 15:8-10).

The third parable tells the story of the prodigal son, who asked his father for his "portion of goods" and then went to a far country and lost his inheritance through riotous living. When famine came and he found that he could not survive, he determined to return to his father to beg forgiveness and ask to be made a hired servant. As he approached, his father saw him coming, had compassion on him, and ordered his servants, "Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry: for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry" (Luke 15:11-24).

The gospel teaches us that every member of the Church has an obligation to strengthen his fellow members. The Savior himself instructed the apostle Peter: "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (Luke 22:32).

There is an unusual concern being expressed by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles over the increasing numbers of Latter-day Saints who are listed on quorum and ward reports as less-active.

We remind you that

Every less-active man has a bishop, quorum president, and home teachers.

Every less-active woman has a bishop, Relief Society president, and visiting teachers.

Every less-active young woman has a bishop and a Young Women's president.

Every less-active young man has a bishop and quorum president.

And every member of the Church has a stake president or a mission president.

President Harold B. Lee taught: "There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1972, 124). Our attention to this alarming trend of inactivity must now become one of our most urgent priorities. The worth of all souls is great in the sight of God, whether they be nonmembers, less-active members, or active members.

The Prophet Joseph Smith referred to this obligation in a letter to the Saints written while he was imprisoned in Liberty Jail in Missouri in March 1839: "Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—thou must commune with God. How much more dignified and noble are the thoughts of God, than the vain imaginations of the human heart! None but fools will trifle with the souls of men!" (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 3:295).

If we truly love the Lord, we will feed his sheep (see John 21:15-17). How will we do that? Through love and eternal friendship, not force or pressure.

A few years ago I heard about a farsighted home teacher in an elders quorum who was given the name of a less-active member. On his way to priesthood meeting early one Sunday morning, he called at the home of this member.

"I'm on my way to priesthood meeting and thought you might like a ride," he explained.

The man, startled and somewhat angry at this interruption of his Sunday rest, said, "No, I'm not interested," and slammed the door.

The following Sunday morning the home teacher again rang the man's doorbell. "Just dropped by in case you've changed your mind," he told the startled man. "We'd really like you to join us."

"Go away! Leave me alone!" the man shouted, slamming the door.

A week later the home teacher rang the doorbell again. This time he added, "We have a great group of men. We need you. You're a member of our quorum. Would you mind if I stopped by next Sunday?" The man decided that the only way to stop his early-morning caller was to go to priesthood meeting and prove he was not interested, so he finally agreed.

The next Sunday, when the home teacher rang the doorbell, the man was dressed and ready to prove his lack of interest. But the spirit of the priesthood meeting, the friendly handclasps, and the sincere interest of the quorum members changed the attitude and awakened the conscience of a man who needed a gentle push. He soon became an active member of the quorum.

There are tens of thousands of good people who have quietly drifted away and are now waiting for a knock on their door. Those who have strayed must experience a doctrinal conversion and social integration by someone who cares.

Loren Eiseley tells about walking along a stormy beach late one afternoon "with the wind roaring at his back and the seagulls screaming" overhead. Tourists who came to the beach would collect shellfish and sea life tossed up each night, boil them in large kettles, and take the shells home as souvenirs. Eiseley walked far down the beach around a point away from the collectors and saw "a gigantic rainbow of incredible perfection." Toward its foot he "discerned a human figure . . . gazing . . . at something in the sand. . . . A starfish had thrust its arms up stiffly and was holding its body away from the stifling mud."

"Is it still alive?" Eiseley asked.

"'Yes,' [said the man standing in the rainbow] and with a quick . . . gentle movement he picked up the star and spun it far out into the sea. 'It may live,' he said, 'if the offshore pull is strong enough.'"

At first Eiseley felt only the futility of the man's efforts, "throwing one starfish at a time back into the sea when it nightly tosses out hundreds." He walked away, looking sadly "at the shell collectors . . . [and] the steaming kettles in which . . . voiceless things were being boiled alive."

The next morning Eiseley again went to the beach. Again the star thrower was there. "Silently [Eiseley] . . . picked up a still-living star, spinning it far out into the waves. . . . 'I understand,' [he] said. 'Call me [a star] thrower [also].'"

Of throwing the starfish back he wrote, "It was like sowing—the sowing of life on an infinitely gigantic scale." He saw the star thrower stoop and throw once more. Eiseley joined with him. They "flung and flung again while all about [them] roared the insatiable waters." They "alone and small in that immensity, hurled back the living stars." They set their shoulders and "cast, . . . slowly, deliberately, and well. The task was not to be assumed lightly" (Loren Eiseley, The Star Thrower [New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1978], 171-73, 184). Each moment counted if they were to rescue the starfish that they sought to save.

We need star throwers—throwers who have vision, who have a sense of discipleship with the Savior, who feel the need to save where there is still life and hope and value and who will not to let that life die on a friendless beach but will hurl it back to where it belongs. Then we may better understand our Lord's commandment: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself" (Matthew 19:19).

The heart and soul of activating our neighbors who have become less active in the Church is found in these four keys:

Love is the basic ingredient and motive for successful activation. One less-active woman was touched when her home teacher told her, "We have a place set for you at our table, and it won't be the same without you." In addition to his words, of course, he showed a genuine feeling of love and concern. She accepted his dinner invitation—and eventually returned to Church activity.

An enterprising and perceptive bishop in California set a goal for his ward to reactivate every less-active person in his ward. He told his ward members, "If you care enough, you'll find a way to reach them." He reserved one night a week to visit less-active members and tried to visit two or three families that night.

On his first visit to a family, he would talk about non-Church topics—fishing, the children, school activities, or other subjects the family members were interested in. "They needed to know that we care," he said. "The next time I visited, we'd talk about the Church. I don't do home teaching—I do fellowshipping."

How did he get them active? After finding out what their interests were, he would put them to work. As soon as appropriate, they were called to positions where they could serve without fear of responsibilities beyond their present abilities.

He concluded: "At all of our ward committee meetings, we report on less-active members before anything else. That gets everyone involved. If someone starts to talk about something else, I interrupt; I want to know about the less-actives first of all. We don't do anything extraordinary; we just follow the program and let people know we care. You'll find ways to get them active, if you love them."

One stake in southern California started a reactivation program in which the bishopric of each ward appointed effective teams from the high priests and elders quorums to work with less-active members. As these special teaching teams visited each family, they stated at the offset that they had been sent by the bishop. They then asked if they might come once or twice each week to teach the family the gospel. Gospel messages were adapted to the needs of the family members.

In six months fifty-nine individuals were activated in this stake, mostly as a direct result of teaching in the home by hand-picked, capable teachers. The stake president attributed his stake's success to (a) the bishops' being asked by constituted authority to recover those who were less-active, (b) careful selection of the most capable teachers, and (c) the diligence and love of the teachers.

An elders quorum in Colorado reported wonderful success in reactivating members through effective home teaching and the use of filmstrips. Seven quorum members each purchased film projectors for use in the program. One prospective elder had remarked, "Please don't send the home teachers to my home anymore." Then he and his wife were visiting at the home of another less-active member when the home teachers arrived with their film projector. He saw the filmstrip, his heart was touched, and he invited the home teacher to return to his home.

The quorum formed committees, athletic as well as social, to plan activities to prove to less-active members that there is fun and joy in the Church. Members of the quorum held an overnight campout in the mountains, where they sat around a campfire for six hours discussing gospel principles. "We had a real spiritual feast," the quorum president reported.

To keep each former less-active quorum member committed to the Church, the quorum president works with the bishop in preparing the person for a calling and developing an appropriate position for him. This quorum has caught the spirit exemplified by the Lord: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another" (D&C 88:118).

When one less-active brother was approached by his priesthood leaders, he told them, "I'm not inactive; it's just that you don't need me." Men, women, and youth will respond to our invitations to participate when they feel they are needed. There is an appropriate calling for everyone.

Some time ago a man told me how he became lost in the middle of a ward with five hundred members. "My wife and I had our first contact with the Church when two sweet, spiritual missionaries called. They came, they taught, they converted. We literally lived off their spirit. Then, as many converts know, those two wonderful elders were transferred.

"It was extremely difficult for us to keep that same spirit," he said. "We felt we could not go it alone. We withdrew from Church activity. My wife told the visiting teachers not to come back, and we asked the home teachers to leave us alone. I suppose in the elders quorum they discussed some 'lost' brethren who needed to be 'found.' Yes, I was lost. One day there came a knock at our front door. As I opened it, I saw a young, smiling, freckle-faced man who said he was the elders quorum president. He asked if he could talk to me for a few minutes.

"In the coming weeks he came many times to bring us vegetables from his garden, eggs from his chickens, a birthday card for our daughter. Sometimes he came just to talk. He got me involved in the ward sports program. He even apologized for anyone who may have hurt our feelings. What did he do that got us back? He loved us. He was sincere. He cared. He shared with me his personal testimony. He helped me to search my soul. He helped me to pray to my Father in heaven.

"For the love this man gave my family, we will be eternally grateful. The Lord has poured out his blessings on us. We have been to the temple and have been sealed for eternity. We have returned to the temple many times and gained further light and knowledge promised to us.

"I am now working with this elders quorum president as his counselor. My wife is teaching Primary and is a visiting teacher. I was lost, but because someone cared, because someone took time, because someone took the risk of showing his love and concern, I was found and was able to lead my family back to the Lord. I plead with all members of the Church to look around and help guide lost children back to their Heavenly Father." In a survey of less-active and reactivated members, we learned the following:

Recently a stake presidency decided to put an activation plan to a test and to personally visit some prospective elders. They reported: "The first brother we visited was a less-active elder. He wept and thanked us for coming. Since our visit, he has accepted a calling in the Church. The second, a prospective elder, also wept. He promised to give up his cigarettes and to prepare for Melchizedek Priesthood ordination at our next stake conference. The third, also a prospective elder, was pleased to have us visit. A counselor in the stake presidency developed a marvelous rapport with him and is working with his family in addition to the special home teachers assigned. And the fourth visit was to a prospective elder who warmly received us, reaffirmed his less-active lifestyle, but agreed to receive some materials about temple marriage."

The stake presidency then added, "Not bad for just two weeks of visiting!" They have a new appreciation of how successfully we can reach those who are less active.

In wards that have made great strides in their activation efforts, members have a legitimate sense of their importance, genuine pride in their callings, and respect and admiration for their leaders. Bishops have an instinctive warmth, cordiality, and sense of genuine interest in the lives and welfare of every member. We must continue to develop and cultivate this positive love and concern for each member, looking beyond ourselves and reaching out to grasp the hands of those who have wandered away and lead them back to the fold.

Let me summarize the guiding principles of the activation program:

First, priesthood and auxiliary leaders must be determined to set the activation guidelines in motion.

Second, they must have faith that the activation of men and women and families is possible.

Third, the individual or family must be taught the gospel, either in their homes or by attending a temple preparation seminar so that they might become converted.

Fourth, and most importantly, leaders need to qualify themselves to obtain the companionship of the Holy Ghost to assist them in touching the lives of the less-active members.

President Spencer W. Kimball said of our responsibility to strengthen less-active members: "I am very hopeful that the Church will stay with the emphasis on these challenges for several years, so that we can truly make a significant difference. It doesn't mean that other things must go undone during this time, but we need to concentrate on the things that are most critical. There are so many marvelous benefits that await us as a people if we succeed, and I am positive we will succeed. So much depends upon our willingness to make up our minds, collectively and individually, that present levels of performance are not acceptable, either to ourselves or to the Lord. In saying that, I am not calling for flashy, temporary differences in our performance levels, but a quiet resolve to do a better job" (Lengthening Our Stride, Regional Representatives' seminar, 3 Oct. 1974).

We can change the present flow of men and women and boys and girls into the dark pool of inactivity. May each of us reach out to our brothers and sisters in the gospel and help bring them back to the fold.
