David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

18

Building and Strengthening Marriage

Today we are witnessing an unending assault on the traditional family. Sacred values of human goodness, discipline, and love and honor for God our Eternal Father are being challenged as never before. A new self-centered generation is making the family a prime target of continuing belittlement. Marriage is being downgraded or shunned, parenthood degraded and avoided. These, with other disturbing influences, are resulting in a torrent of evil temptations for instant gratification and the demeaning of marriage and the sacred roles of wife and mother.

We learn from the scriptures that the divine intent is that marriage be an eternal union with family relationships enduring throughout eternity. After the earth was created, God made man in his own image and gave him dominion over the earth. By the side of man stood the woman, sharing with him the divinely bestowed honor and dignity of supremacy over all other creations. God said, "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him" (Genesis 2:18).

The Lord also instructed, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh" (Genesis 2:24), thereby giving sanction to the union of male and female in authorized marriage, which is heaven-planned for the creation of mortal bodies.

The earliest recorded commandment to Adam and Eve was to "be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth" (Genesis 1:28). We regard children as gifts from God, committed to our care for loving, nurturing, and careful training. The Lord instructed us to "teach [our] children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord" (D&C 68:28). They are not to be mistreated or abused; rather, they are part of a family with the potential of eternal relationship.

President Spencer W. Kimball explained: "The Lord organized the whole program in the beginning with a father who procreates, provides, and loves and directs, and a mother who conceives and bears and nurtures and feeds and trains. The Lord could have organized it otherwise but chose to have a unit with responsibility and purposeful associations where children train and discipline each other and come to love, honor, and appreciate each other. The family is the great plan of life as conceived and organized by our Father in heaven" ("The Family Influence," Ensign, July 1973, 15).

Marriage was meant to be and can be a loving, binding, and harmonious relationship between a husband and wife.

As we contemplate our Lord's declaration to Moses, "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), we reflect with sadness upon the present serious trend of families and homes being torn apart through divorce. A major underlying cause of divorce seems to be in not understanding that marriage and families are God-given and God-ordained. If people understood the full meaning, there would be less divorce and its attendant unhappiness. Couples would plan for a happy marriage relationship based on divine instruction. If couples understood from the beginning of their romance that their marriage relationship could be blessed with promises and conditions extending into the eternities, divorce would not even be a considered alternative when difficulties arise. The current philosophy— get a divorce if it doesn't work out—handicaps a marriage from the beginning.

The ever-increasing rise in divorce is ample evidence of how acceptable divorce has become as the popular solution to unhappy or "not-quite-up-to-expectation" marriages. But no matter how acceptable divorce has become—how quick and easy to obtain—it is tragic and painful, not only at the outset, but also in the years to come. Divorce can never really be final. How can mothers and fathers divorce themselves from their own flesh and blood children, or from the memories of days and years of shared experiences that have become part of their very lives?

Divorce rarely occurs without immense emotional, social, and financial upheaval. Most people underestimate the alienation, bitterness, disruption, and frustration between a divorcing couple and among their children, friends, and relatives. Some never adjust to the resulting emotional consequences.

Perhaps most tragic of all is that more than 60 percent of all divorces involve children under eighteen years of age. Children of divorce all too often have a higher delinquency rate and less self-confidence than do children in homes where parents are happily married, and they tend to be more promiscuous and more likely to have unhappy marriages themselves.

Considering the enormous importance of marriage, it is rather astonishing that we don't make better preparation for its success. Usually, young couples date for a few months or for a year or two, enjoying romance and getting acquainted. But once they are married, they soon learn that romance must blend with spiritual beliefs, in-law relationships, money issues, and serious discussions involving ethics, children, and the running of a home. Too many people are inadequately prepared for this lofty responsibility. They go to college for years to prepare for a vocation or a profession that is not nearly so rewarding or important as a good marriage. Serious transgressions, as well as injured lives, all too frequently make it clear that husband-and-wife relationships deserve a great deal more prayerful attention than many are giving them. Fewer marriages would become troubled, and more would be happier, if couples visited a warm-hearted bishop or counselor who could suggest ways to avoid pitfalls, and who could encourage them to thoughtfully use self-discipline and needed restraint and develop the loving attribute of unselfishness.

President Harold B. Lee once received this letter from a married woman: "When we thought that the end was here and that there was only one thing to do and that was to get a divorce, we had been told that we should counsel with our bishop. At first . . . we hesitated, because he was just a young man. . . . But he was our bishop so we went to see him. We poured out our souls to our young bishop. He sat and listened silently, and when we ran out of conversation he said simply, 'Well, my wife and I, we had problems, too, and we learned how to solve them.' That is all . . . he said. But you know there was something that happened as a result of that young bishop's statement. We walked out of there and we said, 'Well, if they can solve their problems, what is the matter with us?'" ("General Priesthood Address," Ensign, Jan. 1974, 100).

Our concern is that many married couples don't take their marriages seriously enough to work at them, protect them, nurture them, cultivate them day in and day out, week in and week out, yearlong, quarter-century long, half-a-century long, forever.

Middle-age divorce is particularly distressing; it indicates that mature people, the backbone of our society, are not working carefully enough to preserve their marriages. Divorces granted to people over forty-five have increased at an alarming rate. A couple who consider breaking up their marriage—a couple who may have reared their children, who possibly have grandchildren—and decide to go their separate ways, need to realize that every divorce is the result of selfishness on the part of one party or both.

In Malachi we read: "The Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. . . . Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth" (Malachi 2:14-15).

Marriage is a covenant. Two of the Ten Commandments deal directly with preserving the sanctity of marriage: "Thou shalt not commit adultery" and "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife" (Exodus 20:14, 17). Jesus magnified the law against adultery: "But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart" (Matthew 5:28).

Successful marriage comes as a result of the faithfulness of a man and a woman to each other, a faithfulness that began when each chose the other. It is a privilege indeed for a couple to live harmoniously with their chosen mate and to continue acquiring a depth of love, oneness, and wisdom that can be shared with each other now and throughout all eternity.

Marriage is sustained by faith and knowledge of its divine establishment and by the energy of love. A wise man explained, "When the satisfaction or the security of another person becomes as significant to one as one's own satisfaction and security, then the state of love exists" (Harry Stack Sullivan).

A strong, shared conviction that there is something eternally precious about the marriage relationship builds faith to resist evil. Marriage should be beautiful and fulfilling, with joy beyond our fondest dreams, for "neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11).

Latter-day Saints need not divorce—there are solutions to marriage problems. If, as husband and wife, you are having serious misunderstandings, or if you feel some strain or tension building up in your marriage, you should humbly get on your knees together and ask God our Father, with a sincere heart and real intent, to lift the darkness that is over your relationship so that you may receive the needed light, see your errors, repent of your wrongs, forgive each other, and receive each unto yourselves as you did in the beginning. I solemnly assure you that God lives and will answer your humble pleas, for he has said, "Ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done" (D&C 50:29).
