David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

20

Spiritual Crevasses

One summer Clarence Neslen Jr. took his family to Jasper National Park in Alberta, Canada. They enjoyed exploring the Columbia Icefields, jumping over crevasses in the famous Athabasca Glacier. It was an exciting experience until eleven-year-old Cannon, attempting to jump across a crevasse, missed and fell into the deep chasm. He became wedged between the walls of ice. When his father looked down some thirty feet to where his son was trapped, he was further alarmed to see a river of icy water flowing beneath the crevasse.

Several young men were also exploring the glacier. They heard the cries for help and came running. They had a small rope but soon realized that it was not strong enough to pull Cannon to safety. If it broke, Cannon would most assuredly fall into the rushing river of freezing water.

Sister Neslen and others ran to a nearby lodge for help. The nearest park ranger camp was seventy-five miles away. They learned by telephone that two park rangers were near the icefields. Located by radio, they rushed to the rescue. Time was short, decisions urgent, and silent prayers were sent heavenward.

Brother Neslen tried to calm his son and soothe his fears. Hypothermia was setting in. Young Cannon's shirt had been pushed up as he fell. His bare skin was now pressed against the cold walls of the glacier. To keep his son from unconsciousness, the father called down to him to keep praying, to wiggle his fingers and toes, and to sing his favorite songs. Over and over Cannon sang:

I am a child of God, And he has sent me here, Has given me an earthly home With parents kind and dear. (Hymns, no. 301)

All were strengthened by Cannon's faith and determination. But he was beginning to weaken. His father kept assuring him that help would soon arrive and that his Heavenly Father would hear his prayers.

The two rangers arrived. Spikes were driven into the ice, and ropes were attached to one of the rangers, who was lowered to rescue Cannon. But the crevasse was too narrow. Their only chance to rescue Cannon was to lower a looped rope and pray that he was alert enough to grasp it and then have the strength to hold on as they tried to pull him out.

Brother Neslen reported that he offered the most fervent prayer of his life, pleading with the Lord to save his son's life. "A feeling of assurance and calm came over me," he said, "and I knew that he would be saved."

Cannon had lapsed into unconsciousness. His father called down encouragement, rousing his son sufficiently that Cannon's icy fingers now were able to catch hold of the rope. "Hold on with all your might!" his father called down to him. Cannon was carefully pulled up—inch by inch, foot by foot—all thirty feet. When he was finally pulled to safety, he was unconscious. His fingers had miraculously frozen around the rope and had to be pried loose.

He was immediately wrapped in blankets and rushed to a waiting ambulance, but there was not enough warmth to raise his body temperature sufficiently. A paramedic undressed Cannon, then took off his own coat and shirt and held Cannon against his bare chest so that his body heat would radiate to the boy. Cannon slowly responded to the loving care of his rescuers. The prayers of all had been answered.

Young Cannon Neslen later told his father that, while wedged in the ice, he felt a comforting assurance that he would be saved. He knows God loves him and that He has a special mission for him to perform in this life.

Not unlike Cannon Neslen, who accidentally fell into a crevasse, some of our young people today have slipped into spiritual crevasses.

Spiritual crevasses symbolize the temptations and pitfalls that too many of our youth are tragically encountering: alcohol, with its wine coolers and keg parties; drug tampering and dependency; R- and X-rated films and videos, which often culminate in sexual immorality. On the edge of those ominous crevasses are parents and others who, with fervent prayers, cry for help and assistance. Like Cannon's father, they too pray that their sons or daughters will hold onto the extended lifeline. Their love, the teachings of the scriptures, and the assurance of the eternal blessings of the Savior's atonement are sure lifelines to safety.

Young people are not the only ones who slip into crevasses.

A stake president recently told me that a respected member who had held Church leadership positions was enticed by some business friends to try the cocaine drug "crack." The men were depressed. Their company was failing, and they succumbed to the evil enticement of illegal drugs.

The Church member wasted eighteen thousand dollars buying "crack," lost his job, underwent a personality change, and finally was hospitalized. Through it all, his wife stayed by him. She found a job, and they began the struggle of putting his life back together. His Church friends helped him get another job. His mind is seriously affected, however, and he is still somewhat dependent on some drugs. The hopes and prayers of his family are that he will be able to hold onto the lifeline.

When Satan was cast down to earth with his innumerable hosts, he became "the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive" if they would not listen to the Lord's voice (Moses 4:4).

One of Satan's methods is to distract and entice us so that we will take our eyes off the dangerous crevasses. He has succeeded to such an extent that many no longer recognize sin as sin. Movies, television, and magazines have glorified sin into what they think is an acceptable lifestyle and there is no punishment for evil behavior. Assuredly we live in a time spoken of by Isaiah when men "call evil good, and good evil" (Isaiah 5:20). Don't trifle with evil. You will lose. Don't display the somewhat arrogant attitude of those who say, "I can handle it," or "Everyone else does it."

A friend, visiting relatives in another state for a high school graduation, noticed a few students chewing tobacco. When he asked his nephew about it, the young man replied, "Everybody does it." My friend's nephew did not chew tobacco, but he did believe most boys did. Even in schools where in reality only a few students are using drugs, drinking alcohol, or smoking, non-users commonly believe that most of their fellow students are doing it.

Everyone is not doing it. Young people are influenced by their friends. Latter-day Saints are the Lord's special resource for teaching the gospel to all his other children. We are different from others who have neither our understanding nor our responsibilities. We can help set the standard.

The Lord has blessed us with special privileges and responsibilities. We were foreordained to come to earth at a time when the fulness of the gospel is on the earth. We were foreordained to receive his priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before the world was" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], 365).

We are the Lord's spirit children, singled out with a special calling. And we know that he loves us. We have the gift of the Holy Ghost. We can discern good from evil. And with the power of the priesthood, we have the authority to represent our Heavenly Father.

To help each of us avoid the pitfalls and crevasses in life, the Lord has provided the lifeline of the precious truths in the scriptures, which, if held onto, will allow us to escape both physical and spiritual danger. The Word of Wisdom was given so that we might have clear minds and healthy bodies; the Sermon on the Mount, to make us sensitive to one another's needs; and the Ten Commandments—cut in stone by the finger of God—forbidding us to sin. He declared, "Thou shalt not."

I urge each Latter-day Saint to develop a personal companionship with the scriptures.

President Spencer W. Kimball read the Bible when he was fourteen years old—all sixty-six books and 1,519 pages. "If I could do it by coal-oil light," he said, "you can do it by electric light" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 131).

President Kimball was a very special teacher for all of us. He didn't have a car or a bicycle, but he did have nine cows to milk every morning and night. He said, "I thought, 'What a waste of time, to sit on a three-legged stool. Maybe there is something else I could do while I am milking.'" He placed a copy of the Articles of Faith on the ground beside him and went through them, over and over, until he had memorized them. Then he repeated the Ten Commandments over and over until he learned them. He memorized important scriptures that would help him on his mission—all while he milked the cows. He didn't have time to waste; he had things to do with his life (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 131).

It would be a wonderful thing for us all to use our time wisely by learning of God's ways.

President Ezra Taft Benson challenged each of us to read the Book of Mormon—the most correct of any book on earth and the keystone of our religion. As the angel Moroni sealed up the gold plates, he was inspired to promise future generations—that is, us—that on certain conditions God will manifest the truth of those records by the power of the Holy Ghost, and promising us that "by the power of the Holy Ghost [we] may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:5).

Imagine such a promise. If we desire with a sincere heart, with faith in Christ, we can understand all things.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, while working on his Ph.D. at a prominent eastern American university, got to know well one of the reference librarians who had helped him with some research.

One day he said, "Ilene, I need to know how many books we have in the University Library that claim to have been delivered by an angel."

As you can imagine, the librarian gave him a peculiar look and said, "I don't know of any books that have been delivered by angels. Swords, maybe, or chariots, but I don't know of any books."

"Well, just run a check for me, would you? It may take a little doing, but I really would like to know."

The librarian dutifully did some checking of the nine million books in the library. For several days she had nothing to report, but then one day she smilingly said, "Mr. Holland, I have a book for you. I found one book which, it is claimed, was delivered by an angel," and she held up a paperback copy of the Book of Mormon. "I'm told you can get them for a dollar. My goodness," she continued, "an angel's book for a dollar! You would think angels would charge more, but then again," she said, "where would they spend it?" (Patricia Holland, president's welcome assembly, Brigham Young University, 9 Sept. 1986).

Think of it—one book has been delivered by an angel, and it teaches of our eternal salvation. And each of us may own a true copy!

May the Lord bless us with our life's opportunities. May we put our trust in him to avoid the crevasses of sin and evil, and hold onto the lifeline of the gospel. We can make correct choices—the ones we know in our hearts will be for our best good.
