David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

21

Into His Marvelous Light

A Brigham Young University student wrote to the editor of the daily newspaper: "Why must we always tag along behind the rest of the world, trying to get as close as our religion will let us? 'A style of our own' is not an empty phrase."

Today's young people live in a world far different from that experienced by their parents. Though the world is becoming more wicked, the youth of Christ's Church can become more righteous if they understand who they are, understand the blessings available, and understand the promises God has made to those who are righteous, who believe, and who endure. All of our youth are entitled to and need this knowledge in order to combat the forces of deception that would lead them captive into darkness.

Peter, writing from Rome to the scattered Saints, understood their trials and temptations to desert the faith and go back to their old ways. He encouraged them as he wrote about "the trial of your faith, . . . much more precious than of gold that perisheth" (1 Peter 1:7). He added a broader dimension with stirring words to help us understand who we are: "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people," and as a chosen and peculiar people, "ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9).

While attending a stake conference, I had the blessing of meeting with a group of young people, several of whom were the only Latter-day Saints in their high schools. When I asked, "You set the right example for the rest of the students, don't you?" they replied, "We really try." As they spoke, I could see the light of belief and conviction in their faces. I could begin to understand what Peter meant by being called "out of darkness into his marvellous light."

Our youths, with all of their distractions, must realize that through their membership in the Lord's Church, they are very special, and that the Lord is counting on them so that the prophecies might be fulfilled. They are of a noble birthright and are thus different from their friends who are not members of the Church. They are a "chosen generation"; they live "in the world" but do not follow worldly trends or habits that are contrary to their belief.

Paul, writing to his beloved Timothy and realizing the pressure Timothy was experiencing, said: "God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind" (2 Timothy 1:7).

If our young people conduct themselves properly and develop their personalities and lives along Church standards, their candle will be high on a hill and will burn brightly for all to see.

Debbi Brown, the only Latter-day Saint in her high school senior class in Virginia, said, "It is essential for us to live the standards of the Church. Most people who know anything about the Church know that it maintains the highest moral standards. There is never a need to apologize. We are so lucky to have the true gospel. By making the Church standards our standards, we can share this gospel with others."

She continues: "A good friend (not a member of the Church) invited me to a party celebrating our victorious football season. He was a popular football player. I was hesitant. He knew I was a Mormon. My hesitation must have been evident. He quickly added, 'No drinking allowed.' People know our standards and respect us for them. To be different from the crowd is a privilege." Some young people may feel at times that the Lord's commandments restrict their freedom as compared with that of others. Freedom does not mean license, nor does it imply the absence of all restrictions and disciplines. The Savior did not teach undisciplined, permissive-type freedom. When he said, "Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" (John 8:32), he was telling us that his truth, if followed, would free us from falsity and deception; that his gospel, if followed, would free us to gain eternal life. As the light of the gospel fills our souls, our abilities increase.

One young military chaplain, a former missionary, lives the gospel as he should. His superior officer at his first duty assignment was so impressed with his spirit that he wrote: "I want you to know how much we chaplains and the thousands of men have appreciated his presence. To describe him like a breath of fresh, clean air would be poetic and not intended to demean other chaplains who labor at our large base. He has a special charisma that radiates love." The officer then added, "We have benefited in many ways from this young chaplain. We not only admire him but renew our own enthusiasm. Thousands have derived great spiritual and social benefit from his service."

Some time ago a high school senior and student body leader was asked about his relationship with his peer group. He said, "I find great strength in the example of my peers. To get up and walk out of an offensive movie, to stand up and defend or even befriend a person whom everyone else ridicules, to be the only one in the crowd to say no to drinking, dishonesty, breaking the Sabbath day—all of these actions take a person of strong character. Such people among my friends have given immeasurable courage to me and to others."

He continued, "I remember a night when some friends and I sneaked into a movie through the exit without paying. We were laughing and feeling smart and smug about it when, without a word, one of my friends got up and left the theater. Suddenly, being dishonest didn't seem funny any more. One by one each of us walked out, each secretly wishing we had had that much courage."

This young man went on to say, "Probably the most respected person I know is a young man who makes friends with all kinds of people, regardless of their belief or status. He is loved among Church members and classmates. He is always the life of the party, yet he has never lowered his high standards in any way to win a friend or to get a laugh. He gravitates naturally toward positions of leadership because his peers, even the weakest ones, sense his strength of character. He has changed the lives of many young people."

One of the great powers in the world is that of example. People need models to see and at times to lean on. Henry David Thoreau wrote: "If you would convince a man that he does wrong, do right. Men will believe what they see."

Such an example was Mervin Sharp Bennion, who became one of the renowned heroes of World War II. He was born in the small village of Vernon, near Tooele, Utah. There he grew up in a faithful Latter-day Saint home and was taught by his parents the principles of faith, reverence, respect and regard for others, confidence in himself, a strong sense of right and wrong, and an understanding of the full measure of his purpose in life. Because of his excellent reading ability as a result of studying the Bible as a small boy, he became an outstanding student in the one-room log schoolhouse in Vernon. There were usually thirty or more pupils in all grades from the first to the eighth, all taught by one teacher. The students had little time for individual instruction, but they were taught the attributes of a good character and wholesome habits, and they developed their personalities with plays and programs in which everyone participated.

Near the close of his high school days, Mervin Bennion took a competitive examination and was admitted to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland. There he continued his character and personality development, resulting in his being number one in his class for the first three years; in his fourth year, he dropped back to third in his class because he was tutoring as free service some of the other midshipmen who were having difficulties. When he graduated from the academy, he received the sword awarded for excellence by the Daughters of the American Revolution.

Mervin Bennion continued through the usual duty assignments of a young naval officer, growing in stature and ability and always living close to the Lord. He married Louise Clark, the eldest daughter of President J. Reuben Clark Jr., and they had one child, Mervin Jr. In Mervin's various naval assignments, he commanded a number of ships and served as chief of the Bureau of Ordnance in Washington, D. C., a distinguished position.

Wherever he was on assignment, he was always active in the Church, seeking out nearby branches and wards and attending all of his meetings. In Washington he was a counselor in the branch presidency and later served in the first bishopric of the Chevy Chase Ward. Though he was heavily involved at the Navy headquarters, he was completely devoted to his Church callings. For example, he had thirty home teaching families to visit, and he made it a point to visit each one every month. Everyone who came in contact with Mervin Bennion in the Church or in the Navy felt of his great spirit and devotion, because he knew so well his purpose in life and his responsibility.

His last assignment was as commanding officer of one of the Navy's largest battleships stationed in Hawaii, the USS West Virginia. America was then at peace. Commanding officers of large ships usually had free time for social life and personal affairs; however, Captain Bennion, because of his dedication and love of his country and his desire to serve well and faithfully, was careful with the use of his time. On 6 December 1941, a Saturday, he was invited to dinner at the Honolulu home of Ralph Woolley, who was serving as president of the Oahu Stake. After a pleasant evening, President and Sister Woolley suggested that Captain Bennion stay overnight and go to Sunday School with them the next morning. But he said that his place was on his ship.

The following morning, Sunday, 7 December 1941, at a few minutes before eight o'clock, Captain Bennion was in his cabin, preparing to go to Sunday School and fast meeting in Honolulu, when a sailor on watch from the bridge dashed in to report the approach of Japanese planes. Captain Bennion instantly gave the command, "Air attack! To your battle stations!" Then he ran to his own station, the conning tower on the flag bridge.

Within a few minutes the enemy planes flew in close and let go torpedoes and bombs that struck the West Virginia in rapid succession. Captain Bennion, anxious to see what had happened to his ship, stepped out the door of the conning tower. He had scarcely taken two steps when he was hit by a splinter from a bomb; the splinter tore into his body, and a fragment hit his spine and left hip. He fell to the floor. A pharmacist's mate rushed over and quickly bandaged his abdomen, but it was clear to him—and undoubtedly to Captain Bennion—that the wound was beyond any hope of mending, though the captain did not say a word to indicate that he knew of this serious condition.

Captain Bennion refused to be attended further and sent the man below to help other wounded sailors. As men and officers came to him, he briefly asked what was happening and gave orders and instructions. He remained courageous and cheerful and resisted, with a firmness and vigor that astonished his officers, all efforts to remove him from the bridge. He talked only of the ship and the men, how the fight was going, what guns were out of action, how to get them in operation again, who was wounded, what care the wounded were receiving, and how to evacuate them from the ship.

At about nine-thirty fire broke out, cutting off the escape of Captain Bennion and two others. The officers tied him onto a ladder and tried unsuccessfully to lift him out; then, with great difficulty and with the ship on fire, they carried him up to a navigation bridge to a corner that seemed to be free from smoke. They made him as comfortable as they could, but Captain Bennion told them to leave him and to save themselves, if possible.

From the battleship alongside the West Virginia, most of Captain Bennion's men watched the lone figure lying on the navigation bridge. A young ensign, deeply attached to him, watched for hours. He said that twice in the first half-hour after Captain Bennion was left alone, he saw him stir, rise up on his elbows, look about, and then drop back. The grandeur of this heroic death scene as it unfolded profoundly moved the men of the stricken fleet, and the executive officer of the ship wrote, "Mrs. Bennion, be assured that every person on the USS West Virginia shares your grief. We are all proud to have served under Captain Bennion, and his kindness, cheerfulness, and courage will always be remembered by all of us who had the privilege and pleasure of being under his command." Thus closed a glorious life and a naval career without fault or blemish. The following morning, when the superstructure of the stricken ship had cooled off, Captain Bennion's body was removed. The spot where he lay had been untouched by fire.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt posthumously awarded Captain Bennion the Congressional Medal of Honor. A camp at the Farragut Naval Station in northern Idaho was named Camp Bennion. And on 4 July 1943, a destroyer launched at the Boston Navy Yard was christened the USS Bennion by Louise Clark Bennion. Admiral David Sellars wrote to Sister Bennion, "His complete forgetfulness of self and devotion to duty at the last has set an example and will serve as an inspiration in years to come to the officers and men of the United States Navy." His heroic conduct is now cited in naval training classes as one of the outstanding examples to be found in all United States naval history.

"The most important of all his characteristics was his constant and sincere desire to keep the commandments of God," wrote his bishop. "He did not think himself overly righteous, but his sincerity and his ever-present desire to live in accordance with God's law and to perform the full duty required of him impressed all who knew him."

Mervin Bennion's character, his purpose, his desire, his faith, and his conduct were steadfastly the same. Of course, he had grown in stature and in influence, but inherently he was unchanged. He was started out on the right path by his parents in a little Mormon town, and he kept going straight ahead, his purpose clearly identified.

Each of us has been given a lamp to carry. Our lamps will light the way for us and, we hope, for others, but they must have oil. This oil will not come from the good works or the righteousness of our family or friends, but from our faithfulness in keeping the commandments of God, our actions and desires, and, of course, our love of the Master.

In Thornton Wilder's play Our Town, a young woman dies and discovers that she has the opportunity to live one day of her life over again. She chooses her twelfth birthday. When the day begins, her first reaction is an intense desire to savor every moment. "I can't look at everything hard enough," she says. Then to her sorrow she sees that the members of her family are not experiencing life with any of the intensity she felt. In desperation, she says to her mother (who cannot, of course, hear her), "Let's just sit and look at one another." And later she says, "Oh, earth, you're too wonderful for anybody to realize you. Do any human beings ever realize life while they live it?"

I testify that each of us, as followers of the Savior and members of his Church, can realize life while we live it, through service to our fellowman, devotion to our families, and adherence to the commandments of God. Shortly before he died, Sir Winston Churchill was invited to stand before the student body of a prestigious preparatory school in England. This was all that he had to say: "Never forsake the things that you know to be true. Never, never, never, never." May that blessing be ours.
