David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

22

Overcoming the Power of Evil

As I view the struggles of mankind in this challenging time, I reflect on the familiar verse of Henry Van Dyke that most high school students were required at one time to memorize. Van Dyke wrote:

Four things a man must learn to do, If he would make a record true: To think without confusion clearly, To love his fellowmen sincerely, To act from honest motives purely, To trust in God and heaven securely.

"To trust in God and heaven securely." Wouldn't there be a feeling of great security if every Latter-day Saint home produced sons and daughters who trust in God securely and who believe in him and in his Son, Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world!

It can be difficult to think clearly in these times, to hold to a high degree of integrity and loyalty, and to maintain lofty ideals in a generation that seems to have lost its scale of values. The current wave of permissiveness in many areas of our lives is being encouraged by false interpretations of true, basic, moral principles.

The Savior warned us of these times: "There shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect" (Matthew 24:24).

Unfortunately, along with much of the world, some of our loved ones are influenced by false prophets, false Christs, and modern movements of spiritualism. Some have become victims of Satanic influences because they do not understand or realize the power of the adversary, who knows human weaknesses and is ever present.

Who is this evil power? Is he real? Does he exist?

John the Revelator encapsulated that powerful struggle in heaven, the outcome of which has such an impact on all of humanity: "There was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not. . . . And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, . . . for the accuser of our brethren is cast down. . . . Woe to the inhabiters of the earth . . . for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time" (Revelation 12:7-10, 12).

There is an eternal struggle with evil forces. John the Revelator is speaking to all of us, telling us to be on guard, to beware.

The Lord has also warned us in modern revelation: "Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (Moses 4:3-4).

In recent years, America and most other nations of the free world have been converted into a space-age Sodom and Gomorrah, aided by some publishers and movie producers, and even some so-called educators. Moral principles have been eclipsed by the blind, ungodly pursuit of pleasure at any price.

In the Book of Mormon, Alma records Korihor's sad experience with Satan: "Behold, the devil hath deceived me; for he appeared unto me in the form of an angel. . . . And he said unto me: There is no God; yea and he taught me that which I should say. And I have taught his words; and I taught them . . . even until I had much success, insomuch that I verily believed that they were true; and for this cause I withstood the truth, even until I have brought this great curse upon me" (Alma 30:53).

Many people who believe at least tentatively in the reality of God have a much harder time believing in the reality of the devil. Some even soft-pedal the subject and go along with the popular idea that the devil is a purely mythological creature. Some roar with laughter as a television comic remarks, "The devil made me do it." Well, maybe he did! He will always try.

To deny the existence of Satan and the reality of his evil power and influence is as foolish as to ignore the existence of electricity. We know that electricity is real; we see and feel its power. We also know about war, hatred, backbiting, bearing false witness, cheating, and the broken hearts and broken homes caused by the moral sins of modern Babylon. Do members of the Church feel a lack of evidence in the reality of Satan and his power?

We are told that "some of the very elect" will be enticed and deceived, even though through baptism they have already accepted Christ as their Savior. Wouldn't the evil one concentrate on them if he found a weakness or opportunity?

A college student who hoped to repent of some serious mistakes and straighten out his life told me of an influence that, for a time, controlled his life. When he was in high school, he desired to have some expert ski equipment, so he accepted a job that would require work on Sundays and evenings. This resulted in his nonattendance at priesthood and other Sunday meetings, and he was always too tired to attend early-morning seminary. With his fancy new ski equipment, he was named to the high school ski team and made some new friends. To be "with it," he started to smoke and soon moved to marijuana and from marijuana to LSD. His parents now seemed old-fashioned, so he moved from their home in order to live with his newfound friends in an old house. His father tried to visit him and to communicate through letters, but the young man now felt completely disenchanted with Church and home. It was only after he had made many tragic mistakes that he finally came to his senses and moved back home with his parents. He told me, "The devil seemed to be in charge of my life."

After interviewing the young people in his ward, one dedicated bishop commented on the lack of spiritual direction from some parents to their own teenage sons and daughters. "Bishops and teachers can't do it all," he said. "Parents must teach their children of the pitfalls of evil." He then compared the difference in priorities in the various homes as reflected in his interviews with the youth. One girl told him, "I know the gospel is true. I keep the commandments and have no problems." Another young woman remarked, "I don't accept all of it; I'm battling with some parts. We never discuss the gospel at home."

What a tragedy! Parents must strengthen their homes and teach their loved ones to distinguish between Satan and our Savior. They must teach their loved ones that "all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, . . . and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually" (Moroni 7:12).

Taking time to explain these eternal truths of the gospel in the warm atmosphere of the home could mean the difference between exaltation and darkness. At a crucial moment, the humble testimony of mother and father recalled by a youth could make the difference in a critical decision.

True happiness in this life and in the life to come is found in keeping the commandments of God. We have been told, "You shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (D&C 84:44).

I bear witness that the devil is real. I have felt of his influence. The apostle Paul knew firsthand of his power. As Saul of Tarsus, he persecuted the Saints, locked them in prison, and spoke against them when they were put to death. Later, as the believer and great apostle, he encouraged the followers of Christ at Ephesus: "Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world" (Ephesians 6:11-12).

If we will keep and live the commandments of God and follow the counsel of his living prophet to strengthen our homes, the protecting armor of God to which Paul refers will fit comfortably, the shield of righteousness will be sufficient for us to withstand the evil darts, and our loved ones will find great joy and salvation.
