David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

24

The Fight against Pornography

In recent years a plague of pornography has swept across most countries of the world with increasing momentum and devastating impact. What began a few years ago as a few crude picture magazines that startled sensitive people has grown to hundreds of publications, each seeking to outdo the others with increasingly shocking content.

So-called adult bookstores, selling materials that appeal to the prurient mind, are now open in nearly every city. Obscene materials once available only by mail and in a plain brown wrapper are now prominently displayed on the magazine racks of many local convenience stores and other business establishments where they are readily accessible to the young and the old alike. Theaters showing R- and X-rated films and worse have become established in most cities. It is reported that one particularly offensive movie, filmed at a cost of forty thousand dollars, has earned revenues of many millions of dollars.

It should come as no surprise that grand juries have found that 90 percent of all pornography is dominated by organized crime. Large profits from one project become a source of funds for still larger and more sophisticated enterprises as a growing tidal wave of smut dashes against the weakening bulwarks of morality.

New technologies that can bless our lives in many positive ways are being used also to spread pornographic corruption. Video recorders and computers can bring to homes great classics of music, history, art, and drama; but they can also bring into some of these same homes lurid portrayals of debauchery that contaminate those who view them and extend their corrupting influence to our communities and society.

Cable television and satellite transmissions, with their powerful capacity for good, are not only being used, but are also being abused. State and national laws necessary to govern their proper use are not yet established, and they are almost totally unregulated. Greedy men have been ready to exploit this vacuum in legal regulation without regard for the consequence to its victims.

Some may ask, What is pornography? United States Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart said that while he could not exactly define pornography, "I know it when I see it" (Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378-U.S. 184, 1964).

Pornography is not a victimless crime. Who are its victims? First, those who intentionally, or sometimes involuntarily, are exposed to it. Pornography is addictive. What may begin as a curious exploration can become a controlling habit. Studies show that those who allow themselves to become drawn to pornography soon begin to crave even coarser content. Continued exposure desensitizes the spirit and can erode the conscience of the unwary. A victim becomes a slave to carnal thoughts and actions. As the thought is father to the deed, so exposure can lead to acting out what is nurtured in the mind.

But there are other victims. Crimes of violence have increased in the United States at up to five times the rate of population growth. A 1983 University of New Hampshire study found that states having the highest readership of pornographic magazines also have the highest number of reported rapes. Pornography degrades and exploits men, women, and children in a most ugly and corrupt fashion.

Perhaps the greatest tragedy of all is in the lives of children who become its victims. The saddest trend of our day is the alarming increase in child abuse. Much of it occurs within families and involves corrupting the divine innocence that children have from birth. The Savior reserved his harshest condemnation for those who offend little children. He said: "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for . . . it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish" (Matthew 18:10, 14).

The Lord commanded: "Neither commit adultery . . . nor do anything like unto it" (D&C 59:6). President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "The early apostles and prophets [warned against] sins that are reprehensible . . . —adultery . . . infidelity . . . impurity, inordinate affection . . . sexual relations outside of marriage . . . sex perversion . . . preoccupation with sex in one's thoughts. . . . And one of the worst of these [sins] is incest . . . [or] sexual [relations] between persons so closely related that they are forbidden by law to marry" (President Kimball Speaks Out [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981], 6). Incest is an ugly sin, and this particular sin may damage its innocent victims well nigh irreparably.

What impels offenders to such terrible deeds? Police report that some 80 percent of those who molest young boys and girls admit modeling their attacks on pornography they have viewed. How has this evil gained such a foothold in our society? Have we ignored the warnings of our Church leaders? President Kimball declared: "So long as men are corrupt and revel in sewer filth, entertainers will sell them what they want. Laws may be passed, arrests may be made, lawyers may argue, courts may sentence . . . men of corrupt minds, but pornography and . . . insults to decency will never cease until men have cleansed their minds. When . . . [man] is sick and tired of being drowned in filth, he will not pay for that filth and its source will dry up. . . . Hence it is obvious that to remain clean and worthy, one must stay positively and conclusively away from the devil's territory, avoiding the least approach toward evil. Satan leaves his fingerprints" (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], 229, 232).

This growing presence of obscenity has been aided by the lowering of media standards for advertising, by relaxed movie ratings, by soap operas and situation comedies on television that use their powerful voices to justify, glamorize, and encourage sexual relations outside of marriage.

Perhaps we have been intimidated by those who claim that producing, distributing, and using obscene materials is a basic right to be defended. This is not true. Even under the divinely inspired constitutional principles of this land, obscenity is not condoned nor protected. The United States Supreme Court has clearly held that criminal prosecution of those who produce and distribute obscene materials does not violate their First Amendment rights (Miller v. California, 413 US 15 [1973]).

This spreading evil has been aided by a failure to enforce laws designed to prohibit or regulate it. Although some additional legislation may be helpful, those who have been fighting the discouraging battle against pornography in recent years are in agreement that nearly 90 percent of all obscene materials could be eliminated from our communities if existing obscenity laws were strictly enforced. A few courageous cities have performed outstanding service by ridding themselves of X-rated theaters and so-called adult bookstores and by limiting access to hard-core pornographic books and magazines. The citizens of Mt. Lebanon, Pennsylvania, formed a citizen action group and determined that they were not going to allow such degrading material in their community. They closed an adult bookshop and a large distribution warehouse, and, as a result of their determined citizens' organization and involvement, they have had enacted a city public-nuisance ordinance.

Lawmaking bodies will listen to effectively organized citizens. However, too often the trend is tragically toward citizen apathy and a sense of futility. And who is to blame? We could conveniently point the accusing finger at public prosecutors who are not vigorously enforcing the law; we need men and women of courage and conviction in these offices of public trust, if the awful tide is to be stemmed. But while one accusing finger is pointing toward those who make or enforce the law, another may point to us who may be equally to blame.

Fortunately, what is deemed legally obscene is partially determined by local community standards. We as citizens, by our own standards, are the ones who can help establish what offensive materials are—which ones are legally obscene—and cannot claim protection from the law. Unfortunately, many people assume that even hard-core pornography is legal because it is so prevalent. But that is not true. Some public prosecutors may excuse themselves from seeking enforcement of obscenity laws by explaining that community standards determine what is obscene. They therefore conclude that because the community tolerates such material, its presence must reflect the accepted community standard. Concerned citizens—you and I—can change this misunderstanding.

What, then, is needed to reverse this ominous insult to us, to our families, and to our communities? Only when men and women concerned for their families and communities let their voices and their influence be felt in thoughtful, rational ways will we alter the destructive course on which we are traveling. Silent indignation may be misinterpreted as approval. Irrational action may be ineffective because it is regarded as prudish rather than thoughtful. Albert Camus wrote: "By your actions or your silence, you, too, enter the fray."

May I suggest a few things we could do to halt this deadly evil:

James, the apostle and the brother of our Lord, wrote: "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation. . . . Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man" (James 1:12-13).

Let us discuss with our children of appropriate age, and in sensitive ways, the harmful effects and addictive nature of such material. Let us rigidly monitor the selection of television programs, movies, videocassettes, music, and other forms of entertainment for our families. Let us foster in our homes a love of knowledge through uplifting literature, wholesome books, carefully selected movies and television programs, classical and exemplary popular music, entertainment that uplifts and edifies the spirit and mind.

If appropriate, let us approach the management of offending stores, movie theaters, bookstores, television and radio stations, with a request to withdraw indecent materials from public display or use or patronage. Of course, such efforts should be consistent with the constitutional process, exercising gentle persuasion.

Some nationally owned and franchised convenience stores and others have responded to the courteous request of their customers to discontinue selling certain degrading materials. We commend them for what they have done and would encourage others to follow their lead.

"There is a line of demarcation," said President George Albert Smith, "well defined, between the Lord's territory and the devil's. If you will stay on the Lord's side of the line, you will be under his influence and will have no desire to do wrong; but if you cross to the devil's side of the line one inch, you are in the tempter's power, and if he is successful, you will not be able to think or even reason properly, because you will have lost the Spirit of the Lord" (quoted in Kimball, Miracle of Forgiveness, 232). As a man soweth, so shall he reap.

May we strive continually to purify our personal lives, strengthen our homes, and recognize the evil forces that are working through insidious ways to thwart our eternal progress.
