David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

25

The Sacrament: A Divine Obligation

I wish everyone could grow up in a small town. I have so many happy memories of my boyhood. During those delightful summer and winter days, we created most of our own activities and amusement. They were wonderful days.

The most important building in our town, in addition to the schoolhouse, was our ward meetinghouse. The chapel had an imposing, two-tiered, elevated stand. The first or lower tier had a table for the ward clerk at one end and a piano at the other end, and right in the center of this elevated area was the sacrament table. On the highest level of the stand were the pulpit, with a red plush cover, and beautifully carved chairs with red plush seats for the bishopric or visiting authorities. On the rear wall of the chapel were two impressive oil paintings, one of the Kirtland Temple and the other of the Salt Lake Temple. Everyone in attendance had a clear view of the stately pulpit and, of course, the sacrament table.

Sacrament meetings were very special occasions. The Lord instructed that "it is expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus" (D&C 20:75). We of the Aaronic Priesthood knew it was special. We were well trained. We knew exactly what we should do. We had been taught at home and in our quorum meetings of the high honor placed on us as holders of God's holy priesthood, which authorized us to perform sacred ordinances of the gospel.

As a deacon, I vividly recall how we admired the two priests, seated up on the first level of the raised platform, who would administer the blessing on the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Everyone in the meetinghouse could see them. I'm sure the two priests felt the importance of the occasion. They were neatly dressed in their best clothes and were well prepared. They acted and looked as dignified as members of the bishopric, who were seated in their special chairs above them.

As deacons and teachers, we sat on the first row, prepared to pass the sacrament. I recall how shiny the bread trays appeared, and how the glass cups for the water sparkled. Everything about the sacrament table, including the linen, was immaculate.

Everyone was expected to sing the special sacrament hymn. Everyone did sing. Children were trained not only to be reverent but also to know some of the words of the most familiar sacrament songs. I can still see Sister Ella Jack, who led the music, standing in full view between the sacrament table and piano. Before the hymn started, she would pause and look over the congregation to be sure everyone had a hymnbook and was ready to sing. She gave special attention to see that the Aaronic Priesthood boys had hymnals. We would all sing.

We were learning in our youth that in order to feel of the Spirit, we must experience a change in our hearts, and in order to be in harmony on this sacred occasion, we had to sing the sacrament hymn. As we sang the words, our souls were better prepared to understand this sacred ordinance. At the Last Supper the early apostles joined with the Savior in singing. Matthew records, "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives" (Matthew 26:30). As we young boys would sing in sacrament meeting, the message of the words would be impressed upon our hearts. There comes to one's soul heavenly thoughts as he joins in heavenly expressions coupled with heavenly melody.

After the sacrament song had been sung, the priests knelt on a little red velvet bench and offered the blessings on the bread and the water. We didn't have printed cards, but the Doctrine and Covenants was open to section 20, if needed. There were no microphones or speakers. The priests were taught to read slowly and distinctly and to enunciate clearly so that everyone might hear and understand the words of these sacred prayers, every word of which was given to us by the Savior himself.

Our quorum advisers schooled us in priesthood meeting on the sacredness of the ordinance of the sacrament: about how our thoughts should be of the Savior, about his sacrifice for us, about the importance of our dress and appearance, and about this quiet opportunity to resolve in our own minds to do better in keeping all of the commandments.

We would watch carefully as the priests officiated in a sacred procedure somewhat similar to the very first such occasion, and listen as they recited the divinely directed blessings upon the bread and water in remembrance of the flesh and blood of our Savior. Every word in the sacrament ordinance is vital. All who attend the sacrament meeting should clearly hear each word and reflect upon the covenant being made and on their own personal worthiness.

The ordinance of the Lord's Supper was introduced by the Savior himself, as recorded by the Gospel writers. Elder James E. Talmage wrote:

"While Jesus with the Twelve still sat at table, He took a loaf or cake of bread, and having reverently given thanks and by blessing sanctified it, He gave a portion to each of the apostles, saying: 'Take, eat; this is my body.' . . . Then, taking a cup of wine, He gave thanks and blessed it, and gave it unto them with the command: 'Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.' . . . In this simple but impressive manner was instituted the ordinance, since known as the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The bread and wine, duly consecrated by prayer, become emblems of the Lord's body and blood, to be eaten and drunk reverently, and in remembrance of Him" (Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983], 553-54).

This holy ordinance was later taught by the Savior to the Nephites in the Western Hemisphere. After teaching and healing their sick, "Jesus commanded his disciples that they should bring forth some bread and wine unto him. . . . He took of the bread and brake and blessed it; and he gave unto the disciples and commanded that they should eat. And when they had eaten . . . , he commanded that they should give unto the multitude."

He instructed, "Give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name. And this shall ye always observe to do, even as I have done, even as I have broken bread and blessed it and given it unto you. . . . And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you. And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these things. And if ye shall always do these things blessed are ye, for ye are built upon my rock" (3 Nephi 18:5-6, 11-12).

This weekly opportunity to partake of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, one of the most sacred ordinances of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is further indication of his love for all of us. Associated with the partaking of the sacrament are principles that are fundamental to our advancement and exaltation in the kingdom of God and the shaping of our spiritual character. We should reflect in our own week-day conduct the spiritual renewal and the commitments made on Sunday.

We all have regrets for words or deeds or thoughts from Sabbath to Sabbath that we would like to erase from our souls. Perhaps we have erred against or injured someone. If there are ill feelings in our hearts, we should repent, obtain forgiveness from those affected or transgressed against, and then humbly, with contrite spirits, prepare ourselves to be worthy to partake of the sacrament. If we sincerely repent, we can be forgiven and spiritual healing can come to our souls.

By revelation, the Lord instructed that "the members shall manifest before the church, and also before the elders, by a godly walk and conversation, that they are worthy . . . —walking in holiness before the Lord" (D&C 20:69). He also taught: "Ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily" (3 Nephi 18:28). Some years ago Elder Melvin J. Ballard wrote: "I am a witness that there is a spirit attending the administration of the sacrament that warms the soul from head to foot; you feel the wounds of the spirit being healed, and the load being lifted. Comfort and happiness come to the soul that is worthy and truly desirous of partaking of this spiritual food" (Crusader for Righteousness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], 133).

During the administration and passing of the sacrament, those present have the opportunity to think of the precious gifts available through the Savior's sacrifice for each of us, for the sacrament is blessed and sanctified so that each may partake of it in remembrance of him (D&C 20:77). We have the opportunity to reflect on his life; to recall with deep gratitude and reverence his example of purity, kindness, and love; to reflect upon his great atoning sacrifice; and to partake of the symbols of his torn flesh and his blood that was shed on the cross. He taught the Nephites, "I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; . . . that I might draw all men unto me" (3 Nephi 27:13-14).

As we partake of the sacrament and reflect upon his sacrifice for each of us, we make a solemn commitment to keep the commandments he has given us; by so doing, we might always have his spirit to be with us. By partaking of the sacrament each Sunday, we receive the encouragement and strength to keep the commandments of God, to live uprightly, virtuously, and honestly. He himself summed those commandments up as follows: "Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself" (Luke 10:27).

This is what every person who partakes of the sacrament is committed to do. Living God's commandments obligates each of us to a life of goodness and to exclude from our lives hatred, enmity, immorality, selfishness, drunkenness, jealousy, and dishonesty.

May we experience the joy of regular attendance at sacrament meeting and feel the blessings of eternal progression in our personal lives through wholehearted compliance, in spirit and actions, with the sacred words of the sacrament. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Reading the experience of others, . . . can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], 324).

The sacrament is one ordinance that allows us to experience a personal relationship with God and enlarges our knowledge and understanding of him and his Only Begotten Son.

Our personal reward for compliance with the covenants and obligations in the ordinance of the sacrament is companionship of God's Holy Spirit. This is the light that leads to eternal life. The divine virtues associated with the partaking of the Lord's Supper are (1) keeping his divine life ever in mind; (2) loving him with all our heart, might, mind, and strength; and (3) laboring to bring to pass his ultimate purpose—the eternal life of man.
