David B. Haight, Light unto the World ( 1997)

26

Seek Ye First the Kingdom of God

I am thankful for good music and for the influence of good music in our lives. When we sing "For the Strength of the Hills" (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 35), I think of the strength that I have felt throughout my life—the strength that we receive by being faithful, obedient members of the Church. Living as we should becomes our strength of character.

My grandfather had been living in Farmington, Utah, for a few years before he and his family were asked to go out into south-central Idaho and help settle a new community to be named Oakley. My father, Hector, was a teenager when they moved. My mother, Clara, was a teenager living in Tooele, Utah, when her father was asked to move to Oakley and build the first flour mill there. And so Hector and Clara fell in love out in that little Idaho town.

When it was time to be married in 1890, they didn't ask where they would be married and what they would do. They knew what to do. Oakley is about 180 miles from the Logan Temple, but my parents went to the Logan Temple from that little town to be married on 15 May 1890. I've often wondered how they made the trip. Imagine one of the old double-seat surrey buggies without any sides on it, pulled by a team of horses.

I don't know how many were in the company, but if you would imagine a modern automobile—with its steel top, glass sides, heaters, radio, comfortable seats—by the side of that buggy, you would see a great difference. Imagine those young people with some of their party organizing to travel 180 miles. It would take a week. They set out to make the seven-day trip to the temple in that buggy. They were without sleeping bags or winter clothing as we know it today, but they had clothing that was appropriate for that time, some blankets and quilts, and some flour sacks filled with food.

So when we sing about the strength of the hills, we should thank the Lord for the strength of where we are and who we are and what we believe in and how we live. Are the young people today wondering if it would be inconvenient for them to go a few miles to the Manti Temple or the St. George Temple or the Atlanta Georgia Temple or even to the Stockholm Sweden Temple or the Johannesburg South Africa Temple or wherever it might be? Picture in your mind what went on only a few years ago, and your travel to a temple will not seem so inconvenient.

My wife, Ruby, and I were married in the Salt Lake Temple on 4 September 1930. The next morning we went to see her mother on M Street in Salt Lake City to bid her good-bye. And as part of those tender moments, she fixed a little basket of food for us to put in the car. She said to me, "David, promise me that you'll take good care of Ruby." And I said, "I promise." I remind Ruby periodically that someday I'm going to see her mother again, and I hope I will be able to look her straight in the eye and say, "I think maybe I've done it."

Ruby and I were married the right way, sealed in the temple with its divine covenants and commitments that promote trustworthiness, faithfulness, devotion and dedication. Now, after more than sixty-five wonderful years, we look back on our time together and realize that it gets better as time goes on.

When Ruby and I left for California in 1930 in our little Model T Ford, we crossed Nevada going a hundred miles an hour on those gravel, washboard roads—thirty miles straight ahead and seventy miles up and down. We'd never been to California before, so when we finally made it to Lake Tahoe, that large lake looked warm and beautiful. I didn't know that it was icy cold under the first inch of water. We found a little motel and went in and put on our swimsuits. I wanted to demonstrate to her that she had married a real "he-man." We went on the pier out in the lake, and I thought it looked so wonderful. The sun was just going down. I dived straight down, to demonstrate to Ruby what a "find " she had made. As I dived through the icy water farther down, I thought I was a goner. I clamored to get out.

We had a wonderful time together as we drove on to Berkeley, California. We found a furnished apartment for forty-five dollars a month. But our second day, when I came home that evening, I discovered that my key wouldn't work in the door. I finally went to the manager and said, "I'm sorry, my key doesn't work." She said, "Oh, that's all right. Your wife has moved you." I said, "Moved us?" "Yes," she said, "we had another apartment that was five dollars less per month."

Ruby and I figured out one day that we have moved around the United States twenty-seven times. We moved to California on three different occasions. We moved to Illinois twice. We've moved back and forth and around. But out of that, we look back upon it all with joy. Now, with our three children and our fifty-plus grandchildren and great-grandchildren, we say, "What a wonderful life has been ours."

If we seek first the kingdom of God and live as we should, all the rest of life seems to fall into place and wonderful things happen. So as we look upon our family, we are pleased that all who could of our grandsons and some of our granddaughters have served missions. They all understand and can sing "I Am a Child of God" (Hymns, no. 301) and other wonderful songs of Zion. We're proud of them. Life is rich and full and wonderful. It all falls into place if we help it by the way we live.

As we reflect upon the sesquicentennial year of our pioneers' arrival, we remember their trek across the plains—the suffering and the living in the wagon beds and sleeping out on the ground and walking barefooted and burying the dead out on the prairie—finally to arrive in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, there to establish Zion. You can imagine how they would later sing, "Let the mountains shout for joy! / Let the valleys sing" (Evan Stephens, "Let the Mountains Shout for Joy," The Choirbook [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1995], 50).

We can do that now as we reflect upon our ancestors who were part of that trek and all that they have done in making the way for us and then envision the Church today. As we reflect upon what is happening throughout the world regarding the image of the Church, the growth, and the continued expansion of stakes and wards and membership worldwide into new countries, new areas, again we could sing with great enthusiasm, "Let the mountains shout for joy." Here we are, and the word is spreading the way it has been predicted and the way it should be done.

I'm getting old enough now that I just about span the twentieth century. Not long ago President Hinckley was talking about a dedication coming up in the year 2000. He said to me, "And I'm planning on your being there." I said, "I'll plan on being there." If I can make that date, I will be ninety-four years old, for I was born in 1906. That would give me 94 percent of the one hundred years of this century.

As I reflect upon the twentieth century and what I have learned, I would like to say something about what I have witnessed and what I have felt during that time.

In the year 1906 the population of the Church was about 360,000 people. There were fifty-five stakes. There were twenty-two missions. There were some fifteen hundred missionaries, as far as I've been able to calculate, which would mean about seventy missionaries per mission in twenty-two missions. The work was moving forward the year that I came into existence.

The story was told by my mother that on the morning I was born, on a Sunday, my father was quite proud. He was the bishop of the Oakley First Ward in Oakley, Idaho, and he went outside to announce it to one of our Scandinavian friends, Brother Petersen, who was walking by. My father asked him to come in and seen the new son. My mother said I was the homeliest little child she had ever seen. I was undernourished, wrinkled, and bald headed. And so Brother Petersen, after looking at me, said, "Sister Haight, do you tink he's worth boddering with?" Well, that was my entrance into the world.

And now from that time I've seen automobiles come into being, and the first airplanes. I've seen radio develop from a little crystal with a "cat whisker" to tune it, to the beginning of the modern electronics world. I remember that we would sit in the Idaho Power Company at night with a little radio and scratch with that little whisker, and we could get some terrible static. We thought we were tuned in to China because we couldn't understand what was going on.

As I think of the world that I knew when I was young, the basic values that we talk about were in place then. With all of the things that I've seen happen while I've lived upon the earth, nothing has come along to change those values. We now have the great ability to communicate as rapidly as we do and in the various ways that we do. We can travel faster—through the air, in automobiles, and so on—but the basics, the eternal principles, haven't changed a bit.

I was ordained a deacon by Bishop Adams, who took the place of my father when he died. My father baptized me, but he wasn't there when I received the Aaronic Priesthood. I remember the thrill I had when I became a deacon and held the priesthood, because I had been taught in a simple way that I had received the power to help in the moving forward of the Lord's program upon the earth. We receive that as twelve-year-old boys. We go through the ranks of the lesser priesthood—deacon, teacher, and then priest—learning little by little, here a little and there a little, growing in knowledge and wisdom. That little testimony that we start out with begins to grow, and we see it magnifying and building in a way that is understandable to us. We can feel the magnitude of it as we start to grow up and prepare for manhood.

Speaking of preparing for manhood, I was a man by the time I was twelve because my mother expected it of me. She was not looked upon as a widow; she was my mother, with the responsibility to rear, to teach, and to train us and to help us prepare for life. And so I would say, remember the simple, simple basics that we learn from the beginning, that we're taught in the scriptures.

Starting with Adam, the basics were upon the earth, and with the development of mankind, and the speed of automobiles or airplanes or communication, none of those gospel basics has changed. They're still in place. We have to learn to obey the simple, basic rules of the gospel.

The gospel is true, and it will move forward to fill every corner of the earth. People will have an opportunity to hear with their own ears that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. Of him I testify.
