Humor f Bible ory Candidates for the offiCe of the antiChrist

the Da The beast and his mysterious number have led to all sorts of speculations throughout

history about who the Antichrist might be. In retrospect, many of these identifications have

seemed quite ridiculous—a fact that should cause us to hesitate before suggesting that

someone might be the Antichrist today. A few of the many candidates have included:

when Constantius persecuted orthodox Christians and favored congregations that denied the

deity of Jesus. Athanasius also seems to have expected a final, future Antichrist.)

the Antichrist.” Not surprisingly, the pope did not respond positively to this missive.)

leon” into a series of numbers that add up to 666.)

“Hitler” adds up to 666.)

of a head wound.)

Hebrew adds up to 111, 666 divided by six.)

looked like a six if you stared at it long enough.)

tempt.)

wound that seemed fatal.)

“CVTE PVRPLE DINOSAVR.” Extract the Roman numbers, add all the numerals together

[C+V+V+L+D+I+V], and the result is 666.)

were 666.)

let’s face it, haven’t we all wondered about this one when using Control/Alt/Delete to restart a

frozen computer that’s running Microsoft Windows?)

World Wide Web is the Antichrist. The Hebrew equivalent of W is the letter vav, which does

double-duty in Hebrew as the number six. It’s been suggested that vav-vav-vav would equal

666—but it really doesn’t. Hebrew gematria has no notion of “tens place” and “hundreds

place.” So “WWW” results in the number eighteen (6+6+6), not 666.)

This is just one page from Rose Guide to the End-Times Prophecy, is an easy-to-understand overview. It helps ©2012 Rose Publishing. You may print

you go through the key portions of Scripture and explains different ways that Christians have interpreted them. 10 copies, but do not post on the internet

Simple charts and illustrations help you see the whole picture. ISBN 9781596364196. Save $5 on your $25 or send via email.Your friends may sign up

for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Newsletters

order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Four Views of the End Times

DVD Series

This six-week study shows four different Revelation

time lines and tackles Dispensational Premillennialism,

Postmillennialism, Historic Premillennialism, and

Amillennialism. For each view, Four Views of the End Times

includes a definition, supporting Scriptures, a time line of

the view’s popularity, and a sampling of Christian leaders

supporting that view.

Book 9781596364127

Temple

Pamphlet

The full-color, glossy 12-panel pamphlet covers the

Tabernacle in the wilderness to the Temple. built by King

Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod’s Temple, the one Jesus

knew so well. Each of the Temple furnishings are explained

in detail, as well as their functions, purposes, and the

meanings they have for believers today.

End-Times Prophecy

Pamphlet 9781596360013

Jesus talked a lot about the end of time and his second

coming. These are key teachings that every Christian

Rose Guide to The Temple

should know. So why don’t they? is an easy-to-

Book

Rose Guide to the Temple is a full-color overview of the

understand overview. It helps you go through the key

Temple, with more than 100 images, charts, diagrams,

portions of Scripture and explains different ways that

photos, and illustrations, many of which have never published

Christians have interpreted them. Simple charts and

before. Rose Guide to The Temple is a clear and easy-to-

understand examination at the temple and contains clear

illustrations help you see the whole picture.

plastic overlays and stunning posters that no other Temple

guide has. It covers the span of time from Abraham to

Book 9781596364196

modern day.

Book 9781596364684

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
