Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

Brigham Young At Home—1

LIFE WITH FATHER

The Brighton resort is a lovely little valley perched high in the mountains some 4000 feet above Salt Lake City. The road for the greater part of its thirty miles winds up between sheer mountain precipices, and it was a difficult matter indeed to traverse that rocky way with the cumbersome wagons and oxen or mule teams of the sixties. It was no jaunt for a day's pleasure, this trip to Brighton. When the people went they bundled beds, babies, and provisions into their wagons for a stay of several days. Nevertheless, it was a favorite place for the Mormons to meet in celebration of the Utah state holiday, the anniversary of the day when a band of pioneers had first entered the barren valley and gazed upon it with mixed feelings of hope and consternation as my father, Brigham Young, uttered the momentous words, "This is the place."

On the day of my birth, July 23, 1860, a company of the Saints had made the customary trip to Brighton, and they had no sooner reached their destination than word was brought to Father that my mother had taken ill. To the great disappointment of his people, who felt that no gathering of any sort was complete without their leader, he turned around and went immediately back to the city in order to be with Mother during her ordeal. As I was his fifty-first child, the birth of a baby was far from being a novelty in the family, but his consideration for each of his wives, or any other member of his family, was such that he would willingly forego any pleasure of his own if he could be of any comfort or assistance to them.

Throughout my childhood and early girlhood I had the opportunity of being closely associated with my father. This was somewhat unusual, because in a family as large as ours, consisting as it did of nineteen wives and fifty-six children, it was not possible for each member to spend a great deal of time with him. It was my happy lot to do so because Father had his sleeping room and always ate his breakfast in the Beehive House, which was the home of my mother and her family exclusively.

Let me give you some idea of my father. No child ever loved, revered, and cherished a father more than I did mine, but how could I do otherwise, knowing him as I did? My mother looked upon him as the embodiment of all that was good and noble. He had the affection and tenderness of a woman for his family and friends. He was good to look at, and I fail to recall an instance when he was not immaculate in person and dress. He had well-shaped hands and feet, a clear white skin, and blue eyes—the kind that radiate love and tenderness—and a mouth that was firm, commanding the respect of all with whom he came in contact. Few could resist the wonderful personality that made him so beloved of his people. He was of medium height, rather large, with beautiful light brown curly hair, a high brow that was broad and intelligent, a long straight nose, and a chin that denoted character and firmness.

Each day of my childhood stands forth in my memory as one long round of happiness. The family used to eat an early breakfast, but I always waited until ten o'clock when Father had his, so that I might be served with him. In those days he wore quite a long beard, and it was my duty to tie a bib over it in order to protect it from stray crumbs.

I suppose one of the principal reasons why I enjoyed having my breakfast with Father was because he always had the things I liked. To be sure, there was corn-meal mush and milk, which was no great treat, but there were also hot doughnuts and syrup, codfish gravy which Mother was very adept at making and which Father loved, squabs from the pigeon house, and some little delicacy from our own garden. Brother Staines the gardener was a genius at making things grow under glass, and the first and finest strawberries or other fruits of the season naturally found their way to Father's table. His only hot drink was composition tea made from herbs and spices.

We seldom enjoyed our breakfast in peace, for there was invariably a stream of people calling to see Father about something or other, since he was not only their spiritual leader but their adviser in many temporal problems as well. I rather liked having them come in, however, for they certainly brought a variety of stories and problems. Perhaps there had been an encounter with the Indians with a sad loss of property or even lives. In his efforts at extensive colonization Father had sent settlers to remote parts of the state, and in some instances the savages had become so troublesome that the whites were forced to abandon their new homes. I must confess that I was more excited than grieved when I heard that the redskins were on another rampage.

During the summer months there were frequent reports of the progress of immigrant trains, and if they were in a weakened condition, as was not unusual after their long journey, fresh teams and supplies would be sent out to meet them. Missionaries were constantly being sent out "in the world" to preach the gospel, and this necessitated the arranging of many details, financial and otherwise. The poor of the city would come with their problems, and statesmen would call to pay their respects, but whether it was a poor woman with her tale of sorrow or an important man of affairs, Father received them all with the same consideration and respect and gave them all the help within his power.

After breakfast he would sometimes delight me by saying, "Daughter, go tell Brother Squires to come and barber me," and I would run quickly across the street to the little barber shop on the corner where the Federal Bank Building now stands.

Brother Squires would return with me, bringing his bottles of bay rum and sweet-smelling hair oil, the curling irons, and the big calico cloth to cover over Father. We would all go to his private room for the "barbering," and after Brother Squires had singed the hair (Father never allowed it to be cut as he said it made the ends bleed) he would give me a nice little sprinkle of cologne or bay rum as he finished his work. After a time he left the shop near our home and moved over on Main Street, and when I went over there to have my own curls trimmed I would take in payment a small pail of buttermilk, of which he was very fond.

After he had finished with the barber, Father would usually go to his offices to work until dinnertime, and here, of course, I did not care to go, but sometimes an immigrant train would be arriving, and then I was always eager to accompany him to the tithing office grounds where the wagons would come to rest. When he went out he wore a rather high hat, a Prince Albert coat, and either a green cape or a grey shawl over his shoulders. In the summertime he wore light cream prunella cloth suits—sack coats and trousers, with white shirt and neck cloth and a panama hat. I realize now the wonderful laundry work that went into those suits. They looked like a piece of satin. I remember them so distinctly perhaps, because when they were discarded Mother would make of them little white jackets and skirts trimmed with white braid for my "best" wear.

The tithing office (where in early days the Saints used to bring one tenth of all their produce for the Church) was in the same block as our home, and where the Hotel Utah now stands. The entire block was surrounded by a high cobble-rock wall, and to a big yard within this enclosure came the weary, travel-stained men, women, and children upon their arrival in the city. The covered wagons that had been dragged for long months over plains, high mountain passes, and through deep rivers, bulged at the sides with most of the earthly possessions of the owners, while underneath were strung buckets, kettles, and other odds and ends.

Many of these people had come from the "old country" and could not speak a word of English, but how their faces shone with unutterable joy and thanksgiving of having at last reached "Zion"! Father never left the grounds until every family was comfortably located, for the night at least. The Bishop of each ward was assigned a quota of immigrants, and it was his business to see that they were given a start of some kind in beginning their new home in the West. The settlers who had come previously were always most generous in opening up their homes to the newcomers, having a vivid memory, probably, of the time when they were sorely in need of such hospitality themselves.

Mother always used to say that everyone who didn't have any other place to go was sent to her. Certain it is that to our house came all girls who had arrived in Utah alone. Often they stayed to work for her, and as many of them had come from foreign countries I picked up a generous smattering of Danish, Swedish, German, and Welsh. It seemed that the girls learned the English language more quickly from us children than from any other source, and they reciprocated by teaching us theirs.

Some of these girls knew absolutely nothing about housework, having worked largely in factories before their emigration. I recall one girl who didn't even know how to sew on a button and, by way of contrast, another who knew nothing of any kind of work except the making of buttons, having been practically reared in a button factory. By the time Mother was through training them they were all good housekeepers, but about that time they would either get married or go to work for someone else. Many of these girls were married from our house.

On Saturday afternoons we would often go out to the warm sulphur springs for our baths. These springs were located about a mile west of our home, and Father liked to bathe there because of the medicinal value of the water. I suppose they brought him relief from the rheumatism from which he sometimes suffered. Father, Mother, my young brother, and I would go in the carriage known as the "victorine." It was really only a light, covered wagon but it had deep springs and was very comfortable. My parents and brother sat in the rear seat while I sat up in front in great dignity with Black Isaac.

Black Isaac, who was Father's first coachman, was a negro who had been one of the servants of the Prophet Joseph Smith. After the assassination of the Prophet he had joined Father's household and had come out to Utah in 1847 with the very first company of pioneers. I believe his wife came in a later company.

Although there was a great deal of prestige attached to the honor of riding with the only colored coachman in the city, and while Isaac had been places and seen things the likes of which no one else could or would tell me about, still I should really have preferred being with the other children in the wagon which was drawn by Jimmy Campbell and the blind mules. Jimmy was a demure little fellow who worked in our barns and who spent his spare time sitting out in the shade knitting socks for his numerous family. There was not much supervision, and consequently there was likely to be rather a hilarious time in the wagon, and I longed to take part in it.

The bathhouse was built with a large pool in the front part of the building and a number of small private pools in the rear. These latter were really no more than large, square-shaped tubs, being about six feet long and four feet wide. They were built of wood which had become very dark from the mineral in the water, and they were elevated a few feet from the floor so that one could stand on a step made of small wooden cleats and conveniently let the water drip off.

Father never went in with the public but used one of the small baths in the rear and also had his own private entrance. I had no scruples about mixing with the others; in fact, the more people I have had around me the happier I have always been, but Mother invariably made me accompany her to another of the small pools. Here again my pleasure in the trip was diminished, for Mother thought that the primary purpose of a bath was to get clean. While I was being duly scrubbed I listened with deep yearnings to the splashings and delighted screams of the children in the front pool.

We would arrive home from the baths just in time to prepare for dinner which was served at 4:30 in the Lion House and a trifle later at the Beehive House.

The Lion House, in which lived the greater number of my father's families, was built in 1856. It was so named from the carved stone lion which rests above the main entrance. The architect was Truman O. Angell who was also architect for the great Mormon Temple, but Father designed the Lion House and supervised the details of the building very carefully. He had learned the trade of carpentry as a young man, and the results of his knowledge are evidenced in such fine features of the home as the easy stair treads and graceful banisters—quite perfect for sliding upon, except that such an undignified procedure was never allowed in the presence of Mother or the "aunts," and it was extremely difficult to find the great central hall entirely free from grown-ups.

Another feature of the building that we children enjoyed, whenever we could without interference from the wives, was the dumb-waiter that was used to carry food, coal, kindling, and other supplies from one floor to another. We used to have grand rides up and down, one at a time for the larger ones and two at a time if we were very small, but woe to the youngster who was caught on the waiter when someone wanted to send a load of kindling up to her apartment. She didn't wait long enough to find out whether it was her child, or not, before she administered a healthy spanking.

There were usually about twelve families living in the Lion House. When the families grew too large to live there comfortably they were moved to individual homes, although I recall that Aunt Emmeline lived there at one time with her brood of nine, which can scarcely be called a small family. One wife lived in Provo, one at Forest Farm, and another at St. George in southern Utah, where Father usually spent his winters because of the mildness of the climate.

There were three floors in the house, with a long hallway running straight through the center of each. On the upper floor were twenty bedrooms, where the childless wives and the older boys and girls slept. Each bedroom had its own picturesque dormer window, many of them had fireplaces, some had stoves, and all were cozy and comfortable.

The middle floor held the apartments of the wives with small children and the parlor or "prayer room" as it was quite generally known. The floors were the Early American which have recently become popular again, and the woodwork was of native pine painted so skillfully that it is still beautiful today. At the front entrance was a glass vestibule which kept out the cold drafts of winter.

The basement floor was perhaps the most interesting of all. On the west side was the large dining room, where some fifty members of the family sat down to every meal. Can you imagine all of those children watching eagerly to see who would get the first piece of pie? Beyond the dining room were the butteries, kitchen, and laundry.

The laundry was a far cry from the modern affair of today where the housewife has nothing much more to do than turn on a switch. At one end of the room was a brick fireplace where the water was heated in huge brass caldrons. Two large barrels stood along the wall. In one was stored the water for the washing which was softened with wood ashes in lieu of lye or other commercial softeners. The other was used for washing blankets and quilts, and the work was done with a wooden pounder, or "dolly," as we called it in that day. There were high shelves for such aids to superior laundering as homemade indigo blueing and homemade potato starch. Each wife had her separate washday so that there was washing going on every day of the week except Sunday. If one of the wives was ill, however, another was always more than willing to come to her aid or put the additional washing in with her own.

There were always plenty of men around to lift the clothes, bring in the water from the pump in the back yard, and assist in every way possible. Father was most considerate of his womenfolk and would not allow them to do any work that could be done just as easily by hired help. The large baskets, which held the piles of snowy clothes, had mostly been made by the Indians and traded to us for food. There was an excellent drainage system for the disposal of waste water, for Father was very particular about sanitation. He never would allow the men to milk the cows until they had washed their hands. I suppose that is one of the reasons why there was so little sickness among us.

The wives also used to take their turns at ironing, but this was done at night by two or three of them so that they could go through the house occasionally and keep a lookout for fire at the same time. During the following day when these women slept, their children would be cared for by some of the other wives.

One wife had entire charge of the kitchen with as many girls as she needed to help her. After the Golightly Bakery was opened on Main Street we used to buy all our bread there in order to save the members of the family from that particular work. My own mother, who was an excellent cook, presided over the Lion House kitchen from the time it was built in 1856 to 1860, a few months after my own birth, when she moved to the Beehive House and was succeeded by Aunt Twiss.

On the east side of the basement hall were the stone-flagged cellars where ice, butter, milk, eggs, meat, and vegetables were kept. There was a ventilating system which connected the cellars so that the air was always fresh and sweet smelling. Next was the weaving room with its great spinning wheel and weaving loom for the making of blankets and carpets. Neither the wheel nor the loom was ever idle for any great length of time, and very fine articles they turned out too. I cut up some of our home-woven blankets and used them for my own babies for many years. They were much softer than any I could purchase at the stores.

At the north end was the schoolroom where Aunt Harriet Cook taught the children of the family for many years. Later it was turned into a recreation room and was the scene of merry entertainments during the long winter evenings. Father had a small platform erected for our dramatics, and many a fairy princess and valiant knight, dressed in costumes pieced together from four and twenty bedroom closets, tripped back and forth to the admiration of brothers, sisters, and mothers. There were large steel hooks upon the wall for the pulling of molasses or vinegar candy and a small stove for the popping of corn. There were never any dull moments in our family, I assure you. What one child couldn't think of, several others could, and Father never left anything undone that could add to our happiness.

The outside of the Lion House was finished in cream plaster, which with the white woodwork and green shutters made a very lovely combination. It was beautiful to me then, as now, and I never stand within its rooms that I do not hear once more the echo of happy childish voices and gaily tripping feet.

It seems strange to many that this co-operative idea of living could have been so successful among our families, but Father believed that it would have been feasible, even, to extend the plan to include the entire community. In one of his sermons in the Tabernacle he said that he would like to see houses built for a group of one thousand people and having one central eating place. Then instead of a woman having to get up and "fuss around a cookstove she would have nothing to do but go to her work." The dining hall he had in mind would seat five hundred people, and his idea of serving them was a rather quaint version of the modern roteria. He suggested that if a person at one end of the hall wanted a beefsteak he could telegraph his wants to the kitchen and the order would be conveyed back by means of a small railroad. When everyone was through eating, the dishes were to be slipped under the table and run back to the ones who washed them. Knowing that dishwashing was a job that all the women in the community would avoid, he suggested that "a few Chinamen could do that." He concluded by saying that "half the labor necessary to make people moderately comfortable now, would make them independently rich under such a system."

I must not leave the Lion House without a word about our splendid gymnasium. Along the full length of the west side of the house ran a huge porch, and here Father had placed every contrivance available in that day. We had horizontal ladders and straight ladders, horizontal bars, back boards to straighten our shoulders and make us walk upright, jumping ropes, wands, hoops, roller skates, wooden swords, dumbbells, swings, and big balls to kick and roll about. We had regular teachers to instruct us in gymnastics, fencing, and solo dancing. It was probably because of our training in dancing that the girls of our family were in such demand for "fairy" or ballet dancers when the Salt Lake Theatre was opened. Needless to say, we adored our gymnasium, and besides all the fun we had we gained poise and developed fine, strong bodies. The roof of the porch was used for sleeping quarters by the older boys and girls in the summertime when the upstairs rooms with their single dormer windows were likely to become rather warm.

Holding almost as high a place in our affections was the family swimming pool, or "fount," as we called it. It was located just back of our schoolhouse and was about twenty feet square and four or five feet deep. A clear stream of water from the near-by canyon supplied the water which ran in and out again by means of small troughs. The water was warmed only by the summer sun, but it was always quite comfortable. At least, I never remember of anyone's staying away from the pool on account of the water being cold, as long as his mother would allow him to go in. Our bathing costumes were made with an eye to modesty rather than beauty and consisted of linsey dresses and pantalettes for the girls and shirts and overalls for the boys. Incidentally, the "fount" was used also for baptismal services.

Our bathhouse was made out of an old discarded band wagon which had benches along the sides. Father had a roof put over the top, pegs put along the sides for our clothes, and drainage holes bored in the bottom. With these few alterations it made an admirable dressing room.

I have been asked several times if there were not an underground passage near the Lion House which was used by Father and others to hide in during the raids against those who were practicing polygamy. I feel reasonably sure that the rumor came from the fact that at one time a large canal ran under a portion of Father's property. I know that when my sister Mira built her home just north of the Beehive House it was necessary to have brick arches constructed in the foundation for the canal water to flow through. The old canal has been abandoned for many years, but the arches still remain. I have heard recently of someone's discovering this canal and concluding that it was a secret passage, but in following its path a complete barricade of earth and bricks was encountered which was impassable. So falls to earth another absurd and sensational chapter about these historic homes and my beloved father. But to return to the house and its people. About seven o'clock in the evening Father would go to his room, light a candle in the tall, brass candlestick, come into our sitting room across the hall, and say quietly, "Time for prayers." No matter what we were doing or who was there, we dropped everything and followed him through the long narrow hall and into the parlor of the Lion House. Uncle Joseph Young and Uncle Lorenzo Young, who lived near us, frequently came in to join in our family prayers and would often be sitting in their places in the parlor when we arrived.

Father would step to the glass cupboard, take down the prayer bell, go to the door, and give three distinct rings. After a moment he would put the prayer bell back and take his place by his brothers in the center of the room. In a very short time the patter of feet would be heard in the long hallway upstairs and down, and the children would come tripping in to be followed by their mothers with a more sedate tread. Father and his brothers sat on the west center part of the room. On their right, in an honored place, sat Aunt Eliza R. Snow, and on around the room were the rest of the family, each wife having her own place with her children about her.

Father usually discussed the topics of the day, and then we would all join in singing some familiar songs, either old-time ballads or songs of religious nature. Finally we would all kneel down while Father offered the evening prayers. One distinct phrase in his prayer I shall never forget it so impressed my childish mind was—"Bless the church and Thy people, the sick and the afflicted and comfort the hearts that mourn."

One night after we had all been seated Father took out his pocketbook and drew from it a sheaf of crisp, new ten-cent bills. He called all the children about him and handed a bill to each one. It looked like a hundred dollars to me, for we saw very little actual money, all of our needs being supplied for us. From that time on I never missed evening prayers if it were at all possible for me to attend.

After the prayers the members of the family would disperse to their apartments, where the younger children would be put to bed and the wives perhaps visit with one another in their various sitting rooms. During the winter evenings we would pop corn or make molasses candy, always saving a plate of the latter for Father if he were absent, as he was very fond of it. Ernest and Art, my brothers, would get a pan of snow over which the candy could be cooled very quickly. Then it was great fun to snap it between one's teeth. Father liked to eat the fresh popped corn in a bowl of rich milk, and he also loved sugar candy, which he would often ask my sister Fanny to make.

After Arbogast opened his candy store on First South Street, Father would have Mother put a white earthen bowl in the center of a napkin and tie the four corners over the top. Then he would send me off with it over my arm like a basket to Brother Arbogast with the words, "Tell him I want fifty cents worth of stick jaw but I want him to wash his hands before he breaks it." When I returned, Father would take a portion, put it in the oven to soften, and then we would all "fall to." My, how good it was! Real "store" candy.

Whenever anyone went out for the evening, he took his own lamp and placed it on a table near the glass vestibule. Upon his return he carried the lamp back to his own room, and the one who returned to find but one lamp burning on the table locked the door for the night.

On Sunday evenings the older girls were permitted to entertain their beaux in the parlor. The oldest members of the group became rather famous as the "Big Ten," because there were just that number who seem to have grown up about the same time. There was only the one large parlor for them to entertain their young men in, and twenty did seem rather a large number when there were only four corners, so, one evening, the happy suggestion was made that some semblance of privacy might be obtained by turning down the coal-oil lamp that stood on the table in the center of the room. A second thought was that the light might be more effectively dimmed by placing a barricade of books around it. The main idea, anyway, was to get rid of the light, so everyone lent a hand, and soon there was but one shaft of light that played upon the ceiling where no one minded it. The couples then went back to their chairs and the sofa, which seemed so much more cozy in the semidarkness.

All went very well for a time until the door slowly opened, and there stood Father with a candle in his hand. He gave one look around the room and then walked to the table where he removed the books one by one until the proper light shone forth on faces that would have preferred the darkness for a different reason now. Then turning to the very much subdued group, he said, "The girls will go upstairs to their rooms, and I will say good night to the young men."

He could be stern when occasion demanded but he was the wisest, kindest, and most loving of fathers. His constant thoughtfulness for our happiness and well-being endeared him to all of us. The bond between my father and me was as close as if I had been his only child, and I am sure that each of the other children felt the same way. I shall always be grateful that I was born his daughter.
