Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

2—Brigham Young At Home

THE BEEHIVE HOUSE

The only home I ever knew, until six years after my marriage, was the Beehive House. No matter where I go or where I live, this will always be my real home, for it holds the memories of my father, mother, brothers, and sisters, and is enshrined in my heart as a place where love and perfect harmony existed.

The home was undoubtedly planned in Father's mind through happy memories of the beautiful colonial buildings in Vermont, his birthplace. Being a natural architect, he was largely responsible for the plans of the house, assisted by Truman O. Angell, an architect of great ability. It was somewhat smaller than the Lion House, and the two of them were joined together by a hallway and by Father's offices.

To me, the Beehive was the more beautiful of the two houses. It was a large square house with white pillars reaching to the second story in true colonial fashion. The thick adobe brick walls were plastered and then kalsomined in a pale yellow. The large windows were adorned with lovely green shutters, and the big front door was of solid oak with a silver doorknob.

Considering that it was built in the midst of a wilderness and now stands in the center of a modern city, it has not been greatly changed. The green shutters have gone, I am sorry to say, and the rear part of the house has been raised to a full two stories, but other than that, it appears, from the outside, much as it did when it was built in 1854. The original front door now stands on the east side and with it the quaint doorbell that used to peal forth at night, when all the house was still and dark, with a most startling effect.

The house was first occupied by Mary Ann Angell Young, who lived there until 1860 when she moved to the White House, and Mother, with her seven children, moved over from the Lion House. She boarded all the men who worked upon the estate, usually about eighteen in number, as well as the girls who assisted in our home. Father never allowed us to call anyone who worked upon the place "servants." They were always "the men or girls who helped with the work." The Beehive House was also used for entertaining distinguished visitors who came to our city, or any other guests to whom Father wished to show hospitality.

Because it was built largely for entertaining, the rooms were spacious and beautifully furnished. There were two parlors, one upstairs and one down, both on the southeast part of the house. The lower room, which also served as our sitting room, was charmingly decorated with the walls in a soft green shade, lace Nottingham curtains at the windows, and an ingrain carpet on the floor. It was here that Father always ate his breakfast.

The upper room was the more elegant of the two and was called the "Long Hall," and with a length of fifty feet, it was truly "long." It had a fine coved ceiling ending with beautiful plaster moldings. The furnishings included two Lady Franklin stoves, chairs, two large couches, which could be put together to make a bed—and frequently were at conference time—white lace curtains with rose lambrequins on gold cornices, and a pale grey carpet decorated with bunches of roses and green leaves. Not the least of its attractions were the large looking glass in its gold frame with the basket of flowers underneath fashioned from colored shells, and the two chandeliers fitted with their coal oil lamps.

Through the length of the house on the main floor ran a wide hall which was painted in blocks about fifteen inches square to represent Tennessee marble. On the other side of this hall, just opposite to the sitting room, was Father's bedroom. It was a fine, light, airy room, exactly sixteen feet square. For the greater part the furnishings were simple but well-built pieces made by William Bell, our cabinetmaker, a washstand, secretary, and a few comfortable chairs. At the head of the bed was a small table with a carafe covered with glass and his high brass candlestick with a box of matches.

A wall cupboard on the west side was always a point of interest to me because, from its recesses, I could usually depend upon Father to produce rock candy, a few raisins, or some other delicacy for the pocket of my apron. The walls were painted in a subdued pink, and during cold weather a fire always burned in the Lady Franklin stove. A door on the west side opened into his private offices.

From the front hall a long staircase led to the upper floor, with a landing at the end of the first flight. On the wall by this landing hung a large picture measuring about eight by ten feet and made of dark yellow parchment framed in oak. It was divided into squares, and in each square was a pen drawing representing some part of the story of the Bible. It had hung there for as long as I can remember, and when we moved from the Beehive House, the "Bible Picture" was left behind as it was too large to take into any house of ordinary proportions.

There were two stairs from the landing, one of which led to the second floor and the other to an inside room used for closet purposes. The only light in this room came from a tall, narrow window with fascinating tiny panes of glass which opened out looking down directly into the front hall. Whenever I went into this room, I loved to imagine that I was a fairy princess imprisoned in a tower and waiting breathlessly for my rescuers. In time I would hear some knight's step below me, but usually it would be my brother Feramorz calling that Mother wanted me for something or other.

Another door on this same landing led to a lovely bedroom called the "Blue Room," and the third door led to the southwest room, which was mine. It was directly above Father's room and had the same proportions, sixteen feet square. The walls were painted pink, and the woodwork painted to simulate bird's-eye maple and done so well that the paint still remains after more than eighty years. On the south wall was a large window reaching to the floor, which we used as a doorway to the big porch that runs the length of the front of the house. In summer we had our beds here, sheltered from the east sun by canvas curtains. In later years, when I grew up to young womanhood, and the boys would come at midnight to serenade me, this porch was a most convenient place to step out onto, listen to the songs, and thank the serenaders. I would gather my "wrapper" close around me and stand in the shadows of the veranda while the romantic ballads of the seventies floated up on the night air.

A humorous incident of the porch and serenaders comes to my mind. We had a young girl staying with us by the name of Lottie Claridge, who was teaching in Father's schoolhouse across the street. When I heard the boys singing, one night, I went to the back hall and called to her to come out. After they had gone, I took her back to the hall and asked her if she could find her way to her own room. She said, "Yes," and so I left her and climbed back into bed. I was just dozing when I heard a voice faintly calling my name, "Clint, I'm lost. I'm against something warm and afraid I will fall."

I went back to the hall and asked her what was the matter, and with tears in her voice she begged me to come and help her. I lighted a candle and went back to her. Shall I ever forget it! She had walked forward until her foot struck something, then she had stepped up, found herself against a very warm wall and was afraid to step off for fear she might fall. The step was her steamer trunk in front of the big kitchen chimney, which was warm and had terrified her. When I had rescued her, we both sat down on the trunk convulsed with laughter, but Lottie never went adventuring through the halls in the dark again.

From the second floor the stairway became a spiral leading to the attic, two small rooms with large half-diamond-shaped windows on the east and west ends. One of these I used for a "studio," after I became interested in painting. Under the sloping roof of this third floor hung great bunches of Black Prince grapes, which Mother would put there in the fall of the year to dry and use for raisins.

Atop the house is the square pedestal on which stands the large beehive which gave the house its name. It was undoubtedly suggested by the state's first being known as the territory of Deseret, meaning industry, of which the beehive is a worthy symbol.

Behind the sitting room on the first floor were two small rooms, a buttery and a bedroom, then a large dining room known as "the men's dining room," because the workmen on the place were served there, and beyond that the big kitchen with its tin-lined sink, tall cupboards reaching from floor to ceiling, and the great range, almost constantly in use.

At the north end of the house was the family "store" kept by John Haslam. The store had a private door that opened into the back hall of the Beehive House, but to my knowledge it was never used by anyone but Father. The rest of us used the outside door on the east. In this store were kept staples, notions, drugs, dried peas and apples, calicoes and candy. Naturally, what stands out in my memory is the candy kept in large, square jars. I used to go into the store with a small piece of cotton cloth and ask John to please put a few drops of cinnamon oil on it. Then I would take out raveling by raveling and chew it. It was like eating cinnamon candy, a flavor which I love to this day. Whenever I would go into the store alone, John would give me a lump of white sugar. He was very good to me, and I shall never forget him.

Each wife had her charge account here, as well as one at the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, the leading dry goods store of the city, where fancier items could be purchased than those carried in the little family store at home. As far as I know the wives were not limited in either account, although I suppose they knew enough to keep their purchases within reasonable bounds.

Whenever I wanted a list of things from the town store I would go to Father rather than to Mother for permission to get them. It was a trifle easier to obtain his consent, and he didn't bother to scrutinize my list quite so carefully as Mother did. One day I brought for his approval a long list of things that began with "corn plasters." Father glanced at it and then smiling at me quizzically said, "Well, daughter, if corn plasters is at the top, I guess the rest of it must be all right, so just go ahead." Thereafter I put everything I could think of on my list before I brought it to him.

Downstairs was only the cellar. But such a cellar! Will I ever forget those cupboards filled with huge stone jars of preserves, the swinging milk shelves with the ten-quart pans and the thick cream that I loved to see Mother skim with a skimmer and not a spoon, the stone floor that was so pleasantly cool in the summer and the big, highly polished stone slab on the long table where Mother made huge batches of piecrust. There was a wonderful smell to that cellar that can never be approached in the modern cement basement.

In spite of all the help that Mother had, it seemed that there was always some corner of that house that demanded her attention. Usually my own days were quite carefree except when housecleaning time came around, and no one was too young or too small to escape that cataclysm. All the rooms in both houses were covered with carpets, some "store" products, but the greater number of them home woven, and every spring all of those carpets had to come up and be cleaned. Mother used to take hers up in the fall as well because they had so much wear. Oh, for one good vacuum cleaner in that day! After the carpets had been cleaned, fresh straw was laid upon the floors, and the carpets tacked down again. This was where the work for us younger children came in. We would go to the tannery, get small pieces of leather and cut them into tiny squares. Then when the men tacked down the carpets, we handed them a piece of leather to put under each tack so that the carpet would not come over the head of the tack.

There was no season for the sewing of carpet rags. The womenfolk were eternally at it. It was their fancywork, and many an afternoon or evening the wives would gather in one sitting room and the older daughters in another while their nimble fingers cut the rags, sewed them, and wound them into large balls. Later the balls would be taken down to the weaving rooms in the Lion House and made into the really beautiful carpets that covered most of our floors.

Altogether, the Beehive House held fourteen rooms, but in spite of this, what with emigrants and visitors, we were always crowded to capacity. During "conference" time, when great numbers of the church membership gathered in Salt Lake for this semiannual event, we were practically crowded out. Every house in the city had an overflow of relatives and friends, in the early days, and we were certainly no exception to the rule.

I especially remember Brother Fishburn's choir members who used to come down from Brigham City, twenty-five strong, to sing at the meetings and to sleep in our beds. In order to make room for them, Mother would put us children out on the "deck" to sleep. The deck was the attic above the hall that connected the two houses and was used only for storing books containing church records. The women of the choir invariably brought along a number of new babies but, as they always took them off to church with them, I didn't mind that so much as having to give up my bed.

They couldn't have known my real feelings toward them, for they were always most cordial to me. On one occasion Brother Fishburn invited me to go up and sit in the choir seats. Mother demurred, saying, "I don't believe she had better go today—she isn't dressed up very much." No such delicacy of feeling bothered me, however, for, looking the crowd over coolly, I replied, "Oh, I don't know. I think I look about as well as the rest of these people do."

All the laundry work for the Beehive House was done in a little one-room building just west of the outer cellar door. I can not remember when Sister Barker did not wash and iron for us. She was a dear little old lady and used to tell me stories of her former home in England, all so different from this new country. I was usually on hand bright and early to watch her begin her day's work. The fire was always ready when she arrived, and the big copper boiler would be full of boiling water which had been softened with wood ashes.

Sister Barker's hands used to fascinate me, as she worked, they were so big and strong and the water made them so crinkly. She would take basket after basket of snowy, white clothes and hang on the line and then, after all the better clothes were washed, would gather up the blankets and quilts, put them into a big barrel, and pound them with the old dolly until they were clean. She would change the water frequently by pulling a plug out of the barrel to let the water out, and how I loved to see that stream pour like a foamy waterfall into the square hole in the floor into which all the waste water was run.

The little house was also used for other purposes. When the boys would go out shooting rabbits, they would bring them back to the laundry to clean and skin them before handing them over to Mother to be cooked. She never used any part except the hind legs, and I couldn't bring myself to eat even that, but the boys considered rabbit a great delicacy.

My brother, Feramorz, together with Richard W. Young and Heber J. Grant, frequently used the laundry room for making ice cream. Each boy furnished part of the "makings" and Mother showed them how to cook the custard, in which art they became quite expert. After it had cooled they would put it into a pail with a tight lid, set this within a larger pail, and cover with salt and ice. Then they would take turns twisting and turning the inner pail until the cream was frozen.

Of course I never had any part in this procedure, but would sit on the back steps patiently watching and waiting until the lid was raised and a spoonful taken out for "sampling." I would usually get a chance to lick the spoon, and that was about all. I was not very popular with the boys, nor were they with me. I do not think I should have liked them any better, at that time, had I foreseen in Heber a future president of the church, in Richard W. a brigadier general, and Feramorz an honor student at Annapolis.

Near the laundry house was the old pump that supplied all the water for the two houses. That pump handle was going from morning until night, and I daresay there was cause for that groan that issued each time the handle was raised.

Disposal of waste was quite a problem for so large an establishment, but it was handled with every regard to the best in sanitation that was possible in that day. Near the kitchen door was a large box six feet square, sunk about nine inches in the ground, with an outlet in the bottom that emptied into the cesspool. It was several years before we had running water in the house and pipes for waste water, but at that we had them long before they were in common use. At the rear of the two houses was an ash pit built with a rock wall about four feet high. This was emptied once a week after a good wetting down. Great quantities of lime were used for any refuse that could not be carried away from the place. In order to keep the house free from mice, Father had a small square opening left in the foundation on the east side so that cats might come and go at their will. He would never permit a dog or cat in the house, but kept a fine dog, Queenie, up at the barn.

Back of the Beehive House were the many buildings where the work went on that supplied our daily needs, and each has its pleasant memories for me. The old carpenter shop at the corner of canyon road was filled with wonderful shavings—full of life and sunlight, it seemed to me. Mother would send me with a sack to gather some for lighting the fires, but before putting them in I would go through them very carefully and pick out the long ones to use for ringlets. I was sure they really looked like golden curls hanging down my back, and I would trudge home with my sack, quite proud of my find.

Nearly every morning I would go to the pigeon house for two pigeons for Father's breakfast. Brother Hamilton Park, our overseer, would go up into the loft, bring them down, and wring their necks. I always turned my back and shut my eyes while this was going on, then I would take them by the legs, very gingerly, and carry them home to Mother who would make them into a dainty dish.

A rod or two north was the shoeshop where old Brother Reiser sat all day long making or repairing our shoes. I wore these homely shoes all during my childhood, but didn't mind as I knew nothing better. Brother Reiser was a gruff old person with a Welsh accent, but I rather liked visiting him because I could always depend on his giving me a piece of shoemaker's wax to chew. I was very careful never to let Mother or Father see me chewing the wax, for I knew quite well that they would disapprove very vigorously. I can't imagine now how I ever liked the dreadful stuff but I know that in those days I much preferred it to the spruce gum the boys would bring home from the canyons.

Beyond were the blacksmith shop, the flour mill, the barns, corrals, the gardens, and the schoolhouse. To the north was what we called the "upper garden," a fine orchard of apple, peach, black walnut, and pear trees. The garden and the schoolhouse were in such proximity, and the ripe autumn fruits so tempting, that a high board fence had to be built in order to keep the children outside and the fruit inside. Even this was not sufficient to keep out the big boys, so an added protection was provided in the shape of a big, bald, live eagle, who seemed to realize fully that it was his duty to patrol the garden. The eagle, I must say, proved quite effective.

I seldom visited this garden without my father unless I was holding on to Brother Staines's hand for old "Baldy" certainly made me nervous as he looked at me coldly with his eagle eye. The beehives were also located in this garden, and bees have never been any respecters of persons. However, the gardener was always most kind to me, and if I didn't dare venture inside he would bring a choice bit of fruit to me at the gate.

The other workmen around the place were equally kind, and especially do I remember the rides I enjoyed here and there on the shoulders of old Daddy Sewell who milked the cows. He was a great fellow over six feet tall and had a queer mop of light, curly hair—almost corkscrew curls, they were so long. He used to go from the barn to the Lion House with a large pail of milk in each hand and with me astride his shoulders. We must have made a great procession with old Queenie, the dog, bringing up the rear. Anyway, they were the grandest rides I ever had.

Of the entire place, the spot dearest to my heart was the corner where the old discarded stagecoaches were kept. Here, the sisters who were near my own age and I played with our dolls and had "theatres" during the long summer afternoons. There was always a bit of discarded finery in some closet or other that we might acquire for costumes, if we begged hard enough, and the dolls made a patient if unresponsive audience.

Life for us was one continual joy. There were so many of us to plan picnics in the hills, picking wild flowers, hunting pretty mossy places to play with our dolls, and build houses with sticks and stones, that the days never seemed long enough to do all the things we planned. Our play dishes were mostly gathered from broken dishes discarded from the kitchen, or sometimes a bit of looking glass, and what was lacking we supplied with little molded bowls made of good clean mud and baked in the sun. I had a great passion for pretty rocks and pebbles and used to fill my pocket with them, much to Mother's annoyance, as the weight often pulled and tore my skirt from my waist.

Mother's great pride was the garden that enhanced the Beehive House and lent its fragrance to the air throughout the long summer days. It was fenced off with lattice work standing about three feet high, and we children certainly respected that bit of choice ground. One beautiful cherry tree heavily laden with snow-white blossoms stands out in my mind. How I longed to pick some of those blossoms to put into a vase, but such action was strictly forbidden until the blooms became full-grown ox-heart cherries. Memories of the privations of pioneer life were still too vivid to permit of such wastefulness. Some of the lilac bushes my mother planted still stand by the east wall. Near the small gate was the loveliest locust tree I have ever seen, which my grandmother Harriet Page Decker Young had planted in the ground, where she first camped, from seed brought from Nauvoo. All summer long its gracious branches shaded our kitchen door. I was heartbroken when this tree, with its sacred memories, was cut down.

In the big "upper" garden fruit and vegetables grew in abundance. We had several gardeners to take care of this garden, but when the time came for picking the fruit, which must be cared for quickly after it had ripened, the families were called on the job.

During strawberry time the different families were notified of their days for picking and the portion of the patch assigned. When our turn came Mother would put every child and maid available to work, because she needed so many for her large establishment. She would have ten-quart pails, baskets, and cups ready the night before, and by 4:30 in the morning we would be wending our way to the garden, two good blocks from our house.

We would pick into the cups and when they were full, empty into the larger baskets. I would go on ahead and pick the biggest ones, never suspecting that I didn't do a full share of the work. This part was fun, but walking home later in the hot sun decidedly was not, and after breakfast there would be those pails and pails of berries to be picked over. After eating them in the patch for three hours, I would lose my taste for them, and the hulling would be real work. I remember saying to Mother one day, "I hope I never see another strawberry as long as I live!" I am thankful that kind Providence did not take me literally at my word. Mother would cook gallons of them into jams and preserves, and, of course, we had all we could use fresh on the table with lovely thick cream.

Mother's shortcakes were without an equal, and we all just loved them—Father especially. As long as the berries lasted, we would have our days for picking and we also had appointed days for working in the peas, raspberries, and cherries.

When the peaches were ripe everyone was sent to the bowery—a large open-air affair with a roof made of branches—to dry peaches. The men would bring them in from the orchard in bushel baskets for us girls to cut, stone, and lay out on clean tables to dry in the sun. Some of the folks would leave the peelings on, but Mother was very particular and would never allow us that privilege. She was also very careful to have her peaches covered with mosquito netting. It used to look as if there were acres and acres when they were all spread on the tables in the sun.

Sometimes we would add a little variety to the monotony of peach drying by making "peach leather." This strictly original product was made by mashing the peaches to a smooth pulp, adding some sugar, and spreading the mixture out in thin layers on a clean cloth. When dried it would be cut into pieces and made a very delicious "chewy" concoction.

In one part of the garden was a big cellar where vegetables were stored. One day Father's manager sent two of his boys up there to sprout potatoes. After a time the attention of one of the boys wandered from the potatoes to a number of kegs that were stored in the rear of the cellar. "I'll bet there's cider in those kegs," he remarked to the other. The brother agreed that the kegs probably held cider but couldn't see what difference it made to them.

"I'll show you," said the more ingenious one and, going out, he returned with a number of full-grown onion tops. The next step was to find a keg with a plug in the top that could be withdrawn, and when this had been accomplished both boys lay on top of the barrels and drank cider through the onion reeds until they actually rolled off. For once in their lives they had all the cider they wanted and more than they could manage with comfort.

There was something wonderful to me about the upper garden. Its beauty, the nearness to the mountains, the sparkling streams of water, the getting together of the different families—the older ones telling their experiences and we children planning for our play hours. I do not seem to remember any great hilarity and believe now the reason was the indescribable influence of Father's private burying ground, which lay on the east hill just beyond the garden. Several of our family were buried there and we could see the head boards or stones from where we sat under the bowery tending to our fruit. Sometimes Father would drive up through the garden to see how things were coming along and to try out the flavor of those wonderful peaches and pears. His influence was felt constantly. He was so affectionate and understanding that we always looked forward to his coming among us and partaking of our pleasures and fun.

The entire estate was surrounded by a cobblestone wall nine feet high, with gates placed at convenient intervals. Father had a threefold purpose in having this wall constructed. In the first place it was built as a protection against floods. The stream from near-by City Creek Canyon at times swept down the street and was capable of doing some real damage to the garden and of flooding the basements of the houses. The second reason was that employment might be furnished for the emigrants until permanent work was found for them, and finally the wall was useful as a protection against the Indians who were still troublesome during the fifties and sixties.

Each member of the family had his own key to the gates, for they were kept locked after a certain hour in the evening. Just in front of the office was a guardhouse where someone was always on duty to keep out intruders and maintain a sharp lookout for Indians as long as that procedure was necessary.

The main entrance to the estate was the "Eagle Gate," so named from the large wooden eagle which stood guard on its pinnacle. The eagle was designed by Truman Angell and carved by Ralph Ramsey from five blocks of wood: one for the body, another for the neck, two for the wings, and the fifth for the beehive upon which it was mounted. The whole was held firmly together by pieces of iron. At that time there was no way to get through to City Creek Canyon, except through Father's grounds, and so his permission had to be obtained by the settlers when they wished to drive through the Eagle Gate and on up to the canyon for firewood.

There was a legend in the old days that every time the eagle heard the noon whistle blow, he would leave his perch, fly straight down State Street to the old wooden watering trough, get a drink of water—or something, and fly back again. I sat many a time with my feet in the carriage house stream, waiting for the bird to fly, but apparently I was always called to dinner at the wrong time, for I never had the pleasure of seeing him in action.

When the street under the eagle became city property, the old bird was left in peace, but when the street had to be widened for the use of electric cars, it seemed that he was about to be doomed, since there was not room for the cars to pass under the arch. We were all most anxious to preserve our old friend, and my brother Don Carlos, who was then church architect, drew plans showing how the gate could be enlarged and still remain as a loved landmark.

The eagle had grown somewhat dilapidated under the snows of thirty years, so it was sent east to be rejuvenated with a beautiful copper covering. He was reinstated with appropriate ceremonies in 1891 and was stuffed with numerous papers and relics before resuming his position as guardian of the gate and our loved home.
