Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

3—Brigham Young At Home

FATHER'S WIVES

I believe that a finer group of women never lived together than my father's wives. They co-operated with one another to a remarkable degree, and to each one of us children the "aunts" were almost as dear as our own mothers were. I loved them all with good reason, for they all treated me with the greatest affection.

Much has been said and written about the great ingenuity my father displayed in organizing and directing the migration of the Mormon pioneers to the Rocky Mountains—the greatest trek of its kind ever undertaken in this country. I believe that he displayed a resourcefulness almost as great in keeping contented and happy more than twelve wives under one roof. For happy they really were. Undoubtedly at times there were small frictions and jealousies, but they very seldom showed on the surface, and our home was as peaceful and serene as any home could be.

They cared for one another's children, they gathered together to sew rags for the carpet which one of them might be in need of, they shared their joys and sorrows with each other. Where one was weak, another was strong and gladly gave of her strength to the weaker one. Just one instance of helpfulness that might have been a common, everyday occurrence. The families were coming down Big Cottonwood Canyon one day where the way is very steep and where the river rushes along by the edge of the road over huge jagged rocks. In one of the wagons a lively child of a year or so escaped from its mother's arms and fell from the side of the wagon into the rushing stream below. Aunt Martha, who was riding with father two wagons ahead, happened to see the accident, and quick as a flash she leaped from her place down into the stream and saved the child who would otherwise surely have been dashed to a sudden death among the rocks.

The harmony that existed in the Lion House, however, could only have been brought about by very careful planning and directing. All the wives had equal rights and privileges and each was, in turn, expected to do her share in keeping the establishment running smoothly. Each wife took care of her own apartment and her own children and assisted in doing other necessary work around the place.

Those who had no children—of whom there were several—naturally took a heavier part in the running of the entire establishment, such as supervising the cooking or working in the weaving and spinning rooms. Each one worked, also, according to her talents. While Aunt Zina and Aunt Eliza gave much of their time toward building up the church, Aunt Twiss was queen of the kitchen in the Lion House and Aunt Susan Snively managed the home at dear old Forest Farm.

For this reason it is very difficult to attempt to write impartially of Father's wives, for while some of them were energetic in doing public and church work, others were very quiet and retiring, and I cannot hope to do justice to this latter group. All of them had many fine characteristics and sterling qualities.

While I knew all of the nineteen wives who survived at Father's death, space will permit my giving sketches of only a few of them.

Too much honor cannot be paid to Mary Ann Angell—"Mother Young"—who shared with Father all the poverty, trials, and persecutions suffered during the early days of the Church before the Saints came to Utah. The wife of Father's youth had been Miriam Works, who had died at an early age, leaving two little girls. On her marriage to father, Mary Ann Angell took these children to rear and bore a large family of her own besides. They had been married only a short time when Father volunteered to go with the men of "Zion's Camp" to take help and supplies to the suffering Saints in Missouri. He was gone for several months, and during this time she supported herself and the two little girls entirely by her own efforts.

During the early days of persecution in Kirtland, Ohio, she was alone a great deal of the time while Father was forced to flee and remain in hiding for his very life. Many times she stood by in fear and anxiety while apostates and anti-Mormons searched the house for her husband. Finally the persecution became so severe that he fled to Far West, Missouri, where she followed later as best she could with the five young children—the two girls of Miriam Works and the three of her own which had been born to her by now.

They found conditions in Missouri no better than they had been in Ohio. Their lives were being continually threatened, and finally they were driven out entirely and forced to make their way back to the banks of the Mississippi River. This journey from Far West to the Mississippi was one of the most heartbreaking ever undertaken by the members of the Church. It rained and snowed a great part of the way, and often the ground was so low and swampy that they walked through mud up to their ankles. Very seldom did they have adequate shelter wherein to spend the night. By the time they reached the river the rain had turned to snow, and they made their beds for the first night on the riverbanks with six inches of snow on the ground and without even the comfort of a fire, which they found impossible to light.

Throughout this terrible journey, Mary Ann did not even have the help and protection of her husband the greater part of the way, for he left his family eleven times in order to return with teams and help others who were in a still worse plight than themselves.

They had no sooner reached the river than Father was called, along with the other apostles of the Church, to go on a foreign mission to preach the gospel. It never occurred to any of them to question this call. When Father left he was so ill that he could not walk, without assistance, the thirty rods to the river to embark on the boat, and Mary Ann was just recovering from the birth of a baby then only ten days old.

Mary Ann Angell came of the strictest Puritan parentage, and naturally the introduction of polygamy was a great trial to her, as it was to my father. He tells of standing by the grave of one of the departed brethren and wishing that the lot of the dead man were his own. The burden of polygamy seemed harder than the hand of death. Nevertheless, they both accepted the principle as coming from a prophet of God, and when Father was married to the other women who became his wives before the journey west, it was with the full consent of Mother Young.

She bore all the trials and hardships of the exodus with true courage and bravery. During the first winter she remained with the Saints in Winter Quarters near where Omaha, Nebraska, now stands. She now had seven children to care for, but, in addition to this burden, her benevolence to the poor was such that it was remembered for years afterwards. During her first year in the Salt Lake Valley she lived in a little hut close to the "log row" where Father's other wives and children had their home until better quarters could be provided. In later years she lived in the White House, a beautiful and spacious home about a block east of the Lion House.

Naturally the one who stands out foremost in my memory is my own dear mother, Lucy Decker Young. She was truly a wonderful character, as many others besides myself could testify. She had been given a rigorous New England training in her childhood, rising at five o'clock with the other members of the family in order to have the housework done by seven and be ready for the "real" work of the day—spinning, weaving, sewing, and making soap and candles. She said that she never remembered seeing candlelight at night. When darkness came, they went to bed. She often remarked that when she had her own family, none should be forced to arise at any certain time. They should have their required or natural sleep and, as I remember, she held to this resolve as far as it was possible to do so. It was probably because of her early training that she was such a marvelous housekeeper and was able to accomplish such an extraordinary amount of work in later years.

Mother became Father's first plural wife when she was married to him in June, 1842, four years before the journey to the West was begun. At the time the first company came she was ill and unable to travel, but in September of the next year, 1848, she made the journey to Salt Lake. As she and her baby weighed less than one hundred pounds they were allowed to ride in the wagon most of the way. Most of the company walked.

That same wagon box was her first home in Utah for many months. In after years it was made into two tables, which are now in my possession. She then moved to the old fort, where nearly all the pioneers lived during the first year in the valley in order to have protection from the Indians. Her next home was in the log row, a row of rooms built in the form of the letter L and made of logs put together with mud plaster. All of Father's families, with the exception of Mother Young, lived there at that time, and one room was used as a schoolroom for the children. Later Mother moved to an adobe house where the Church office building now stands and from there to the Lion and Beehive Houses. Father gave her the title to the Beehive House on the condition that no matter what his reverses or financial conditions might become she would never mortgage or give him the home, and she never did.

I never heard her complain of the long, hard trip across the plains, but rather she expressed thankfulness that she was permitted to come to Utah and deemed worthy to cast her lot with the Saints in the wilderness, as it indeed was at that time.

The picture of Mother as I remember her in my childhood days is a very lovely one to me. She was of medium height with beautiful brown eyes and hair as fine as silk. As I think back, I never remember her with her hair untidy or uncombed. She used to part it in the middle, comb it down over her ears, then braid it in about eight or nine strands and loop it up at the back in a soft "bob," as it was called then. She had two dimples in her cheeks, and her smile to me was adorable. She did not have a beautiful nose, but a nose that seemed to fit in with the rest of her features and that made it seem just right. Without exception, she had the loveliest, whitest skin I have ever seen and pink cheeks that added to her charm.

Besides taking care of her own family of seven, she boarded all the men who worked on the estate, and the number of meals alone that she served in one day would have been enough to stagger a less valiant soul. The hired men had their breakfast at seven and were away to their work before the family breakfast was served at eight, just early enough to allow the children to get ready for school. At ten o'clock Father was served and at noon the men, and the family again ate separately. Two suppers in the evening finished the day's meals unless Father had special guests in later, which he often did. Of course there were always two or three girls helping with the work, but still Mother did a good share of it herself. She thought nothing of making fifty mince pies at one baking or of freezing ten gallons of ice cream.

Sometimes I was amazed at the things Mother was called upon to do in the way of managing the home and preparing big suppers for Father's guests. When I said something of this to her one day she replied, "If your father wasn't the most wonderful man in the world, I couldn't do it." She adored Father, but there wasn't a jealous hair in her head. Some of the other wives undoubtedly were jealous at times, although they had no reason to be, for Father treated them all just as much alike as he possibly could, but Mother never was. She had previously made a most unhappy marriage, and the contrast between that and her later happiness was so great that she appreciated it to the fullest extent.

In spite of the many demands upon her, she always had time to do the little personal things for me that a child loves. She would brush my curls and make adorable little dresses for me of pink or blue delaine. Even my underwear bore fine embroidery that must have taken many hours of her time.

Some of my fondest memories of Mother are in connection with our weekly bath night. The Saturday night bath has come to be something of a joke in this day of built-in bathtubs and running hot water, but even a weekly bath was no small accomplishment in the sixties. The boys would bring the water from the pump in the back yard and fill the big copper boiler which had been placed on the kitchen stove. Then the big washtub was brought in, and as soon as the water was warm it would be transferred from the boiler to the tub and the boiler refilled until all seven of us had taken our turn in the washtub.

After we were all through we would go into the big front room and draw chairs up to the stove. Mother would take me in her arms, draw her blue, checked apron over my feet and legs, and rock me while she told us all stories. How I loved it! It was all very cozy and homey with the soft light from the fire and the lamp playing on the greentinted walls and Mother's sweet face. She told the same stories and riddles over and over again, always starting with the story of the "Golden Bull," but I enjoyed them just as much at the hundredth telling as I did the first time.

One of my most treasured keepsakes which belonged to Mother is the "Kensington tapestry," which came into her possession through a rather peculiar circumstance. During the days of the gold rush in California in 1849 a great many covered-wagon trains passed through Salt Lake City on their way to the gold coast. These people had sold or left all of their property in the East, believing that riches inevitably awaited them in California once they were successful in reaching that place. Unfortunately, a wagon in one of the trains caught fire, and nearly all of the contents were burned. The one small trunk which was saved contained a beautiful hand-woven piece of tapestry representing Mary and Jesus during the flight into Egypt. It measured five by three and one-half feet.

In despair over the plight of his family, the owner of the wagon came to Father and offered to sell him the tapestry for fifty dollars worth of food, enough to see them safely through to California. Food was still very scarce in Utah in those days, but Father knew that the family could not possibly go on without provisions so he bought the tapestry. It hung on the walls of the Beehive House throughout all my childhood days and came into my possession upon my mother's death. When it was nearly one hundred years old I had a glass covering put over it in order to give it better protection.

Aunt Clara Decker, Mother's own younger sister, was the wife who accompanied Father in the first company of 143 pioneers who blazed the trail into the Salt Lake Valley for the great number who were to come later. Because of this, she is often called "the pioneer wife." At first it had been though wisest to take only men upon this arduous journey, since not even their exact destination had fully been decided upon, but as Heber C. Kimball was not very well at the time it was necessary for his wife to go with him. Of course she did not care to be the only woman in the company, so two others came as well, Clara and her mother, Harriet Page Decker Young, who was at that time the wife of Father's brother, Lorenzo Young. My mother and Aunt Clara were, of course, her children by a previous marriage. Clara had been married to Father in 1844 when she was only sixteen years of age, and she was still but a girl in her teens when she first gazed upon her "home" in the Salt Lake Valley, a barren sagebrush waste with scarcely a green thing in sight.

I remember Aunt Clara best for her loving, sympathetic nature. She could have mothered whole multitudes if it had been necessary for her to do so. In addition to her own four children she reared the children of Margaret Alley, one of Father's wives who had died young and left two little ones. She also had under her protection at the Lion House her own younger sister, a woman and her son by the name of Farnham, and a young Indian girl whom they called Sally.

Aunt Zina D. Huntington was the "Doctor" of the family and a very remarkable woman in many other ways. She was one of the four wives of the Prophet Joseph Smith whom Father had married upon his death in order to give them his name and protection in making the journey to Utah. She was a very ardent member of the Church and had received many spiritual manifestations during the time she lived in Kirtland as well as in her later years. She arrived in Salt Lake with some of the very first companies and lived in tents and wagons until log houses could be built. She was the mother of only one child by Father, but she also reared the three children of Clara Chase, one of Father's wives who had died in childbirth.

One of the many practical experiments which Father undertook in the development of the commonwealth was the raising of silkworms, and Aunt Zina was placed in charge of this work for the Church. She had direct charge of a large cocoonery and mulberry orchard belonging to Father and raised the cocoons very carefully, attending to them with her own hands. A very good grade of silk was manufactured at this time, of which many pieces are still in existence.

She took a very active part in directing the women's organizations of the Church and traveled many times to southern Utah and other distant parts when such travel meant a journey of several days' duration in a rumbling wagon over rough roads. She was an eloquent speaker, and at one time when she delivered an impromptu speech at a mass meeting, a woman reporter wrote of the occasion, "I raised my eyes to her standing just before the table we were using. Suddenly, as though her words struck home like an electric shock, several gentlemen sitting at my right hand, clutching the arms of the chairs, started as though they would rise to their feet, their faces burning with the truths they heard, their eyes fixed upon her fearless and uplifted hands. I can never forget that moment. It was more than eloquence, it was inspiration."

In 1879, Aunt Zina made a trip to the Sandwich Islands where she did a great deal of missionary work and was received most enthusiastically. She was gone for two years and upon her return was met at the station by thirty ladies in carriages who escorted her to the Lion House, where a reception was held in her honor. In 1891 she was made vice-president of the National Council of Women. This was unusual, because it was in a day when honors were seldom accorded to Mormons.

It is as the "Doctor," however, that she is known best. She had very little training but had a great deal of natural ability which was put to use not only for our own family but for many others throughout the city. She officiated at the arrival of hundreds of babies, including all that were born in the Lion House. Many of the poor people of the city depended upon her for advice and comfort as well as for physical ministrations, and she seemed to have a never-failing supply of all three.

The medicines which Aunt Zina kept on her shelf were the common ones of the day—camphor, ipecac, hot drops (and whatever they were, they were exceedingly hot), mustard, and composition tea. In times of contagious diseases we wore around our necks the supposedly potent asafetida bag and hung sulphur sheets over the doorways. Raw onions in plates were sometimes kept around the rooms in order to absorb the poisons that might be in the air.

The composition tea was used by Father not only as a medicine but for his usual hot drink, since our religion teaches us not to use ordinary tea or coffee. I still drink it myself and have given the recipe to hundreds of friends. Here is Father's own recipe for it: 4 oz. each of ground bayberry, poplar bark, and hemlock; 2 oz. each of ground ginger, cloves, and cinnamon; and 1 oz. of cayenne pepper. I take a small bit on the end of a spoon, fill the cup with hot water, and use plenty of cream and sugar.

When Father was suffering with rheumatism, Mother would wrap his knees in red flannel, put the hot drops on them, and give him composition tea. I used to carry a small pail of it cold to the Tabernacle for him to drink in place of water when he was preaching from the stand. Some years ago one of my friends called upon me, and as she was somewhat chilled from the cold weather I made her a drink of the hot composition tea. It seemed to be just what she needed, or at least what she thought she wanted, and she drank so much that she became ill. Since then she has always referred to it as "Mormon Highball."

On the rare occasions when we needed a professional physician, old Dr. Bernhisel was called to the house. He had a peculiar belief that all food should be eaten without salt, and he not only practiced this queer notion himself but insisted that his family follow as well. Think of longing for just one pinch of salt when there were literally square miles of it in the valley! When poor Mrs. Bernhisel became so weary of saltless food that she could stand it no longer, she used to come to our house, and Mother would prepare a plate of good food for her, well seasoned with salt.

Naturally, healing by faith and administration was commonly practiced in our home since it is one of the principles of the Church. I sometimes think that Father must have had just a touch of superstition in his make-up, for at one time when my brother Fera had stepped on a nail, Father asked the boys to go out to the barn, find the nail, and bring it into the house. When they had done so he handed it to Mother saying, "Grease it well, Lucy, and keep it in a warm place and the foot will be all right." And in a short time the wound did heal. Perhaps by faith. Who knows?

Down at the lovely Forest Farm lived Aunt Susan Snively, associated in my mind with all the delicious things to eat that a visit to the farm invariably brought forth. Others of the wives lived there at various times, but I seem to remember Aunt Susan best so I suppose she must have been the superior cook. The farm was about three miles south of our home, and the road out was such a beautiful drive that we used to go out by the wagonload whenever we had the opportunity. Father was very proud of the farm and loved to take visitors out there, especially those from the East. I was always very careful to be dressed up and in the near vicinity on such occasions so that I often had the opportunity of driving out with them. I especially remember the day I rode out there in the company of the charming actress, Julia Dean Hayne.

A long lane with shade trees on either side led up to the house, which was a homey place with a gabled roof and a great porch that ran all the way around. Hollyhocks and roses bordered the porch, and a great profusion of other flowers grew in odd nooks and corners of the lawns. All of our butter, eggs, milk, and cheese came from the farm, and it must have taken a tremendous amount to supply an establishment the size of ours. The blooded stock was kept out there also, really breeders, I suppose, although we children never heard mention made of anything of the sort.

Another wife who was a wonderful housekeeper was Aunt Eliza Burgess. She lived in Provo for some years and kept a house there for Father so that he would have a place of his own in which to stay while he was making Church visits to that part of the state. I spent one entire winter with her in that delightful town, and a very pleasant winter it was too. She sewed many little pieces of dainty clothing for me when I was a child, and when I was grown she endeared herself still further to me by making my wedding cake.

Quite the opposite from these "homemaker" types of women was Aunt Amelia Folsom, whose elegance was partly responsible, I suppose, for the frequently circulated statement that she was Father's "favorite wife," a statement that was entirely without foundation. I loved to go to her room, because she had such beautiful cut-glass bottles of lovely-smelling bay rum and cologne which I might sniff to my heart's content. Her father had given her some very fine jewelry which she would permit me to play with on the floor. I would empty it all out of the box and then put it back in again, piece by piece, admiring each jewel as I did so and longing for the time to come when I would be grown up and perhaps have some of my own.

She was an accomplished musician, being able to play the piano and to sing, so naturally she was very much in demand at home entertainments. As she had no children and therefore had more time on her hands than some of the other wives, she used to put a great amount of beautiful handwork on her underwear. I loved her "modesty skirts"—short petticoats that reached from the waist to the knees—because they were so dainty with their crochet trimmings, and yearned for the time to come when I could wear them myself. In fact, I wore the queer things for years after my marriage simply, I am sure, because the desire had taken such firm root within me.

Aunt Harriet Cook was the schoolteacher of the family. She had received an excellent education in the East before she joined the Church, and when the Lion House was first built she taught the children of the family in one of the basement rooms which was completely fitted up for the purpose. She was also a highly skilled tailoress. I was a frequent visitor to her room as well as to Aunt Amelia's, but instead of giving me jewelry to play with, she would set me to work cutting carpet rags. She knew, I presume, that I would soon tire of this work and leave, which I would.

No one at the house appealed to me more greatly than Aunt Eliza R. Snow. She held a most honored place in our household and indeed in the whole community, for it is doubtful if the Church has ever produced any woman who was her superior. She was a plural wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith and had been crushed with grief at his martyrdom. Father had married her in Nauvoo but, although he always provided a home for her, she was his wife in name only.

Early in life Aunt Eliza showed great promise as a writer. At the time of the terrible destruction of Missolonghi by the Turks she wrote a poem commemorating the event that received a great deal of favorable notice throughout the literary circles of the day. Shortly afterward when the deaths of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson occurred on the fourth day of July, 1826, she was requested by the press to write their requiem, which she did, composing the poem of sixty lines in the short space of five days. Best known of all her writings, however, is the inspirational Mormon hymn, "Oh, My Father." She continued writing throughout her lifetime and published nine volumes after her arrival in Utah.

She was slight and fragile and always immaculate in dress. I see her now in her full-skirted, lace-trimmed silk dresses, with her dainty lace caps and a gold chain around her neck, looking for all the world like a piece of Dresden china. She always sat on Father's right at the dinner table and also in the prayer room. He valued her opinion greatly and gave her many important commissions, especially in relation to the women's organizations of the Church. Her numerous duties in this capacity earned for her the quaint title of "Presidentess."

Among the many duties which this fragile little woman undertook was that of establishing the "Woman's Cooperative Store and Exchange" at my father's suggestion. He remarked in his sometimes outspoken manner, "The women can take hold and do all of the trading for these wards as well as to keep a big loafer to do it. It is always disgusting to me to see a big fellow handing out calicoes and measuring ribbon. I would rather see the ladies do it. Let them do this business and let the men go to raising sheep, wheat, or cattle."

The Relief Society had first been organized in Nauvoo, Illinois, with the Prophet's wife, Emma Smith, as president and Aunt Eliza as secretary. When the work became general throughout the Church in 1866, the latter was made president and held the position for twenty-one years, a responsibility which entailed a great deal of traveling and executive work. One of the first Relief Societies organized was for the purpose of caring for and teaching the Indian women who were often hungry and nearly naked. It was called the Sisters' Indian Relief Society.

There is no doubt but what Aunt Eliza was also the power behind the throne in organizing the "Retrenchment Society," although Father is usually given the entire credit. She was very extravagant in her own mode of dress, invariably putting yards and yards of material into her skirts and trimming her gowns as elaborately as possible, but she could not bear to see a like extravagance in the younger generation, her feelings on the subject, indeed, amounting almost to fanaticism. I haven't the least doubt but what she was entirely sincere in the matter, evidently believing that what was quite all right for a woman of her judgment and experience would fill the heads of the young girls with vain and idle thoughts.

On one occasion Father had given each of the older girls a beautiful grosgrain ribbon sash some nine or ten inches wide. One of the girls, Phoebe, had laid hers out on the bed with her party dress in anticipation of an evening dance. When she went into her room just after dinner, the sash had disappeared, and naturally Phoebe was filled with indignation. Seeking out her mother on the verge of tears, she told of the disappearance, ending with the statement, "I know that Aunt Eliza has taken it." Her mother attempted to persuade her differently, but Phoebe was so sure that she waylaid Father in the hall on the way to evening prayers and made the same statement to him.

"All right, daughter, we'll see," Father replied mildly, and as Aunt Eliza came by on her way to the prayer room he stopped her and said, "Phoebe has lost a sash. Have you seen anything of it?"

"Yes, President Young," she said. "I felt that you wouldn't approve of anything so frivolous for your girls so I put it away."

"Sister Eliza," said Father, "I gave the girls those ribbons, and I am the judge of what is right and wrong for my girls to wear. Phoebe is to have her sash."

So peace and the sash were restored for that one occasion, but there came a time when Father called all of the girls into the parlor and announced that they were becoming entirely too adept in following the fashions of "the world" and that he would like them to modify their manner of dress. Flounces were to be curtailed, bangs were no longer to be frizzed, bustles were to be subdued; in fact, they were to retrench in all the vanities and frivolities of the world and set an example for the rest of the daughters of Zion to follow. To be sure the girls had been in the habit of loosening their tight skirts before they went into the prayer room so that the bustles appeared less conspicuous, but this was not enough. The bustles were to be permanently subdued.

A regular organization was effected called the "Retrenchment Society," and my sisters agreed, although with no great enthusiasm, to give up the frills so dear to the hearts of young and pretty girls.

This was not the first time that Aunt Eliza had trifled with the whims of Madame Vanity among the pioneers. During the fifties she had been a leader in an effort to stabilize women's dress in the territory, which had resulted in the Deseret Costume, a hideous affair consisting of bloomers and full skirts, without trimming, hoops, or trains. The costume was short lived, but it helped to pave the way for the society which was later formed.

Before long the group grew to include other young women of the city outside of our own family and in time to extend throughout the entire Church. Today it is a strong organization known as the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, but its aims have changed with the times and personalities, and now it deals largely with religious instruction and with directing the recreational activities of the young people of the Church.
