Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

Brigham Young At Home—4

THE UTAH WAR

The famous African explorer, Captain Burton, in his book The City of the Saints said in his description of Father: "Such is his Excellency, President Brigham Young, prophet, revelator, translator and seer—the man who is revered as king or kaiser, pope or pontiff never was; who, governing as well as reigning, long stood up to fight with the sword of the Lord, and with his few hundred guerillas, against the then mighty power of the United States, who has outwitted all diplomacy opposed to him; and finally who made a treaty of peace with the President of the great republic as though he wielded the combined power of France, Russia and England."

Captain Burton referred to the "Utah War," when through diplomacy, cunning, and not only one "act of God," but several, an army of the United States was kept out of the territory long enough for misunderstandings to become cleared and a great catastrophe averted.

This dramatic episode in Mormon history began during the July 24 celebration of 1857. Great numbers of the people had traveled through Cottonwood Canyon to the lovely resort at Silver Lake. The pilgrimage had begun early on the morning of the twenty-second, and by midnight of the following day, according to statistics, 2,587 people, 468 carriages and wagons, 1,028 horses and mules, 382 oxen and cows had completed the journey.

Just over the ridge, in nearby Little Cottonwood canyon, the granite was already being taken out for the foundation of the great temple, the erection of which was the pinnacle of all their fondest hopes and dreams. What a comforting thought that the Saints had at last found a place of refuge where a mighty temple could be reared without fear that it would be torn down by mobs and its worshippers driven from their homes as well.

Great preparations had been made at Silver Lake for the occasion. Three boweries had been built with plank floors for dancing. Five bands and numerous choirs were with the merrymakers, and all was in readiness for a fitting celebration in honor of the tenth anniversary of the founding of Deseret.

On the morning of the twenty-fourth, Father requested the Saints, because of their large numbers, to attend to prayers in their tents. The Stars and Stripes had been unfurled at sunrise, and throughout the morning there were programs, singing, dancing, and visiting. Among the attractions was the parading of Captain John W. Young's company of light infantry, fifty boys between the ages of ten and twelve, resplendent in bright, new uniforms and aptly called "The Hope of Israel."

At high noon the gaiety of the scene was rudely interrupted by the arrival of four travel-worn horsemen, O. A. Smoot, Porter Rockwell, Judson L. Stoddard, and Elias A. Smith. They went into conference with the Church leaders at once, and before evening their tidings were announced to the people. An army of twenty-five hundred from the States was marching toward the Territory, the Government had canceled the mail contracts, and numerous far-fetched rumors concerning the Mormons were being circulated in the East. Smoot and Stoddard had ridden from the States in twenty days in order to bring the message with all possible speed.

After the first shock there was little or no confusion. Father told the people to go on with their merrymaking, and the day's festivities ended with a dance, as had been originally planned. A decade earlier he had stated that "if our enemies will let us alone for ten years we will ask no odds of them," and the ten years had passed. The people he led believed that he had spoken truly.

In Father's mind, however, was immediately shaped a great resolve. He would prevent the army from entering the Territory if it were at all possible. Failing in that, the people should not be driven from their homes—they would leave them voluntarily and set fire to them before they should fall into the hands of the enemy. To the members of his council he said, "We have built cities in the East for our foes to occupy; our very temples have been desecrated and destroyed by them but with the help of Israel's God we will prevent them enriching themselves with the spoils of our labors in this mountain retreat."

It was thought that General Harney, the Indian fighter, would, in all probability, be in command of the advancing army, and during the day Brother Poulter composed the following lines which the people quickly joined in singing:

Squaw-killer Harney's on the way

Doo-da, doo-da

The Mormon people for to slay

Doo-da, doo-da, day.

Then let us be on hand

By Brigham Young to stand

And if our enemies appear

We'll sweep them from the land.

The Saints were at a loss for a time to understand why an army of such proportions should be descending upon them, but gradually a few facts came to light. Chief among the apparent reasons was a letter written by William W. Drummond, formerly a judge in the Territory, charging that the Supreme Court records had been destroyed with the direct knowledge and approval of Father, that a change of governors was imperative, and that no executive could be installed without military aid. He also hinted that the Church authorities had been responsible for a number of murders and indicated that lawlessness and rebellion existed generally. Some color was lent to his charges by the reports of two other men, one a disgruntled mail carrier who had lost his contract to a Mormon.

It is not reasonable to suppose that the United States Government would have gone to the enormous expense of sending an army on a march of over one thousand miles on such flimsy and unverified reports, if there had not been a deeper reason. In the light of later events, that reason became quite apparent. John B. Floyd, who was Secretary of War at that time, was a rank secessionist, and there was no better way in which he could aid his cause than to send a large part of the Union forces off to this inaccessible region, leaving Governmental arsenals and military stores unprotected in many Southern states. It has also been suggested that there were probably some money-grabbing contractors who used their influence to have the army on the march.

Whatever the causes, the venture was destined to cost the Government somewhere between fifteen and twenty million dollars and to go down in history as "Buchanan's blunder."

The Church leaders lost no time in shaping a course that would keep the soldiers beyond the boundary line of the Territory, at least until communications could be sent to Washington and the misunderstandings cleared. If they failed in this, the plan was to journey south to other wildernesses or mountains, leaving their homes and fields in ashes. On the nineteenth of August thousands of the Saints met in the Tabernacle and pledged their support to Father and his counselors in whatever course they elected to pursue.

A few days previous, Colonel Robert T. Burton was instructed to start toward the east with a company of 160 men. The ostensible purpose was to give aid to emigrants, but in reality they were to keep close watch on the approaching army and report all movements. They went as far as the Sweetwater and at Devil's Gate camped within half a mile of the advance army. Here they cached some of their provisions and sent an express on to the Platte. Men came frequently on mustangs to bring word to Father of all that went on, in spite of all the cold and danger that such a ride involved.

On September 1, Captain Van Vliet arrived in Salt Lake City in an effort to purchase supplies for the troops. He says: "On the evening of my arrival Governor Young, with many of the leading men of the city, called upon me at my quarters. The governor received me most cordially and treated me during my stay of six days with the greatest hospitality and kindness. In this interview he made known to me his views with regard to the approach of the U. S. troops in plain and unmistakable language. The governor informed me that there was an abundance of everything I required for the troops but that none would be sold to us. I told them frankly what I thought would be the result of their present course, that they might prevent the force from entering Utah this year but that next season the U. S. would send sufficient troops to overcome all opposition. The answer to this was invariably the same, 'We are aware that such will be the case, but when the troops arrive they will find Utah a desert. Every house will be burned to the ground, every tree cut down and every field laid waste.'"

The following Sunday, Captain Van Vliet attended services in the Tabernacle, and when Elder Taylor asked those present (about 4,000) if they were willing to do this, every hand in the audience was raised. The Captain said that he was sure Utah had been misrepresented and that he would hurry back to Washington to use his influence in favor of the Territory.

To this Father replied, "I believe that God sent you here and that good will grow out of it. I was glad when I heard you were coming. If we can keep peace for this winter, I feel sure that something will occur to save the shedding of blood."

During his visit he was introduced to Father's wives and children and was taken through our orchards and gardens. It is reported that when he asked one woman if she would destroy her home for religion's sake, she replied that not only would she do so but that she would stay up nights to do it.

In the meantime, Washington was very far away, the army was close at hand, and drastic steps needed to be taken.

On the fifteenth of September, Father proclaimed Utah under martial law. He forbade all armed forces to enter the Territory and directed the militia to hold itself in readiness to repel any attempt at invasion. In spite of the fact that the army was on the way avowedly to install a new executive, Father took the position that he was "still the governor" and therefore had the authority to forbid the entrance of an armed force.

On September 30 an express arrived saying that the troops were near Fort Bridger, and the soldiers of the Nauvoo Legion made ready to march under the direction of General Daniel H. Wells. The Legion then numbered over six thousand men, and instructions had already been sent out to make every needful preparation for a winter campaign.

From the very earliest days of the Church it had been necessary for its members to be on the defensive, and the Legion had first been organized back in Nauvoo, Illinois, with the Prophet Joseph Smith as its commander. Upon his death Father succeeded to the command but resigned after reaching the valley when Daniel H. Wells became Lieutenant-General and brought its numbers up to thirteen thousand men, well armed, well drilled, and highly proficient.

It was with part of these forces that General Wells prepared to hold back the armies of the United States, but under Father's strict orders, "without the shedding of one drop of blood." The General made his headquarters at Echo Canyon with a force of 1,250 men. Here he directed General N. V. Jones to have his men dig trenches and make dams across the canyon so that it might be flooded and to pile rocks and boulders upon the mountainsides to be used against the troops in case they attempted to force their way through the narrow canyon. The position held by our men there would have enabled them to hold back an army of almost any size.

General Wells then went on to Fort Bridger, where he met Colonel Burton, who had been all this time in the field keeping close track of every movement of the army. From there he sent a copy of Father's proclamation on to Colonel Alexander, who was in charge of the U. S. forces pending the arrival of General Johnston. He was told that the militia was in the field to carry out the instructions of the governor and that they must either retire from the Territory or disarm their forces. The commander paid no attention to these demands other than to reply that he would submit them to General Johnston upon his arrival from the East.

The method of campaign, as outlined by our leaders, was to harass the enemy in every way, in the hopes that it would become impossible for them to remain in the West. General Wells's instructions to Major Taylor, in charge of one of the advance units, were, "On ascertaining the locality of the troops, proceed at once to annoy them in every possible way. Use every exertion to stampede their animals and set fire to their trains. Burn the whole country before them and on their flanks. Keep them from sleeping by night surprises; blockade the road by felling trees or destroying river fords where you can. Watch for opportunities to set fire to the grass on their windward so as if possible to envelop their train. Leave no grass before them that can be burned. Take no life but destroy their trains."

Lot Smith was ordered to meet the supply trains and either turn them back or burn them. The first train he met turned back without much argument, although he had no way of knowing, of course, just how far back they would go. He decided to attack the next train after nightfall, in the hopes that many of the teamsters would be drunk and therefore unable to offer a great deal of resistance. With about twenty men, he rode up to the camp-fires of the enemy but found, to his surprise and discomfiture, that there were two trains, instead of the one he had reckoned on, and probably sixty or seventy men against his twenty. He was facing the firelight, and upon looking back at his force behind him in the darkness he decided that there was no way of knowing whether he had twenty men or a hundred, so he boldly commanded the teamsters to stack their arms.

They obeyed without much hesitation, and then they were given the privilege of taking enough wagons and supplies to get them safely back to their starting point. While the wagons were burning an Indian arrived upon the scene and asked for some presents. He was made very happy with two wagon covers, some soap, and flour. Another train was burned the following day, after the leaders had refused the alternative of turning back.

After a few weeks of this guerrilla warfare Colonel Alexander sent an express to Father threatening extermination if the Mormons continued to resist and emphasizing his confidence in his ability to carry out the orders of the Government. Father wrote back asking him why he had spent an entire month on Ham's Fork if he had such confidence in his ability and also justifying the mode by which the Mormons were defending their homes. He offered to assist the troops to reach Fort Hall or retire within reach of their supplies from the East. He also invited the Colonel and his officers to visit Salt Lake City, provided they left their troops behind them, and promised them safe and courteous treatment within the city.

Colonel Alexander did not avail himself of Father's hospitality, but it so happened that his pet white mule did—although not at all by design. The mule fell into the hands of some of our soldiers and was turned over to Father's care. He received the kindest of treatment and became the subject of considerable diplomatic correspondence. Before he could be returned, however, he died either of grief or of old age and was sincerely mourned by all of the Youngs as well as by his former comrades.

General Johnston joined his troops on the first of November, and they started from Camp Winfield to Fort Bridger, a distance of thirty-five miles. It took them fifteen days to cover this short distance, and they suffered frightfully on the way. The weather was much colder than they had expected to endure—particularly if they had been in Salt Lake Valley, according to plan—and many of their supplies had been burned. Upwards of fifteen hundred head of cattle had been driven off, and many of the remaining herds, as well as horses and mules, froze to death in the bitter cold of the Wyoming mountains. When they reached Fort Bridger they found that it also had been burned by the Utah Militia, so they used the ruins of the fort to store their supplies and made winter quarters on Black's Fork.

General Albert Sidney Johnston was a brave and brilliant soldier who had often been mentioned as the next Commander in Chief of the United States Army. It was thought in some quarters that he had been sent West purely as a political move by those who wished him far distant from the national scene.

The soldiers suffered great privation during the winter, flour being extremely scarce and vegetables and salt lacking entirely. Learning of their sad straits, Father sent a load of salt to Colonel Johnston. The Colonel returned it with every expression of bitterness, but the soldiers, who had wearied of eating poor meat without any salt, salvaged the load and returned it indirectly to camp. Later they were supplied with salt by the Indians at exorbitant prices.

As soon as it was learned at Church headquarters that Johnston did not intend to carry on a winter campaign, all interference on the part of the Utah Militia was forbidden. Some Federal soldiers, who had been captured, were ordered released, and the greater part of the Legion returned to their homes. Only fifty men were left to guard the pass in Echo Canyon.

On the arrival of the Legion in Salt Lake City they were greeted by the citizens with a song that had been written for the occasion by Aunt Eliza R. Snow:

Strong is the power of Brigham's God,

Your name's a terror to our foes,

Ye were a barrier strong and broad

As our high mountains crowned with snows.

Then welcome! sons of light and truth,

Heroes alike in age and youth.

Wilford Woodruff said concerning the return of the Legion: "Through all this President Young has been as calm as a summer's day. The army of Zion is now returning to its home with the same spirit of composure and quietude that it carried with it into the mountains. As the men passed, on their return, by President Young, they gave him a quiet salute and went silently to their homes, while President Young gazed upon them with thanksgiving and praise to the God of Israel."

It is a bit surprising that there could have been so much serenity under the circumstances, for the opposition to the army was distinctly rebellion, if not treason, and the consequences to the leaders could have been very serious indeed.

In spite of the fact that an army lay encamped just beyond the boundaries of the Territory with the prospect that it might be joined by other armies in a few months, that every man in the community might be fighting very shortly, and that the present winter might be the last spent by the Saints in the Salt Lake Valley, the winter of 1857-58 is spoken of as one of the gayest ever known in the Territory. New Year's Day was featured by balls and social gatherings in many of the ward halls, chief among them being a large gathering at Ballou's Hall in the 14th Ward. Dramatic companies and literary associations flourished, balls and parties were frequent in both public halls and homes, and "every amusement suitable was a source of profit to the caterer and pleasure and benefit to the patronizers." The meaning behind all this gaiety is summed up in the words of one writer as follows: "There was the great sagacity and remarkable commonsense leadership of Brigham Young seen in all this jubilee. He was preparing to make his second exodus, if necessary, and did not intend to play his Moses to a dispirited Israel."

After Van Vliet's report at the nation's capitol, President Buchanan found himself in rather an embarrassing position. The expedition was costing several hundred lives, several millions of dollars, was accomplishing practically nothing, and there was no reasonable explanation for having inaugurated it.

In the meantime, the Church authorities were seeking desperately to have the situation cleared at Washington before the return of mild weather should bring additional troops to Camp Scott. There was one man in the East in whom Father had the greatest confidence, and to him, Colonel Thomas L. Kane, was sent a special messenger entreating him to use his influence with the President in behalf of the Mormons.

Although Colonel Kane was in poor health at the time, he hurried to the capitol and offered his services as mediator in this strange conflict. By this time, President Buchanan was being subjected to a great deal of criticism, both at home and abroad, and he was only too happy to seize upon some means whereby he could ease himself out of the situation without too much loss of dignity. He quickly accepted Kane as his emissary, and the Colonel sailed from New York on the fifth of January, arriving in Salt Lake City, by way of California, late in February.

He was joyfully received by the leaders here, and after a few days' rest and discussion of the problems in hand, he proceeded on to confer with Governor Cumming at Camp Scott. This entailed another journey of 113 miles through deep snow, but the gallant Colonel undertook it willingly and after an arduous journey finally reached the lines of the Federal army.

Here he sought out Governor Cumming at once and delivered Father's message to him which was that the Mormons were willing to receive the newly appointed governor and his fellow officials and give them a loyal welcome, if they would come into the valley without the army. But they were not willing that the troops should enter their capital nor be quartered in any city or settlement of of the Territory.

Governor Cumming was willing to accept this proposition readily and proceed at once on to the Territory without the fanfare of an army, but Commander Johnston saw the matter in a different light. He had been sent out to install a governor and he had every intention of doing so, as well as retrieving some of the losses he had suffered and tasting some sweet revenge. He warned Cumming that the Mormons were merely trying to get him in their power, but the governor was more anxious for peace than for martial triumphs and left for Utah accompanied by Colonel Kane and two servants.

The historian Tullidge says of his meeting with Father: "As soon as he (Cumming) had passed the Federal lines he was met by an escort of the Mormon militia and was welcomed as governor of the Territory with military honors. On the 12th of April they entered Salt Lake City in good health and spirits accompanied by the mayor, marshall and aldermen and many other distinguished citizens."

Arrived at the residence of Elder Staines, Governor Young promptly and frankly called upon his successor at the earliest possible moment, and they were introduced to each other by Colonel Kane.

"Governor Cumming, I am glad to meet you," observed Brigham with unostentatious dignity and that quiet heartiness peculiar to him.

"Governor Young, I am glad to meet you, sir," responded His Excellency warmly, at once impressed by the presence and spirit of the remarkable man before him.

"Well, Governor," said Elder Staines, after the interview was ended, "what do you think of President Young? Does he appear to you a tyrant, as represented?"

"No, sir! No tyrant ever had a head on his shoulders like Mr. Young. He is naturally a good man. I doubt whether many of your people sufficiently appreciate him as a leader."

Governor Cumming thought that the entire affair was now a closed matter and that with his acceptance as governor, peace had been restored, but he soon learned that he had not counted sufficiently upon the resolve of this people. As soon as it was known that the troops were to be quartered in the Territory, thirty thousand people abandoned their homes and started on the historic "move south." Their destination was unknown to any save the leaders. They piled a few provisions into their wagon boxes, tied the family cow on behind, and became wanderers once more. Only enough men remained in the city to apply the torches should the soldiers deviate one foot from their lines of march through the city streets.

The governor was appalled at this calm desertion of the fruits of ten years' labor and pled with the people to remain, promising them that no harm should come to them from the army. But this people had met both promises and enemies before and they had no good reason for putting their faith in either. In his report to the Secretary of State he wrote: "The people are moving from every settlement in the northern part of the Territory. The roads are everywhere filled with wagons loaded with provisions and household furniture, the women and children often without shoes or hats, driving their flocks they know not where. Young, Kimball and the influential men have left their mansions without apparent regret, to lengthen the long train of wanderers. The masses announce to me that the torch will be applied to every house indiscriminately throughout the country as soon as the troops attempt to cross the mountains. I shall follow these people and try to rally them."

During May the governor returned to Camp Scott for his wife, and when he brought her back to the deserted city she was so affected that she burst into tears, begged her husband not to allow the army to stay in the city and to do something to bring the Mormons back.

The kind-hearted old governor assured her that he would do all in his power, but he found that his power was of small instance in this matter, for the Saints went steadily on, some stopping at Provo to wait for further developments and others continuing on as far south as Parowan.

It has been said that this exodus was a move of supreme strategy on Father's part. He believed that the spectacle of thirty thousand people leaving their homes with an army at their backs, with no more valid reason for being there than this particular army had, would incite public opinion in their favor as nothing else would, and the potent voice of the press soon proved that he was right. The New York Times said in part: "When people abandon their homes to plunge with women and children into a wilderness to seek new settlements, they know not where, they give a higher proof of courage than if they fought for them." And from the other side of the water came a statement of similar nature from the London Times which included this statement: "Does it not seem incredible that, at the very moment when the marine of Great Britain and the United States are jointly engaged in the grandest scientific experiments that the world has yet seen, 30,000 or 40,000 natives of these countries, many of them of industrious and temperate habits, should be the victims of such arrant imposition?"

Early in June, Father and others of the Church leaders were called back to the city to meet a peace commission which had been sent out by President Buchanan to offer a full pardon for treason and other crimes and a pledge that the army should not molest the Saints in any way by coming into the valley. The Church leaders received the pardon in rather an ironical frame of mind, since they had never acknowledged that they had been guilty of treason nor entered a plea for pardon. Said Father: "As far as I am concerned, I thank President Buchanan for forgiving me, but I really cannot tell what I have done. I know one thing, and that is that the people called Mormons are a loyal and a law-abiding people, and have ever been. Neither President Buchanan nor any one else can contradict that statement. It is true Lot Smith burned some wagons containing government supplies for the army. This was an overt act, and if it is for this we are to be pardoned, I accept the pardon."

On the twenty-sixth of June the army came through the city, unarmed according to the pledge that had been made to Father, and without making a stop until they reached the Jordan River, two miles west of the city. While passing through the city streets, Colonel Cooke bared his head in honor of the brave men that he had led in the march of the Mormon Battalion. They camped at the Jordan for three days and then went south some thirty-six miles to Cedar Valley, where they founded Camp Floyd.

During their stay at Provo and elsewhere the refugees lived in their wagon boxes or any sort of temporary shelter that could be devised. Some of them built cane houses on the Provo Bottoms, and the more fortunate ones were taken into the homes of friends or relatives. It was during this "move south" that my future husband, John D. Spencer, was born.

Early in July, when it became evident that the army intended to keep pretty much to themselves in Camp Floyd, the people began moving back to their homes. Some had planted crops before they left and had gone back and forth to take care of them, but the great majority had not troubled to put in crops about which there was so much uncertainty as to whether or not they would ever be harvested, and so, of course, they were very anxious to return and provide against the coming winter as best they could.

In the long run the coming of the army proved to be a Godsend to the people of Utah rather than a disaster. A great many of their supplies were purchased in the Territory, and such commodities as butter and eggs brought very high prices. Many merchants of the city could date their rise to prosperity with the coming of the army in '58.

When the army was called back east to fight on the side of the Union in the Civil War, goods that had been shipped from the East were bought by the Mormons at a mere fraction of their original cost. Alexander Majors, who was in charge of the freighting to the Territory, says in his memoirs "that it was necessary to increase the transportation from 400 wagons to 3,500 wagons and teams. It required more than 40,000 oxen to draw the supplies and 4000 men were employed."

After the wagons were unloaded they were taken to Salt Lake City and placed as near to each other as they could stand. Here wagons that had originally cost $150 to $175 each were sold for $10 apiece.

Flour that had cost the government $28.40 a sack sold for fifty-two cents, and many other items were sacrificed on a like scale. Father sent a son-in-law, Hiram B. Clawson, to the sale, where at an outlay of approximately four thousand dollars he purchased about $40,000 worth of goods for our families, servants, and dependents. He also bought the safe which had held $80,000 in gold, which the Government had freighted to Camp Floyd by ox team.

Hiram invited the officers to call upon Father before their departure, and a number of them did, presenting him with the flagstaff of the camp as a token of their present feelings of friendship. It was transplanted to the hill just east of our home, where it stood for many years and bore the nation's flag on all important occasions.

Just before the final breaking up of the camp in July, 1861, the soldiers blew up the arsenal, sank some of their arms in deep wells, and threw others into a huge bonfire. Incidentally, many of the guns were recovered from the wells and served to usher in numerous Fourth and Twenty-fourth of July celebrations.

Colonel Johnston and Father never met. The Colonel left the Territory in March of 1860 to join the Confederate forces and died upon the battlefield when he met General Grant at the Battle of Shiloh.
