Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

5—Brigham Young At Home

INDIAN FRIENDS AND FOES

One day, during the year of 1905, as I was busy with my usual household duties, there came a knock at the back door and, upon opening the door, I was startled to see a very old, very fat, and very dirty Indian squaw. Realizing at once that she was too old to do me any harm, I asked her what she wanted.

She peered at me for a while without speaking and then asked abruptly, "You Brigham's girl?"

"Yes," I answered, "I am one of Brigham's girls."

Having satisfied herself upon this score, she sat down on the porch, and I left her and went on with my work, knowing that she would talk when she was quite ready and not a minute before. Finally when I went back to find her almost dozing in the sunshine there she ventured, "I know Brigham. I here when first white people come to valley. Brigham good to my people."

By degrees I drew the rest of her story from her in broken English. She had been only a small girl when the first white settlers came to the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, but she distinctly remembered Father and his wife. She was very anxious to know if I was a child of that wife and seemed disappointed when I told her that it was Aunt Clara who came to the valley that first year and that my own mother did not come until later.

When I asked how she had found me, she replied that she had gone to the tithing office and asked for one of Brigham's girls and that they had sent her to me as I was the nearest one within reach.

She seemed especially anxious to impress upon me the fact that she had known "Brigham's wife" and that she remembered Father's great kindness to the Indians. Where she came from or where she was going, I didn't learn—only that her tribe was passing through the city and she had made a great effort to see me. I gave her some clothing, which she badly needed, and some food for the inevitable flour sack, and she went her way again through a state vastly changed from the one she had known when she first saw the white people enter it sixty years before.

There is no question but what the problem of keeping the Indians from molesting the settlers to any great degree was one of the most tremendous my father encountered in his task of establishing a place of refuge for his people in an isolated country. He was not entirely successful, of course, in making pacifists out of the red men but, had he been less successful, those first struggling settlements might easily have been wiped out. The Indians had ever been resentful of the white invader who came to usurp his hunting and fishing grounds and make his means of livelihood less certain, and the settlers who came by the thousands to take the land of the Great Basin were not more welcome than their predecessors had been on other frontiers.

Fortunately, for a period of about three years after the pioneers first arrived in the valley, the Indians left them in comparative peace. The first real annoyance on the part of the redskins came in the spring of 1850. By that time a number of settlers had left Salt Lake to establish homes in the fertile valley to the south now known as Utah County. They had built the customary fort and were living in it, going out to their fields in the daytime to plant their crops. At first the Indians had given them no trouble, but shortly they began to steal grain, cattle, and horses. Matters kept going from bad to worse, until finally the people scarcely dared leave the fort at all and were virtually in a state of siege.

Word was sent up to Father that they must have relief and have it quickly. This put him in somewhat of a quandary. He knew, of course, that the fort would have to be relieved, but he disliked shedding blood and starting actual warfare between the whites and Indians. Another consideration entered in at this time, also. The people were already asking for statehood and were anxious to do nothing that would offend the Government. Captain Howard Stansbury, of the United States Topographical Engineers, was surveying in the region, and Father asked what he thought of sending an armed force against the marauders. He not only approved sending the force but helped to outfit it.

Accordingly, some fifty men went down and found the enemy, who outnumbered them two to one, ensconced in a deserted log hut. The fighting continued for two days before the Indians were finally driven out, but at the end of that time many of them were killed and the rest promised to behave.

Father realized fully that if the Mormon colonies were to escape the difficulties that had been the lot of other pioneers he would have to pursue a different policy in his dealings with the Indians. The keynote of this policy is expressed in his message to the Utah legislature in 1854 when he said in part:

"I have uniformly pursued a friendly course toward them, feeling convinced that independent of the question of exercising humanity toward so degraded and ignorant a race of people, it was manifestly more economical and less expensive to feed and clothe them than to fight them."

Two years earlier than this he had sent word to the settlers in Fillmore:

"We exhort you to feed and clothe them so far as it lies in your power, never turn them away hungry from your door, teach them the arts of husbandry, bear with them in all patience and long suffering, and never consider their lives as equivalent for petty stealing."

As may be supposed, the Indians were quick to take advantage of this policy and soon began a practice of begging from door to door, which did not cease for many a year. At that, however, the Saints were glad to give, even to an unreasonable degree, rather than put up with constant stealing and depredations.

As a second part of his Indian policy, Father attempted to establish missions among the "red brethren" in order to educate them and teach them some rudiments of agriculture. The first mission was founded at Harmony, in southern Utah. Twelve men were sent to this distant place in May, 1854, and after what must have been a very weary journey wrote back that they arrived, "enjoying good health, union and peace." They set to work immediately after their arrival planting wheat and digging the inevitable ditches for irrigation. By this means they hoped to be able to help feed the Indians, and they knew that if they fed them, the Indians would willingly stay around to be taught and preached to. The missionaries attempted to clothe them as well, and after giving out what clothing they had brought with them for the purpose, promptly sent back to Salt Lake for more "old clothing, especially shirts, to help cover the nakedness of the Indians, especially the women."

The most famous of the Mormon Indian missionaries was Jacob Hamblin, who was appointed president of the Santa Clara Mission in 1857 and spent the next twenty years of his life in the service of the savage. He was their wise counselor and their true and devoted friend. He understood them, and they learned to love and understand him. Many rifts were averted through the efforts of this courageous and unselfish man.

One of the best known of the interpreters was Dimick B. Huntington, a brother of one of Father's wives, Zina D. Huntington. The Church voted in 1849 that he and Alexander Williams "should have the privilege of trading with the Indians for the community and that all other persons should be prohibited under fine." This plan was adhered to, with only minor violations, for a number of years and helped to curb the dangerous practice of trading firearms and whisky where they could do the most harm.

Father was especially anxious that the Indians be taught how to raise crops and care for livestock in order to compensate them for the loss of their lands. On one occasion he said:

"Let the millions of acres of land now lying waste be given to the Indian for cultivation and use. Let the poor Indians be taught the arts of civilization and to draw their sustenance from the ample and sure resources of Mother Earth, and to follow the peaceful avocations of the tillers of the soil, raising grain and stock for subsistance, instead of pursuing the uncertain chances of war and game for a livelihood."

Of course he was only indifferently successful in making agriculturists out of the Indian, but for that matter, no one else has ever been much more successful.

In spite of this earnest effort to make and maintain peace with the Indian, it was necessary to be on constant guard against molestation. The first building in any settlement was the fort, enclosing the houses and providing safety for the livestock. The brush was kept clear from the immediate vicinity of the fort, and an ample supply of arms and ammunition was always kept on hand.

The first house to be built outside of the fort in Salt Lake City was the home of Father's brother, Lorenzo D. Young. It was built in the fall of 1847, just two or three months after the arrival of the first company of pioneers, and stood upon the present site of the Beehive House.

The Youngs moved into this small dwelling—about one-half mile away from the protection of the fort—very much against the advice and wishes of their friends, and it so happened that the catastrophe predicted for them was almost realized. While Uncle Lorenzo was working away from the house one day, leaving his wife and young baby alone, a tall Indian appeared and demanded bread. The mother had only three small biscuits in the house, and of these she gave the savage two. He was not satisfied and demanded more. She gave him the last one, but he still insisted upon more. She told him that she had no more, whereupon he became furious and, fitting an arrow to his bow, took aim at her heart. This pioneer woman was not only courageous—she was also resourceful. Making as if she were going to comply with his demand, she went into the next room and untied a large mastiff. "Seize him," she called in a low voice, and with a bound the dog had sprung at the Indian's throat and thrown him to the floor.

The Indian pleaded for his life, and after taking the precaution to remove his bow and arrow, she called off the dog. The Indian was badly hurt, and Aunt Harriet, matching her courage with kindness, bathed and dressed the wound and sent him away, a sadder and wiser Indian.

The population of Salt Lake City soon grew to be large enough that the Indians failed to be much of a menace inside the city limits, although when the men went to the canyons for fuel or worked in the outlying fields, they always took the precaution to be well armed. When the nine-foot wall was built around the Lion and Beehive Houses in the middle sixties, one reason for its erection was to afford protection against Indians, although I am sure that this must have been a very minor one.

But if the Indians didn't come to fight, they very often came to beg or steal, and throughout my entire childhood the Indian, in his gaily colored trappings, was a very common sight on the streets of the city. One day a squaw came to the Beehive House begging for sugar. They frequently asked for sugar as they had so little sweet—but for that matter, so did we. This particular squaw kept staring and staring at Mother's face, after muttering the usual request. Mother returned the stare in some curiosity and finally asked her what was the matter. Pointing to her mouth, the squaw said, "You take 'em out." She had been smart enough to detect that mother wore false teeth and wanted to have a look at them.

Before the birth of one of mother's children she dreamed that a very fine-looking Indian came to the house. She was so impressed with his appearance that she asked him his name, which he gave as "Arta de Crista," and when the new baby arrived he was promptly christened 'Arta de Crista" after the Indian in the dream.

Mother was sitting in the weaving room one day working at her great spinning wheel when this same Arta, who was a mischievous fellow, came up behind her and gave an Indian war whoop in a loud and intensely realistic fashion. In terror, Mother knocked the wheel over with one hand and Arta de Crista over with the other. In addition he received a whole-hearted spanking and promised never to play Indian again—with Mother as the victim.

As the Indians became less troublesome in Salt Lake City they seemed to grow more so in the smaller settlements. By 1865 the Government had sent an Agent, Colonel Irish, to take charge of Indian affairs, and he attempted, with Father's help, to have them sign a treaty which would put an end to difficulties between the settlers and the Indians.

By the terms of the treaty they were to move over into the Uintah Valley and give up title to the lands they were occupying at that time. They were to be peaceful and not go to war with other tribes except in self-defense. And they were not to molest the whites. In return for giving up the lands they were occupying at that time, the governor was to extend protection to them, farms were to be laid out, grist and lumber mills built, and several thousands of dollars paid to the tribes each year. The Indians were to hunt, fish, and gather berries on all unoccupied lands. Kanosh was the only chief present at the signing of the treaty who was able to attach his own signature to the document, an achievement of which he was very proud. The other chiefs had to be content with attaching their marks.

In his journal, Wilford Woodruff tells the story of the signing of the treaty somewhat as follows: "President Young and company drove to the Indian farm and held a meeting with the Indians. Colonel Irish, the agent, had called upon President Young to assist him in making a treaty, which he had been unable to bring about because of the opposition of the Indians. They stoutly maintained that they didn't want to sell their lands and go away. Mr. Irish made a speech and the Indians made speeches. Then President Young talked to them and explained that it would be best for them to sign the treaty and told them of the advantages that would come to them if they did so.

"They finally said that they would probably do as he said, but they wanted to think it over until the next day. When they met again all the chiefs came forward and signed the treaty, except Sanpitch, who, according to his own claims, was the main chief. Sanpitch was on his dignity and lay on his face in his tent for two whole days. The other chiefs paid no attention to him, as was their custom, and after the affair was all over and the others had received their presents from the whites, Sanpitch came forward and wanted to receive his presents, as well as sign the treaty. He received some presents but they made him come to Salt Lake before they would allow him to sign."

Colonel Johns of the United States Army was present at the time, and Colonel Irish informed him that he "could do nothing with the Indians except through the influence of President Young."

This treaty did not end Indian troubles in the Territory by any means, and during the years of '66 and '67 there were so many depredations in Sanpete and Sevier Counties that it was necessary to keep armed guards on hand all the time that the crops were being harvested. At one time, in Sanpete County, Father directed the millers to give the Indians what wheat they needed and to grind it for them. The Indians received fifty bushels of wheat valued at two dollars a bushel, but, at that, the grain was cheaper than powder and lead.

This persistent policy of feeding the Indians rather than fighting them bore fruit in many instances, one of which was related by a man who was passing through Utah on his way to California. He writes: "I now told the boys that we were in a position where we were dependent on some one and that I had seen enough to convince me that the Indians were perfectly friendly with the Mormons and that for our own benefit, we had better pass ourselves off for Mormons. So we put our right hands to our breasts and said, 'Mormonee' with a cheerful countenance, and that act conveyed to them the belief that we were chosen disciples of the great and only Brigham Young and we became friends at once as all acknowledged. The fine looking Indian, who sat as King in the lodge made himself known as Chief Walker and, when I knew this, I took great pains to cultivate his acquaintance."

One of the first acts of the Assembly of the State of Deseret in 1850 was a measure designed to stop the traffic in Indian children. Trading parties from New Mexico would come up yearly with horses, guns, and ammunition to be exchanged for Indian women and children, who were later sold into slavery. For this reason the Assembly legalized the adoption or apprenticeship of Indian children, the law providing that the child was to be fed, clothed, and educated, and that the period of indenture was not to exceed twenty years. The law proved to be quite effective in stopping the traffic in children.

Often children who had been stolen from other tribes were left to starve to death unless they could eke out some sort of miserable existence by eating roots pulled from the ground. For a time Father advised the settlers to buy these children in order to save them from starvation, but the Indians began to make a racket out of it, and it had to be stopped.

In many instances, however, kind-hearted settlers continued to take them rather than see them starved or killed, and there was a time when a great number of these children were living in Mormon homes. One woman bought a ten-month-old girl for a quilt and a shirt. She reared the child as a sister to her own children, and when the girl was grown she married a white man and reared a large family of her own.

One such girl—Sally—became a member of our own household and lived with us for many years until romance finally took her back to her own people. When only a child, Sally and another girl had been captured by a tribe, who were enemies of her own people, and cruelly mistreated. The other girl died, but Sally was bought by a brother of Aunt Clara Decker and given to her to be cared for.

At first Sally was taciturn and unresponsive and cared little for such mundane duties as darning stockings and sewing carpet rags, but Aunt Clara eventually won her over and had made a wonderful housekeeper out of her by the time she was grown. Needless to say, she learned to adore Aunt Clara, who mothered her just as she did her very own.

By and by Chief Kanosh came courting Sally and used to do his wooing out in the kitchen, which was an atmosphere quite far removed from "the light of the silvery moon" where Indian romances are supposed to bloom according to song and story. Sally was not easily won, for by now she was quite thoroughly converted to the ways of civilization and had no great yearning to return to the campfire and wigwam, but in time she married Kanosh and went back with him to his tribe.

Some of the Mormons built her a nice little cottage where she had real doors and windows, six chairs, a high post bedstead in the corner, and plates and dishes in a press. She had her own cows and made butter, her poultry, eggs, and vegetables, and her lord and master was sent forth proudly in a clean shirt and collar every Sunday.

Kanosh had already been thrice married before he ever wooed Sally, which may have prejudiced her some against him. His first wife was Ann, a very good woman, who died when her first child was born. His second was Betsykin, a camp follower from Camp Floyd, and shortly after this marriage he took another wife in the person of Mary Huish, a young Indian girl who had been reared by a white family in Payson. It is said that he bought Mary for a pony.

Kanosh was very proud of Mary, but Betsykin was intensely jealous of the girl and her white ways. One day when the two women were out in the hills trying to catch squirrels, Betsykin cut the younger woman's throat, threw the body in the bottom of a wash, and covered it with oak brush.

The body was not found for a long time, but when it was finally located, Betsykin confessed and had to atone for her crime by starving herself to death. She went out into the hills to a lone wickiup, and when her beacon light was seen burning no more the watchers knew that she had paid the penalty and they burned the wickiup.

Sally tried her best to make Kanosh live in the fashion of the white men, but eventually had to give it up as a bad job, although she never fully reverted to Indian ways herself. He would use the little house only upon state occasions, and at one time, to gratify him, Father paid him a visit there.

He was on one of his journeys south and stopped the carriage in front of the door, expecting Kanosh to come out and greet him. Seemingly no notice was taken of his arrival, and when he sent a messenger in to announce him, Kanosh sent back answer that when he went to see "Bigham, Bigham sat still in his house; and what was manners for Bigham was manners for Kanosh."

"He's right," was Father's reply, and, leaving his carriage, he went in to pay his respects to the chief.

He found Kanosh seated like Solomon in all his glory, cross-legged in the middle of the four-poster bed. He wore a heavy overcoat buttoned to the chin, a pair of new boots, and a gorgeous red blanket over all. And this in spite of the fact that it was a very warm day in May.

Kanosh sat erect and motionless in all his dignity, and Father attempted to maintain at least a comparative dignity, but his efforts were completely upset when one of the wives cautiously raised her head from beneath the bed to gain firsthand knowledge of her lord's appearance. Father was forced to indulge in laughter long and loud.

By far the most troublesome of the Indian chiefs was Walker, who always pretended a great friendship for Father and the Mormons, but who seldom lost an opportunity for causing them grief if he could discover one. It must be said, however, that Walker was usually more venomous in his dealing with enemy Indian tribes than he was with the whites.

Gwinn Harris Heap, the superintendent of Indian affairs in California, wrote of him in 1854: "The Utah chieftain is a man of great subtlety and indomitable energy. He is not a Utahn by birth, but has acquired such an extraordinary ascendency over that tribe by his daring exploits that all the restless spirits and ambitious young warriors in it have joined his standard. Having an unlimited supply of fine horses and being innured to every fatigue and privation, he keeps the territories of New Mexico and Utah, the provinces of Chihuahua and Sonora and the southern portion of California, in constant alarm. His movements are so rapid and his plans so secretly laid, that he has never once failed in any enterprise, and has scarcely disappeared from one district before he is heard of in another. He frequently divides his men into two or more bands, which, making their appearance at different points at the same time, each headed, it is given out, by the dreaded Walker in person, has given him with the ignorant Mexicans, the attribute of ubiquity. The principal object of his forays is to drive off horses and cattle."

One of Father's first contacts with the chief was on an occasion when he was returning from a visit to some of the settlements of southern Utah. There were thirty wagons in the party, so they felt themselves reasonably safe from molestation by the Indians, but at that, they were not too well pleased to be met by a band of Walker's men brandishing bows and arrows and filling the air with their fiendish yells. Father learned that Walker was camped a few miles away and thereupon drove his wagons directly into the middle of the camp and settled down for the night. It happened that there was a sick child among the Indians whom the medicine man had given up to die, and Walker made the very simple request of having a white man to share its death and accompany it on the journey. Instead, Father went and prayed and administered to the child, who shortly recovered. It was this act which first won Walker's friendship for Father—such as it was.

Not long after this the Indians became very troublesome around the vicinity of Paragonah. There were so few people in this little settlement that Father considered it unsafe for them to remain there longer and advised them to move four miles south to Parowan. Such a move meant the complete destruction of all their previous labor in the making of homes, the houses all being demolished so that doors, windows, and everything else portable could be taken on the wagons for a future dwelling place.

When Walker heard of the move he replied with the greatest insolence that "the Mormons were d—d fools for abandoning their houses and town for he did not intend to molest them there, as it was his intention to confine his depredations to their cattle, and that he advised them to return and mind their crops, for, if they neglected them, they would starve and be obliged to leave the country, which was not what he desired, for then there would be no cattle for him to take."

The greatest parley that ever took place between the Mormons and the Indians was during the middle fifties, when nearly one hundred wagonloads of Church authorities and their families went down to Walker's permanent camp to meet with him and other leading chiefs. Often on a cold winter night, as we gathered around the great Franklin stove, Father would relate the details of his meeting with these once famous Indians, and in the shadowy corners of the room I could almost see for myself the tall, majestic forms of Walker, Arapeen, and Peteetneet.

Father had made great preparations for this treaty, because he hoped that it would be the means of establishing permanent peace between the two peoples. Accompanying him from Salt Lake City were such Church leaders as Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Ezra T. Benson, his brother Lorenzo Young, Erastus Snow, and Parley P. Pratt and a number of the other brethren as well as numerous of their wives and children. Besides those who traveled in wagons, there were fifty young men mounted on horses. Altogether they must have made a most impressive cavalcade as they journeyed down through the valleys to the Sevier River. At least it was designed to impress the Indians.

When the company arrived at a place in the vicinity of Walker's camp, Father sent a messenger to inform the chief that he would be ready to give him an audience at a certain hour that day. He had mistaken his man, however. Walker was not receiving an audience—he was giving one—and the word came back that "if Governor Young wanted to see him, he must come to him at his camp, as he did not intend to leave it to see anybody."

Father was somewhat concerned about this attitude and began to wonder if perhaps Walker had changed his mind and decided not to make a treaty after all, but it was merely the Indian's cunning in pretending a great indifference about the whole affair. However, Father gave word that the entire company was to proceed to Walker's camp, which they did, and were met by a number of chiefs including Kanosh, Ammon, Peteetneet, Squash-Head, Grosepine, and others.

Walker's lodge was in the center of the camp, and Father, with some of his aids, was invited to go inside. He found Walker sitting in solemn dignity upon his buffalo robe, wrapped in his blanket, and surrounded by a guard of honor composed of old chiefs. He did not rise, but held out his hand to Father and invited him to sit down at his side.

At this point everybody shook hands all around, after which they proceeded with the more serious business of the day. Dimick Huntington acted as interpreter and made a long speech in which he said that the Mormons had come in the hopes of smoking the pipe of peace and ending all hostilities on either side.

For a time there was no further speaking from either side until finally an old grey-haired chief got up and, stretching his withered, battle-scarred arms aloft, said:

"I am for war. I never will lay down my rifle and tomahawk. Americats have no truth—Americats kill Indian plenty—Americats see Indian woman, he shoot her like deer—Americats no meet Indian to fight, he have no mercy. One year gone, Mormon say they no more kill Indian—Mormon no tell truth. Plenty Utahs gone to great Spirit, Mormon kill them—no friend to Americats more."

He was followed by the chief of the Sanpete Indians who likewise was full of grievances against the whites and saw no very good reason for attempting to maintain peace with them.

Other chiefs rose in their turn, standing in stern dignity with their blankets held close about them as they talked either for peace or for continued warfare.

Finally Father asked Walker to talk, but he shook his head saying, "No, I got no heart to speak. Tonight Wakara talk with Great Spirit, tomorrow Wakara talk with Governor."

The pipe of peace was then handed around the entire circle with each one present taking one or two whiffs, and the council was over.

The following morning all were assembled once more in Walker's lodge, and Father spoke to them as follows:

"I love the Indian like a father and I want to be friends with all of them. I will give them plenty of clothing and good food if they will be friends with the white man and not fight and kill any more. I have brought many presents with me for the Indian—clothing, blankets, rifles, ammunition and oxen." At this point he ordered the sixteen head of oxen, which he had brought along, driven into the camp, and the sight of them made the chiefs show much warmer feelings than heretofore.

Then for the first time, Walker expressed himself: "Wakara has heard all of the talk of the good Mormon chief. Wakara no like to go to war with him. Sometimes Wakara take his young men, and go far away to sell horses. When he is absent, then Merecats come and kill his wife and children. Why not come and fight when Wakara is at home? Wakara is accused of killing Captain Gunnison. Wakara did not. Wakara was three hundred miles away when the Merecat chief was slain. Merecats soldier hunt Wakara to kill him, but no find him. Wakara hear it; Wakara come home. Why not Merecats take Wakara- He is not armed. Wakara heart very sore. Merecats kill Parvain chief and Parvain woman. Parvain young men watch for Merecats, and kill them, because Great Spirit say—'Merecats kill Indian; Indian kill Merecats.' Wakara no want to fight more. Wakara talk with Great Spirit; Great Spirit say—'Make peace.' Wakara love Mormon chief; he is good man. When Mormon first come to live on Wakara's land, Wakara give him welcome. He give Wakara plenty bread, and clothes to cover his wife and children. Wakara no want to fight Mormon; Mormon chief very good man; he bring plenty oxen to Wakara. Wakara talk last night to Payede, to Kahutah, San Pete, Parvain—all Indian say, "No fight Mormon or Merecats more.' If Indian kill white man again, Wakara make Indian howl."

The calumet of peace was again handed around, and all the party took a smoke. The council was then dissolved.

It was not to be expected, however, that Walker would greatly change his ways, no matter how impressively he smoked the pipe of peace, and the whites, as well as enemy tribes, continued to have unpleasant contacts with the great chief. On one Sunday, Father said to his congregation: "How many times have I been asked in the past week what I intend to do with Walker. I say, Let him alone, severely. I have not made war on the Indians nor am I calculating to do it. My policy is to give them presents and be kind to them. Instead of being Walker's enemy, I have sent him a great pile of tobacco to smoke when he is lonely in the mountains. He is now at war with the only friends he has upon this earth and I want him to have some tobacco to smoke."

Walker died in 1855, and Father, not knowing that he was ill, had sent him some letters and presents which reached him only the day before he died. According to his wish, they were buried with him. He expressed great anxiety for peace with the whites as well as the greatest friendliness toward Father and the Mormons. As was befitting for the spiritual journey of so great a chief, two squaws, two Payede children, and fifteen horses were killed to form his retinue to the happy hunting grounds.

The one Indian chief who proved, as well as professed, his friendship was Washakie, chief of the eastern Shoshone band. He was a fine-looking, powerfully built man of commanding and dignified carriage and was known throughout the West as a noble character and a true friend of the white man. His life span extended throughout the entire nineteenth century, as he was born, according to very good authority, in 1798 and died February 20, 1900. Just three years before his death, in 1897, he was baptized a member of the Episcopal Church.

By profession he was a bow and arrow maker, fashioning superior bows from elk horns wrapped with sinews. He was also an expert in their use, although in his later life he used a flintlock rifle. For a number of years he was in the employ of the Hudson's Bay Company as a guide, in which capacity he was especially valuable. He was a great friend of that well-known frontiersman, Jim Bridger, and was always willing to help the emigrants to cross streams, find livestock, or build bridges. In appreciation for these services, nine thousand of them signed a letter at one time commending him for his help.

I think that perhaps the finest tribute ever paid to Father by an Indian was that uttered by Peteetneet, the brother of Walker, when he said, "What the other white men say go in one ear and out the other but what Brigham says goes to the heart and stays there."
