Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

Brigham Young At Home—6

SCHOOLS

In 1847 Father stood on the banks of the Missouri River and addressed an assembly of toil-worn pioneers who had paused for a brief respite before making the final great effort that would bring them through the tortuous mountain passes ahead and into a promised land. In the covered wagons that stood near by was space for only the barest necessities to take them through the remainder of their journey and help sustain life until they should gain a foothold in the new country. Many things had been brought thus far that would have to be discarded and, fearful lest they be books, Father said:

"It is desirable that all Saints should improve every opportunity of securing at least a copy of every valuable treatise on education—every book, map, chart or diagram that may contain interesting, useful and attractive matter to gain the attention of children and cause them to learn to read; and also every historical, mathematical, philosophical, geographical, geological, astronomical, scientific, practical and all other variety of useful and interesting writings, maps, etc., to present to the general church recorder, when they shall arrive at their destination, from which important and interesting matter may be gleaned to compile valuable works on every science and subject for the benefit of the rising generation. We have a printing press, and any one who can take good printing or writing paper to the valley will be blessing themselves and the church. We also want all kinds of mathematical instruments together with all rare specimens of natural curiosities and works of art that can be gathered."

The Saints heeded his words, and any who could tucked in an old textbook among the blankets and sent word back to those who were following to do the same.

The first school in the valley was opened in October, about three months after the arrival of the first companies, and was taught by Mary Jane Dilworth. The schoolhouse was an old military tent, shaped round like a wigwam and placed near the center of the fort. The teacher had the dignity of an old campstool for a seat, but the nine pupils had to be contented with logs. The school was opened with prayer, and the first day was spent learning a psalm from the Bible and singing songs. Writing materials were varied and unique. Some of the pupils had slates and pencils, and others had pens and paper, but those who had neither took charcoal and wrote on smooth logs or dried the bark of the white mountain birch. When nothing better was available for the midday meal, the children went out and dug sego roots.

During the following winter, schools were opened for adults as well as for children, the principal subjects taught being foreign languages for the very good reason that there was always available, as a teacher, some person who had come from another country as a convert or had served as a missionary. One such teacher was Addison Pratt, who had been to the Society Islands and taught the Tahitian language to a class of twenty persons three evenings a week. Other languages which are claimed to have been taught successfully during the winter of '47 were Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and German.

Along with the Tahitian language, the pioneers were also privileged to learn some facts concerning astronomy. Orson Pratt, who was a mathematical genius, gave lectures in astronomy and other scientific subjects in the Council House. His announcement stated that "the admittance to the series would cost $1.20, a single lecture $.20. Doors open at 6 o'clock with the lecture commencing precisely at half past six."

It was soon after the organization of the provisional government of the State of Deseret that Father, as Governor, signed an act passed by the first legislative assembly incorporating the University of the State of Deseret. Orson Spencer was appointed Chancellor with a board of twelve regents.

A committee was appointed to co-operate with Father in selecting a site for the location of the University, and when he announced that he had chosen a site on the east bench of the city, his decision was immediately accepted. They decided to enclose the grounds with a rock wall, and 135 rods of this wall were actually completed by 1853 with enough stone hauled to build three fourths of a mile more. The city council passed a law designating ground in the vicinity for herding and grazing ground for the animals of the men who should be working on the University.

The University was first called the "Parents' School" and was opened in the home of John Pack in November of 1850, under the direction of Orson Spencer. Dr. Collins was employed as a teacher, and he endeavored to give instruction in all branches of high school learning. The classes of the school were held in the parlor while across the hall was the first mercantile store opened in Utah. The terms were eight dollars for one quarter, but as usual the produce of the valley was taken in lieu of money.

Textbooks were at a premium, in spite of the fact that the emigrant companies had been urged to bring all that they could possibly carry. In '51 Father sent Dr. Bernhisel to New York to purchase a library which was shipped across the plains by ox team. The original cost was five thousand dollars, and of course the shipping added materially to this sum. The books consisted largely of ancient and modern classics. Two large globes were also brought by ox team. One was a map of the world and the other an astronomical map. During the Fourth of July celebration in '69 these globes, mounted on platforms, were hauled in the procession on wagons.

The University classes were later held for a time in the Council House and, by the time I was ready to attend, had moved to what is now an old knitting factory building over on the west side. It was here that I received my diploma signed by Dr. John R. Park.

My school days began in a kindergarten taught by Camilla Cobb, the first such school in the state. Camilla had been brought here from Germany by the eminent educator Karl G. Maeser. The American translation of her German name being quite unusable, she took the name of Maeser until her marriage to one of Aunt Augusta Cobb's sons by a former marriage. When I attended Camilla's kindergarten, it was held in the front room of Aunt Augusta's home on State Street.

All too soon, kindergarten became a thing of the past, and I was sent over to a school on the corner of West South Temple and Richards Streets taught by Milton H. Hardy and Seraph Young, a cousin. I was still very young, and only a few incidents stand out clearly in my memory—among them, that of the button charm. There were very pretty buttons in those days, and it became a craze among the younger generation to make long strings of them. One button on the string was a "charm," and anyone who touched it had to relinquish one of her own buttons.

One day we were marching around the room, and the line of march took us past the teacher's desk. The girl just ahead of me very deftly removed an apple from the desk and slipped it in her pocket. The teacher glanced over just afterward and, seeing that I was still in the vicinity, asked sharply, "Did you take that apple?"

"No," I answered.

"Do you know who took it?"

"Yes," I replied, "but I won't tell."

"Then go and sit in the corner," came the stern pedagogical command.

I didn't propose to suffer the embarrassment of sitting in the corner for so trivial an offense, so I walked over to where the coats and nubias hung, put mine on, and went home. When I arrived there, Father was just having his ten-o'clock breakfast and asked what was the matter. I explained, putting myself in the best light, of course, and more than a little afraid that I would be marched promptly back to school. After a moment's reflection, however, he said, "Well, you can go and sit in a corner here—and play with your buttons." The latter suggestion, I am sure, was designed to keep me amused and insure him peace from my chatter.

I next attended school in our own schoolhouse built just east of the Beehive House. It was here that all of Father's children, together with a few of the neighbors' children, learned the multiplication tables and the various tenses of verbs.

Those days were very happy ones, and I remember the old schoolhouse with a great deal of sentiment and affection. There was an entrance vestibule about eight feet square, and from its ceiling hung a bell rope just within reach of a grown person and quite beyond the reach of us very young persons who used to look longingly at its tantalizing length. Each morning the bell would ring at fifteen minutes of nine and again at nine, when it was time for lessons to begin.

As we hurried in from the playground I never failed to glance up at the belfry, for the ringing would send a great flock of doves out over our heads, spreading their wings and giving one a feeling of uplift and happiness. The main schoolroom was large with an eighteen- or twenty-foot ceiling and high windows which gave an excellent light upon our desks. These old-fashioned desks were painted bright green and were made with drop lids which, when raised, were highly convenient for such clandestine acts as eating apples during study period or reading notes from the boys.

The object that would distinguish it most from the modern schoolroom was the large round stove which stood in the center of the room. Yards and yards of black stovepipe stretched away to the chimney corner, and around the middle of the stove was a two-inch ledge where our apples baked throughout the long morning. Towards noon as our stomachs became emptier, these apples sizzled with an almost unbearably tantalizing odor.

During the winter months we would come to school well clothed in warm woolen stockings, nubias, and bright wool comforters. One could always while away a pleasant half-hour when lessons palled by picking bits of highly colored wool from the garments and patting them into designs. The more ingenious of us could fashion them into bookmarks or even Christmas presents of a sort.

Friday was always the one day of the week for which we longed, for on that day all studies and exercises were put aside for the afternoon, and we would have a program of declamations, spelling matches, organ solos, and singing, ending up with the school paper, which was made up entirely of contributions from the scholars. I recently saw one that was written in the early seventies and found that Heber J. Grant, the present head of the Church, and myself were the only surviving contributors.

A visitor from the East [^1] during 1865 wrote of our school: "By Brigham's invitation I spent an hour in his school. Its register bore the names of 34 pupils; three Brigham's grandchildren; all the rest his own sons and daughters. There were 28 present from 4 to 17 years of age, on the whole looking brighter and more intelligent than the children of any other school I ever visited.

"With three of the prophet's daughters I had some conversation. Their language is good and their manners graceful. One has a classic face and another so pretty that half the young men of the church are in love with her."

On the whole, I suppose we were as well behaved as the average set of school children—but most certainly no better, and many a time the monotony of the day was broken by a prank from one of the scholars. There was one lad who didn't even wait for the school day to begin but, arriving very early one morning, climbed up into the belfry and pulled the bell rope after him. He then proceeded to ring the bell loudly and long, awakening many of the townspeople and bringing the teacher to her post in a state of half undress to find out what calamity had befallen. When she discovered that it was only young Robert Pyper venting his repressed desires upon the bell, she began searching for a ladder to bring him down, and when none could be found she had the boys stand upon one another's shoulders so that Robert could be brought down to justice. I personally thought him quite a hero.

Father told all his sons that any of them who wished might go East to college provided they would prepare themselves by first obtaining the best in education that the state had to offer. Another condition was that when they returned to the state they were to disseminate the knowledge they had gained among the young people here. There were no half measures with Father: the boys either made good at school or they were taken out.

Don Carlos, the only son now living, thought that he preferred to be with the teamsters, so Father immediately took him out of school and put him to work driving a pair of blind mules up to the sawmill in City Creek Canyon to get flooring for the Tabernacle. Carlos didn't like driving the mules either so he went back and finished college and then went to Troy, New York, to the Rensselaer Polytechnic School of Engineering. He entered with five conditions but was graduated and came back to Utah, where he first taught in the Brigham Young University and eventually became Church architect. Altogether, five of the boys went to Eastern universities. Willard W. went to West Point and was an outstanding student there. The New York papers carried stories of the Mormon and the nigger at West Point, and there were actually people who came from the city to see the two curiosities. Willard became a Colonel in the United States Army, was an instructor at West Point for some years, fought in the Spanish-American War, and was head engineer for the locks on the Columbia River.

Alfales studied law at Ann Arbor, and Feramorz, who was my full brother, was graduated from the Naval Academy at Annapolis and later went to Rensselaer with Don Carlos.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Albert D. Richardson.
