Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

Brigham Young At Home—7

THE THEATRE

The most fascinating spot to me in the entire city, outside of my own home, was the great Salt Lake Theatre, spoken of by Henry Miller, many years after it had been built, as a "cathedral in the desert." It was there that I sat wide-eyed and watched beautiful ladies being saved from the clutches of the dark-browed villain in such plays as "Lady Audley's Secret" and "The Lancashire Lass," or gasped in amazement while the Japanese acrobats built their marvelous human pyramid. Not until the very littlest one had reached the top and given his triumphal "Ki-yi," whereupon the pyramid dissolved and each participant leaped lightly to the safety of the floor again, could I breathe a sigh of relief and sit comfortably back in my seat once more.

People were always amazed when they saw, for the first time, this wonderful theatre built in the days when materials had to be hauled across a thousand miles of country by ox teams and wagons. A people less valiant and less determined to have the finer things of life and without the leadership and vision of a man like my father could certainly never have accomplished this huge undertaking. Many a man hauled timbers all day long for its construction with no better pay than the promise of future theatre tickets.

Father realized that this people, being almost completely shut off from contacts with the outside world, must themselves provide the means for their cultural uplift and entertainment. He must have felt that the arduous task was fully justified, for years after the theatre was built he said, "If I were placed on a cannibal island and given a task of civilizing its people, I should straightway build a theatre for the purpose."

Naturally there were many other supporters of the drama who helped to pave the way for this enterprise. Among them was Phil Margetts, a talented amateur actor who had organized the Mechanics' Dramatic association and was giving performances in "Bowring's Theatre," which was simply Mr. Bowring's home minus, as yet, the partitions. As Brother Margetts was anxious to secure Father's favorable support he invited him, one day, to bring his counselor, Heber C. Kimball, together with both of their families, to come and witness a performance. They accepted the invitation, although "bringing their families" meant that a crowd of slightly less than a hundred must be accommodated in the tiny building. Father was very much pleased with the project and at the end of the play announced that the time was ripe for the building of a big theatre and made his statement which has since become famous, "The people must have amusement as well as religion."

Hiram B. Clawson was among those who had urged such an undertaking, and to him Father entrusted the task of finding a suitable site and securing building materials. Strangely enough, Johnston's army, which had come to Utah with the avowed purpose of making war upon the Mormons, was greatly instrumental in furnishing means and materials for the construction of the playhouse.

The soldiers had been at Camp Floyd, several miles south of the city, for about a year when they were ordered East to take part in the Civil War and were commanded to sell their remaining stock of supplies at auction.

Father sent Hiram B. Clawson to the "sale" with $4,000, and there he bought such things as cook stoves and groceries that later were resold for ten times the amount paid and formed the nucleus for the theatre building fund. Among the most valuable of his purchases were boxes of nails worth $40 which he was able to buy for only $6. Later on, when these nails had all been used and there was no place to buy any more, Father sent teamsters to the Government wagons which had been burned at the approach of the army and had them bring back pieces of iron which were hammered by hand into nails for the construction of the theatre.

Through the united efforts of practically everybody in the community, the building was eventually finished. Talented converts to the Church from England or the Eastern states designed the interior, added artistic decorations, and painted the scenery. The auditorium had a seating capacity of two thousand. It was arranged with a parquet and four circles and was easily the finest building in western America at the time.

It is said that during the winter of 1861 the center of interest with Salt Lake's population alternated between two points—(1) the wall in front of the Deseret News, whereon were posted bulletins of the great Civil War then raging and (2) the great building two blocks away, the mammoth "New Theatre."

The building was formally opened in 1862, just two years after my birth, so my very earliest remembrances include this beautiful place. The opening took place before the building was entirely finished, and as there was no heat, Father sent word in his invitations for the people to wear their heavy underwear and rubbers so that they would not feel too much discomfort.

In the address which he gave upon this occasion he said that "every pure enjoyment was from Heaven and was for the Saints and when they came together with pure spirit and with faith that they would pray for the actors and actresses they would be refreshed and benefited in their entertainments and that those on the stage should ever be as humble as if they were preaching the gospel. Truth and virtue must abound and characterize every person engaged on the stage or they should be immediately ejected from the building. No person would be permitted to bring liquor into this edifice." As long as Father lived the characters of the performers were subjected to his most careful scrutiny. At one time when the talented actor George Pauncefoote was playing in the city for a number of weeks, Father purposely stayed away from the performances because he had heard unfavorable reports of the man's mode of living and therefore gave him this public disapproval.

During the early days the receipts at the door were likely to include anything from string sausage to honey in the comb. The notices of the plays proclaimed, "Cash, also Merchandise, Grain and Home Manufacture received at Cash prices in payment for tickets." There is more than one story told of patrons riding up to the door of this elegant playhouse with a chicken under each arm with which to secure admission. Still more unique was the case of the individual who brought a turkey in payment for his ticket and received two spring chickens in change.

The programs announced in big type that "children in arms will not be admitted," this procedure probably being necessary because there was almost always an abundance of young babies in early Utah families. When this notice did not prove entirely effective, it was changed to a blaring, "Babies in arms Ten Dollars each." I never heard of the ten dollars being paid.

Along with the babies, firearms of any description were excluded from the playhouse, and during each evening's performance a collection of pistols, six-shooters, and what not rested in the treasurer's office, each properly identified for return to the owners at the conclusion of the play.

Lighting of the building was accomplished during the first few years with oil lamps, nearly four hundred of them being required for the purpose. On either side of the stage were posts holding kerosene lamps placed one above another, which served to light the stage well, if not brilliantly. The footlights presented rather a difficult problem but were controlled to some degree by a small shaft which ran from lamp to lamp and was turned to right or left as the lighting required. When the first plays were presented the lights were blown out if the stage needed to be darkened and relighted as the scene demanded.

Always near the lamps were kept buckets of sand and barrels of salt water to be used in case of fire, and it was likely to fare ill with the person in charge of these safeguards if Father found that he was neglecting his duties in any way. Often I would go with him down the little staircase direct to the stage, cross over to the big room where the lamps were cleaned, filled, and made ready for use. I can hear him telling Brother Derr to be extremely careful and watchful of the lights at all times. One night when three oil lamps in the footlights caught fire, Father stepped out across the stage and fanned out the flames with his broad-brimmed hat. Such was the people's confidence in him on all occasions that there was not even a suggestion of panic at this time.

It was necessary for the property man to be little short of a genius in order to meet the demands made upon him. The people of the city came to the rescue many a time with their personal belongings, and usually the plays were produced with all the essentials. Among the properties were a number of guns for use of the chorus in the opera seasons. They were all flintlocks, and many of them carried the name of Harpers Ferry Arsenal for the year 1813. Pioneers who had fought in the war of 1812 had brought their guns along for protection on the plains and then had generously turned them over for use in the theatre.

Charles Millard, the property man at the theatre, had been an apprentice in the same capacity at the Drury Lane Theatre in London. Of his experiences in fashioning properties out of next to nothing, he wrote: "I well remember the first play, 'The Pride of the Market.' The first scene was a market place where vegetables, fish and flowers were needed. How to make them was a problem. At last I saved up every scrap of paper I could find, pasted strip on strip and then made frames of wire or with cardboard and made articles from this. Also made paper mache and fashioned stage properties from this. We then made the goblets with a wooden lathe. The fish we covered with cloth and painted.

"The second scene was a marble parlor and here again we had to use ingenuity. I received permission to borrow properties from President Young's home, which I did, and also used Hiram Clawson's upright piano. The big chairs were President Young's parlor set. We had no carpet, so had to paint a snow white cloth on one side and, having no stencils, did it all by hand. I also painted a table and a cover in the same manner to match the set, which, if I say it myself was a corker. In fact, a traveling company from New York offered $1,000 for the set, which was a pile of money in those days."

There were times when these home-made properties failed to measure entirely up to requirements. One such case on record was that of the cannon used in the production of "The Lonely Man of the Ocean." The sailors were lying about on the ship either dead or dying of yellow fever. The hero and heroine, standing alone on the deck, saw a distant sail and thought to save themselves by touching off the cannon for a signal. The cannon failed to go off, however, and upon the whispered advice of a stage hand the hero touched off the cannon a second time while the stagehand fired a pistol. After the curtain had fallen the cannon came to life and went off, striking two of the sailors and inflicting slight wounds.

The townspeople were always willing to come forth with their treasured possessions if they were needed for the good of the theatre, and there is no more touching example of sacrifice than that of John McDonald, who gave the very hair off his head when occasion, or rather a leading lady, demanded.

During the performance of a play, Sara Alexander was made up as a blonde when the role called for a brunette. Father always took a keen interest in even these slight details and pointed the discrepancy out to her. Sara replied that she would dearly love to comply with his wishes in the matter and could very easily do so if she could only have the glossy black curls of John McDonald to adorn her own head. Brother McDonald was inordinately proud of his wonderful locks that reached down to his shoulders, but when Father explained the situation to him, he hesitated only one brief moment and then said gallantly, "If the success of the play depends upon my hair, Brother Brigham, you shall have my hair."

There was one other time when Father was not quite so successful in having the costuming meet his desires. A professional ballet was scheduled to appear, and Father ordered that their skirts must come to their ankles. The manager's idea of what the proper length of a ballet skirt should be differed greatly from Father's; however, on the first night of the appearance of the ballet the girls danced in ankle-length skirts. On each succeeding night for a week the wily manager cut off several inches from the bottoms of the tarlatan skirts until at the final performance they had reached the forbidden knees before Father was at all aware of what had happened.

Before long my own talented sisters began to take minor parts in plays, and there was one auspicious occasion when the older girls of the family, known as the "Big Ten," appeared in a ballet in bespangled blue tarlatan dresses, with their hair carefully curled and their faces rouged ever so slightly. There even came a day when I made my own appearance upon the stage of the great theatre. My half-sister Talula and I were chosen to act as fairies in the lavish production of "Cherry and Fair Star." There was also a ballet of fairies in which several of the other girls participated, but our own part was very special—in our own eyes at least. We were to be enclosed within huge flower buds, and at a psychic moment the buds were to come up through the floor, open up, and Talula and I were to step forth and dance. It was all to be very lovely with Talula and me resplendent in pink dresses, wreaths on our heads, and wands in our hands.

We came up through the floor all right and the buds opened according to schedule, but when I stepped forth onto the lighted stage my wreath fell ignominiously from my brow onto my face. I was deeply chagrined and on the following night declared that absolutely nothing would make me go to the theatre and run chances of being so humiliated again. Mother persuaded, cajoled, and finally threatened, all without avail. She tried to appeal to my better nature by reminding me that the play would be seriously hampered without me. Apparently I had no better nature. She threatened to tell Father. Usually this had the desired effect of bringing me to time, but I still remained adamant. Finally in desperation Mother said that if I would only go she would give me her gold watch. It was a large Swiss watch with an open face, and I had always admired it so I promptly accepted the watch and prepared to go to the theatre. The wreath stayed in its proper place that night so all went well, and I had the watch in addition—for the time at least.

One night, a short time later, I was suffering from a slightly sore throat and asked Mother, whose room I shared, if she would go down and get me a drink of water. She answered, "Now, Clarie, you know that you have always been taught to wait on yourself. You will have to go down and get your own drink." I pondered this over for a moment and then said, "If you will go down and get me the water, I'll give you back your gold watch." I don't know whether Mother wanted very much to regain her watch or whether she thought I might be in quite serious need of water, but at any rate she went for the drink and I gave up the watch. Upon her death it once more became my prized possession, and I trust that I received it more worthily that time.

The play, "Cherry and Fair Star," marked my last, as well as my first, appearance on the stage of the Salt Lake Theatre, although in later years I assisted in costuming the performances for the Home Dramatic Club and the Opera Company—a role for which I had much more talent, I am sure.

As my husband was a prominent member of both companies, I followed their activities with unusual interest and have many pleasant memories of that (to us) golden age of the drama in Utah. They often had engagements in cities other than Salt Lake, and many humorous incidents occurred upon those occasions, two of which I shall relate here. During a performance of the "Chimes of Normandy," John, playing the part of the miser Gaspard, was supposed to put his bags of gold down through a small trap door in the floor. In lieu of a better receptacle a boy stood underneath to receive the bags, but become a trifle overzealous, thrust his hands up in full view of the audience. Kneeling down, John said, "My gold! My gold! My darling gold! My precious gold!" and then in a low voice, but not quite low enough, "Take your hands down, you damn fool." The audience, which had been smiling politely before, now broke forth into pronounced snickering.

At another time John was playing Ko-Ko in "The Mikado" and my nephew, Brigham S. Young, the title role. While the company was on the way to give a performance in Logan, "Bid" left the train during a stop in Ogden and was in turn left by the train. Only slightly daunted, he secured a horse from a livery stable and started out through a blizzard for the opera house at Logan, fifty miles away. At various towns along the route, he attempted to secure a fresh horse, but circumstances were decidedly against him. Antipolygamy raids were in progress, and nothing could convince the residents that the stranger on the horse was not a deputy United States marshal who should be met with locked doors and silence.

Finally at Wellsville, some ten miles away from his destination, "Bid" helped himself to a mount tied outside of a drugstore and hastened on to the opera. He had wired ahead that he was on the way, and they had stalled along as much as possible in order to give him time to arrive. Finally as John was singing the number just preceding the Mikado's entrance he saw "Bid" arrive and ad libbed until the Mikado could don his gorgeous robe over his muddy trousers and make his regal way onto the stage.

Many of these local Thespians received their first inspiration by being allowed to appear as "supes" with visiting companies.

One of my brothers' friends, Horace Whitney, said that his pride knew no bounds when he marched across the stage with spear and bonnet as one of the army of Macbeth and then, with the simple change to battle-ax and helmet, marched back again in the army of Macduff.

On another occasion, when he was cast as an Indian in the play of "Pocahontas," he arrived too late for a wig, but nothing daunted, put on an Indian suit and war paint and joined the band on the stage. His hair was a decidedly sandy shade, and the leading man practically exploded when he saw the unique addition to his cast. As soon as the curtain had been rung down, he called the costumer in and said, "Harry, there may have been blond Indians in the time of Pocahontas but they are now extinct. Get that boy a wig, or send him home." As there was no wig to be had and Horace declined to go home, the costumer took the only other alternative and blackened the offending hair.

The boys were not long content in their role of supernumeraries and yearned to do better and more valiant things. Finally they decided to produce their own play. One of their number wrote an ambitious sketch called "The Robbers of the Rocky Mountains," and secured Social Hall for its staging. There was some old scenery stored in our barn, and my brothers generously offered to donate it toward the cause—without first consulting Father, however. The overseer caught them making away with the sets, reported to Father, and they were called to an accounting. Seeing their anxiety over the threatened disaster to the play, Father sent for the manager of the Salt Lake Theatre and said, "These boys have a play. They call it 'The Robbers of the Rocky Mountains.' I don't know much about the mountains, but they certainly made a clean job of my old barn. Give them a date at the Theatre."

The play was produced on the night of July 13, 1872, before a large audience, which, it must be reluctantly admitted, had come out more because it was the first night on which the theatre was illuminated by gas than to see "The Robbers."

They would have loved to continue upon the boards of the Salt Lake Theatre, but since this was not possible, they determined to carry on and present "Nick of the Woods" in the Widow Gibbs barn. The reasons for selecting the barn were numerous and worthy. It was centrally located, there were a number of old benches lying about in the vicinity, and the rent was negligible—a ball of carpet rags, a flatiron, and a creepy hen being offered to the widow and duly accepted. Besides, there were double doors on the west side which could be thrown open and the illusion of a burning Indian village be created by the setting sun—it was hoped.

There was more than the proverbial fly in the ointment, however. There was a full-grown cow. The Widow Gibbs insisted that the cow be allowed to remain within the barn and, although there was no place for a cow in the plot, stay she did, at least for a time.

The admission was seven pins for the rear part of the barn, but those who sat in the front two rows and thereby enjoyed a full view of the dressing rooms were assessed one tallow candle in addition. Joe Pitt painted the Indians as Indians had never been painted before, and there was an orchestra composed of a fiddle and an accordion.

In the middle of the overture, the cow broke loose from her assigned place on the stage, came through the curtains, over the benches, and outdoors. The audience didn't miss the cow, but the widow did and sent her small son in with the ultimatum that "the cow couldn't stand out in the rain any longer." It was quite the wrong moment to bring the cow back into the play, especially since there was no place to tie her except to the waterfall (a long board over which Nick was about to descend). Nothing could daunt these ambitious actors, however, and they determined that the play must go on. They ignored the cow and played on until Albert Kimball's mother came after him with a stick for leaving the woodpile. She was not so easily ignored, and the performance came to an abrupt end.

For the first few years the plays were put on almost entirely by a local company led by one or two professional actors who would come from the East for the winter. Naturally there were not many, nor was it often that they would risk their lives coming over the desert by stagecoach, but those who did come among us were very deeply appreciated. Among the brightest of these stars was the lovely Julia Dean Hayne, who came with George B. Waldron and others in 1865 and remained to delight Salt Lake audiences through the next year. Mr. and Mrs. Seldon Irwin, T. A. Lyne, and Pauncefoote were other popular visitors. Among the best known of the local players were Phil Margetts, Nellie Colebrook, Asenath Adams—the mother of Maude—and Sara Alexander, who was a ward in my father's home. Asenath, or Annie, as she was often called, also made her home with us during the theatrical season, for she lived some distance from the playhouse and it was inconvenient for her to go back and forth daily in the wintertime.

Maude Adams' first appearance upon any stage was on that of the historic old Salt Lake Theatre, and following is her mother's own version of the event as related in George D. Pyper's book, The Romance of an Old Playhouse: "We were playing a double bill—domestic play and 'The Lost Child.' I had finished in the first play and was standing in the wings when the maid brought Maude over to the Theatre to wait for me. Children were never allowed in the dressing rooms and this appearance of the babe was unusual. Mark Wilton's baby was doing the part in 'The Lost Child' and the babe was supposed to have been taken into an inn and was to make its reappearance on a tray. After the babe's first exit it got to crying so terribly that it could not reappear and I recall how Mr. Maiben was dancing a jig all over the stage saying, 'What shall we do, what is to be done?' In the terrible anxiety I grabbed Maude from the cradle, put her on the tray and she was taken on. Of course the child had grown immensely from a few minutes previous and Maude amused the whole audience by sitting up and cooing to them."

When her mother died Maude came from New York to arrange for the funeral. The automobile was just beginning to replace the horse-drawn carriage, but Maude insisted that the cortege be made up entirely of carriages drawn by white horses. It was necessary to search the entire valley before enough of them could be found, but the required number was finally secured, and a picturesque procession they made indeed as they moved slowly on to the cemetery.

Father made it a special point to see that the women who were acting at the theatre were not allowed to be out alone at night, especially if they had any great distance to go to the theatre from their homes. In such instances he always sent his carriage to take them back and forth. If the company went out to play in some other town, as occasionally happened, they were most carefully chaperoned. At one time when they were playing in Ogden a young man became interested in one of the girls and wanted an introduction. In order to further his purposes, he took Mr. Harris, the announcer, out to dinner. When he pleaded his cause, however, Mr. Harris refused, gently but firmly, saying, "I can't. It would be worth my job."

Father had not, at first, shown any great cordiality to the idea of allowing Sara Alexander to become a member of the theatrical company, but her splendid work there won his complete approbation in time. An Eastern actor, who played in the city for a season, fell in love with her, and as she had no other guardian, came and asked for Father's consent to their marriage. Father replied, "Young man, I have seen you attempt Richard III, and Julius Caesar with fair success, but I advise you not to aspire to Alexander."

There was a private entrance to the theatre for our family, and as the doorman knew all of us it was never necessary for us to have tickets. We had our own special seats in the theatre as well. The girls of the family sat in the first row behind the parquet in what was known as the "dress circle." The first few front rows on the east side were reserved for the boys, and the wives sat in the west front section.

There was one drawback to going in through the family entrance. We missed the little old lady who stood on the front steps, very much bundled up against the cold, and sold apples and candy animals. We learned to value our good fortune, however, in being allowed to go as often as we pleased when we saw some of our friends carrying drinking water in the third circle in order to earn their tickets. One of these lads was Heber J. Grant. He was graduated from water boy to actor for one performance when, at the age of thirteen, he played one of the pickaninnies in "Uncle Tom's Cabin."

Up in the first circle on the west side was the section reserved for the demimondes of the city, and they were never allowed to sit anywhere else. We children were not supposed to pay any attention to them whatsoever, but they were so pretty with their rouge, which no one else wore in that day, that I never could resist looking at them when I had a good opportunity.

Father had the upper box on the east side, and very often I would go with him and enjoy the performance by his side. Between acts he would take me by the hand and go out on a little balcony that led from the hall back of the box and stand there unobserved but observing. Sometimes we would go downstairs or backstage to see that all was well. Only once I remember of going down under the theatre with Father. The place was one of great mystery and seemed like another world.

He had a wonderful pair of opera glasses, which I had used many times and to which I had become very much attached. The glasses had three lenses, theatre, field, and marine. They were encased in leather and bore his initials on the outside. After his death, all his personal belongings were placed on auction for the members of the family since the executors felt that it would be impossible to distribute them fairly among so many of us. I had used these glasses so much that I was determined to have them, but, as another sister had the same idea, the bidding went so high that I was finally forced to pay $95 in order to obtain them. Years later when the leather had become somewhat worn I sent them to Tiffany's for repairs, in care of Spencer Clawson. Mr. Tiffany was very much intrigued with the glasses, said that he had never seen a pair quite like them, and offered to pay almost any amount of money for them. Naturally they were invaluable to me and are still in my possession.

Throughout the years in which I attended performances at the theatre my admiration went from one leading man to another until by the time I was grown the object of my devotion was Maurice Barrymore, the father of John and Lionel. About this time I took my first trip East, and while in the city of New York I searched the shops up and down Broadway for his photograph. There seemed to be any number of pictures of other actors, but the only one I could find of Barrymore showed him embracing his wife, Georgie Drew, while she looked up at him adoringly, which was not at all the type I had been searching for. However, since it was the only one I could find, I bought it and vented my wrath upon Georgie Drew by blacking both of her eyes. Later, in a more gentle mood, I attempted to erase the blacking but found that it had been done much too effectively.

From the day the theatre opened until the close of his life in 1877, a period of fifteen years, Father maintained a deep interest in the affairs of the theatre. He frequently inspected the building and often attended rehearsals personally. Sara Alexander said of him: "Brigham Young knew more about the needs of a large stage than any manager now living." Even in later years when it was impossible for him to attend the performances regularly, he was kept informed of its affairs and, to a great extent, directed its policy.

He insisted that all entertainments be conducted with the strictest regard to moral conduct. None of the actors were allowed to smoke. The rehearsals of the home dramatic companies were opened with prayer, and there were instances where improper conduct on the part of the performers caused their instant dismissal.

He always preferred the lighter type of entertainment and once said, "If I had my way, I would never have a tragedy played on these boards. There is enough tragedy in every day life and we ought to have amusement when we come here." At one time when "Oliver Twist" was being played, a visiting star gave vent to a bit of realism where she was supposed to be killed by Bill Sykes in such a manner that Father declined to allow the play to be repeated.

Above all was he solicitous for the safety of the audience. Alfred Lambourne in his book, A Playhouse, comments on his careful supervision of the building: "It was upon the Scene-Painter's Gallery that the writer first met Brigham Young. It was a late afternoon in autumn; the rehearsal for that night's play was over, the Scene-Painter's brush was moving rapidly upon the broad spread of canvas before him and he thought himself alone. Anon was heard the sound of firm, yet almost inaudible footsteps upon the gallery stars. Then the maker appeared, and it was the President, the great Mormon leader. Unheralded he had come upon a tour of inspection. Brigham Young was famed for completeness; he possessed a genius for details. Carefully the President examined each watertank, each barrel of salt. He appeared to think that day of the Playhouse's danger from fire. He broke with the end of his gold-headed cane the thick crusts that had formed over the tops in the barrels of salt. I watched him shake his head and compress his lips; there came a frown upon his face. His orders for safety, one could see, had been neglected. He did a labor which should have been remembered and performed by others. No doubt someone would be reprimanded."

It was not strange that Father should have made this great effort to construct a theatre, for he never felt that his responsibilities to his people ended with his spiritual leadership. As one writer said of him: "A more remarkable combination of the esthetic, spiritual and practical, was seldom found in any man than marked the character of Brigham Young."
