Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

8—Brigham Young At Home

SOCIAL AFFAIRS

One of Father's most outstanding qualities as a leader was the manner in which he looked after the temporal and social welfare of his people along with guiding them in their spiritual needs. On the great trek across the plains when everyone but the most feeble walked the greater part of the way, the Saints would be gathered around the campfire for evening entertainment, if the weather was at all favorable. There songs would be sung, music played by the fiddlers, and the men and women would forget the weariness of walking fifteen miles or so over a trackless desert while they joined in dancing the quadrille. It was his way of keeping up "morale" before such a word was ever coined.

During the first few years after the arrival of the pioneers in the valley the dirt floors of the log cabins sufficed for the dances and socials that were a regular and important part of their lives. There was little furniture in the best of the homes, but what there was couldn't be damaged by being set outdoors, so the rooms were cleared, and through many a winter night could be heard the strains of the violins accompanying the dancers.

One of the first socials of which there is any record took place on Christmas night in 1850. A pioneer mother wrote of the affair: "On this day I went to Brigham's mill to a Christmas party. Stayed all night. We had a first rate supper at midnight. I helped to get it on the table. They danced all night until 5 o'clock in the morning the party broke up."

That same year an amusement house was built at the warm springs to be used almost exclusively for dancing. Being elevated from dirt to wooden floors, the parties promptly took on a much more cosmopolitan air, some of them even becoming "balls." For instance, there was the "Grand Military Ball" given by Professor Ballo's band for which the price of admission for a lady and a gentleman was three dollars. There was so little money in the valley that I cannot imagine how he even found enough people to make his ball successful at three dollars a couple. In all probability it was three dollars' worth of whatever produce the ticket purchaser happened to have in the granary.

The warm springs amusement hall was so far away from the center of the city (something over one mile) that a new building known as the Social Hall was erected in 1852 on State Street just onehalf block south of the Eagle Gate. It was small but well built and, to our way of thinking, very fine indeed. At the west end was the door and at the east end a comparatively large stage. On ordinary occasions, when no play was being produced, the stage held a big stove, sofa, and easy chairs. On one side of the stove was a little table with a pitcher of water and tumblers, and when the scenery was on the stage, the big, black stovepipe still rose above in all its grandeur. There were no curtains at the windows, but they were decorated with red velvet lambrequins, and the benches, which ran all the way around the room from door to stage, were decorated in matching velvet. Two chandeliers provided a final note of elegance. It was here that all important functions took place for many years.

Not for their work alone were the pioneers called "hardy," for they attacked their amusements in the same gallant stride. Ballo's military ball commenced at 4 P.M. and lasted until long after midnight. A printed announcement for a party that Father gave in Social Hall in 1853 gives the opening hour as 2 P.M. precisely and states that supper would be served at 6 P.M. At midnight they usually had more refreshments before going on with the dance.

Long before I was old enough to attend the parties at Social Hall, I listened in envy to my older sisters as they described those wonderful balls. Especially was I intrigued with the details of the military ball given by the battalion of life guards when the hall was decorated with circles of sabers artistically arranged around the room while rifles glistened in every window. At one end of the hall was the flag of the minutemen with its motto "Always Ready," and at the other end the flag of the Stars and Stripes covered the entire breadth of the room. I was quite sure that such elegance never had been before nor would be again.

Another affair which I heard much about, but in more or less whispered tones around the house, was the ball given in honor of General Connor before his departure from Camp Douglas for a season in the spring of 1865. It seemed that some of the officers' ladies, preferring not to mingle with the Mormon women, declined to attend and that some of the Mormon ladies, feeling equally exclusive, also stayed away. Those who had risen above their prejudice, however, and attended the ball had described it as being most delightful.

To my great happiness, the day finally arrived when I, too, was permitted to attend the parties at Social Hall. I did not go to participate in the dancing, of course, as I was still only a child, but merely to sit on the side lines and watch the older people dance. Father was an excellent dancer and could turn a "pidgeon wing" with the best of them. I remember, too, that he was always plentifully supplied with partners. During the intermission he would often bring a number of guests home to the Beehive House for supper, and this brought an end to my part in the festivities for I was sent to bed instead of being allowed to go back again. On one occasion when we arrived at the house Mother said to me, "Is the party out already?" And I answered—as I thought, very brightly—"Oh, no. It's just retribution."

Occasionally suppers were served in the basement of the Social Hall, sometimes very elaborate affairs costing as much as five dollars a couple. I remember one very fine supper that Mr. Golightly, the baker, had prepared. I went downstairs holding fast to Father's hand and stood close beside him in one of the narrow aisles between the tables while he talked for a few minutes with his counselor George A. Smith. Brother Smith was a very large man, probably weighing about 350 pounds and, not seeing me at all, he stepped on my foot. I thought I had been very nearly killed.

While Father enjoyed having his friends come to our home for suppers he was not at all inclined to going other places to eat. Whether it was because he was partial to Mother's cooking or wasn't quite sure of the cleanliness in other people's homes, I do not know. I am inclined to think that the latter reason may have entered in somewhat, for I remember hearing him say upon one occasion when I was accompanying him and Mother out to dinner, "Now, Lucy, I want you to be sure and see that Jane doesn't make our tea out of the same water that she boils the eggs in."

Almost from the very first, Social Hall was too small for the crowds who came to attend the parties, and before long it became necessary to issue tickets of different colors for certain dances so that everyone would have a chance to participate.

Very popular, indeed, were the leap-year parties of which the ladies took every advantage. One such ball caused quite a furore among some of the prominent women in charge of the affair because a lively young girl had the temerity to ask Father to attend the dance with her after the committee had practically worked themselves greyheaded in selecting a suitable partner for him.

The girl was Belle Park, a daughter of Father's overseer, Hamilton Park, and as her mother was a member of the committee and the committee meetings were held at her home, she had ample opportunity to overhear the plans. After a great deal of discussion they had finally decided that the actress Nellie Colebrook would be the logical person for the honor of escorting Father to the ball and that the committee would go to her in a body and apprise her of their decision.

Belle quickly made a decision of her own, however, and running the short distance between the two homes, arrived breathless at our door. Mother answered her knock and said, "What can I do for you, Belle? You look as if you had something important on your mind."

"I have," she answered. "I must see President Young immediately."

Mother took her into Father's office, and after he had greeted her, she said briefly, "I have come to invite you to the leap-year ball."

Father glanced at Mother with a twinkle in his eye and said, "Well, Lucy, I've heard a lot about this ball and concluded that I was going to be a wall flower. Bring your carriage to the door, young lady, and I shall be ready."

As the Parks had no carriage, Father took his and called for Belle and her parents also. The committee were quite indignant when they learned that a seventeen-year-old girl had thwarted their plans, but as there was nothing they could do about the matter it was allowed to drop.

Besides the balls at Social Hall, dances were frequently held in the ward meetinghouses. For a long time the tickets were paid for in produce, the party-goer coming with a basket on one arm containing the price of his admission and one on the other arm containing the picnic for his evening's refreshment. And, of course, there was the ever popular home party with the entertainment consisting of pulling molasses candy, husking corn, or else spelling or apple bees.

The larger socials were held in the great theatre after it was completed in 1862. A temporary floor could be laid even with the stage over the seats on the lower floor, and the playhouse with its elegant appointments, made a very beautiful ballroom indeed for these people not yet two decades in this desert country.

In our own family life recreation always played an important part, for Father believed firmly that everyone should have a proper amount of work, rest, and play during each day. Many were the outings and picnics which we enjoyed, sometimes with others of the community and sometimes with only the members of our own family. Two favorite places for our family excursions were the Brighton Resort in Big Cottonwood Canyon, and the Great Salt Lake. It seems strange now that we would have taken the trouble to go to either in the cumbersome wagons of the day.

In 1856, just nine years after the valley was first settled, Father sent out formal printed invitations to a "Pic-nic Party" at the headwaters of Big Cottonwood "Kanyon." A footnote informed the invited guest that he would be required to start very early as no one would be permitted to pass the first mill, about four miles up the "Kanyon," after 2 P.M. I presume this was to make sure that no one was on the road after dark. With wagons, it required two days' travel to reach the camping ground. Once there, however, the entrancing beauty of the place, the singing, and general merrymaking made all the laborious effort of reaching there seem worth while.

The beach of the Salt Lake is twenty miles away from the city, and while the road is not a steep, mountainous one like the other, still a very early start was necessary if we were to go there and back in a day. When we arrived at the lake we would go to the huge black rock for the protection of a dressing room since there is not a single tree within many miles of the salt-encrusted shore of the lake. There was an elevated pathway which led from the shore to the rock. Father would say, "The girls to the left and the boys to the right," and we girls would march around and put on the linsey dresses and pantalettes that we used for swimming, or rather floating, in the buoyant waters, while the boys donned their customary bathing suits of overalls and shirts. After the swim we would enjoy the sumptuous lunch that the clan from the Lion and Beehive Houses always brought along on any outing.

At various times attempts were made to use large pleasure boats on the lake but never with any great degree of success. Father built and launched the first boat of any consequence to sail the lake in the year 1854. The boat was fortythree feet long and designed for a stern wheel to be propelled by horses working a treadmill. It was to be used partly to transport stock between the city and Antelope Island as well as for pleasure trips on the lake. There was a formal christening party when the boat was named the Timely Gull in the presence of several of Father's friends and members of his family. The Timely Gull was not destined to sail the salty waters of the lake for very long, however, being wrecked by a gale and strewn along the shore after making only a few trips.

The next boat of importance on the lake was the City of Corinne, which was purchased by the Church in Chicago, dismantled, and shipped here to be used largely for commercial purposes. The boat met the same fate as her predecessor and was wrecked by gales on the rocks in the vicinity of Mount Hogg.

Captain Garfield, a wealthy mining man from California, made the next boating venture on the Great Salt Lake with a steamboat which he christened the Garfield. This large pleasure boat was for many years the pride of the lake, but when it, too, was blown from its moorings and wrecked, it was salvaged and converted into a bathing resort with kitchen, dining room, and dressing rooms.

It was during our earliest courting days that the Garfield was at the height of its popularity, and naturally I was very much thrilled when John asked if he might take me out there to spend the evening. As he was making only three dollars a week, Mother put up a lunch for us, filling a fairsized chip basket with delicious sandwiches and cakes. When John arrived at our home, however, he would have none of the lunch basket, declaring with pride that he intended to take me to the restaurant for supper. I wouldn't hurt Mother's feelings for the world after she had gone to so much trouble, so I said with determination, "We're not going without this lunch."

With equal determination John said, "Well, we're not going with the lunch." And we were both right. We stayed home.

Father always loved to take visitors to the city out for a swim in the lake, and often I was included in the party. At first we used to go in a spring wagon or the victorine, but after the narrow-gauge railroad was built he had a private car for such occasions. At one time when he was taking a party out, some notable man asked me what percentage of salt the lake waters held. Not having the faintest idea, but feeling that I must answer anyway, I promptly replied, "Ninety-five per cent." "My dear child," he said with a kindly but "how can you be so dumb?" look, "if it were that much, the lake would be solid salt."

On rare occasions we crossed the waters of the lake over to Antelope Island. At one time Father had planned to establish a Church farm there for the raising of cattle and horses. A five-room house was built near the largest spring, and for some years it was used for outings by various of the Church officials. There was some evidence that Kit Carson had once used it as a rendezvous, and a canoe, which was supposedly left there by him, has a place in the Church museum along with his rifle.

Much as we enjoyed these outings to the lake or the near-by canyons, a dance always held first place in our interest. The girls were allowed to go quite freely to the dances in the ward halls, but they loved also to go occasionally to the courthouse, and it was there that Father began to shut down on them. The courthouse really was only the upper floor of a large building on Main Street which was sometimes the scene of social affairs because of its size.

On one occasion a party had been announced and invitations sent out with the names of all the members of the committee printed thereon as was the custom. Nearly all of our girls had accepted invitations to the dance, myself included, and consternation was widespread among us when Father said that we were not to attend the party. Father usually meant no when he said it, and the girls were just heartsick over the whole affair, having hopefully given their promises to their best beaux and pressed up their best gowns in anticipation of the event.

As a last resort my older sister Mira came to me and said, "Clint, we've just got to go to this party. You can always get around Father. You see what you can do about it." I was awfully anxious to go myself as I was just now beginning to go to parties, and the handsome young John Spencer had invited me to go with him, so I said, "I'll see what I can do."

I waited until after breakfast the next morning before I approached Father, for I knew that he would be in a good humor then. The building was owned by a man named Groesbeck, and here I believe I showed some of Father's own diplomacy for instead of mentioning the courthouse I said, "There's going to be a party in Brother Groesbeck's building, and we girls would like very much to go."

Father sat for a while and twirled his thumbs around each other as he always did when he was thinking, and finally he said, "Who's on the committee? Are there any Gentiles?" When I assured him that the committee was above reproach he continued, "Well, you children have always been taught to behave yourselves. If you will go and not mingle with the Gentiles, I guess you can go." I gave him a grateful kiss and ran off to tell the good news to my waiting sisters.

While we girls were usually very careful to obey our parents and associate only with members of our own faith, there occasionally were times when we did "mingle with the Gentiles." I remember in particular one nice-looking boy who had come from the East and was staying with relatives while he studied chemistry at the Deseret University. He had a fine horse and buggy, always a superior attraction for a girl of my day, and I loved to go riding with him. I figured that it was all right for me to go for he was a perfect gentleman and I knew how to behave. I also figured that there was no need to distress my parents about the matter, so I was always very careful to get out of the buggy a block or so from home, being a firm believer in the convenient axiom that what they didn't know wouldn't hurt them.

All was not playtime for the boys and girls in the Lion and Beehive Houses, however. Although there were about twenty-five hired men and women on the place, each one of us was expected to do some share of the work. During the fruit season or housecleaning time, especially, we joined forces with our mothers and the maids and expended our best energies on the peaches or the dust as the case might be.

On Sunday there was neither any work nor play in our home that could possibly be avoided. Father observed the Sabbath with a Puritanical strictness and insisted that everyone else do the same. Not only the members of the family but the hired help as well were expected to make it a day of rest. The big dinner of the week was served on Saturday so that there would be cold meat left over for the Sunday dinner. The horses were never used if it were at all possible to avoid doing so, and even the machinery on the place was given a day of rest. Father would never wear the same clothes on Sunday that he wore on other days and he always urged his family to follow the same rule.

If we indulged in singing or reading, the music or books must be of a nature appropriate to the day. Of course, we were always expected to be in church during every session that was held so that we often attended twice or even three times a day. The girls' beaux could come on Sunday nights and be entertained in the parlor, but if the young people went buggy riding they must do so on some other night of the week.

When I grew old enough to be going out on Sunday night the young people of my age would entertain in groups. We would all attend church first, and then after meeting we would take a nice long walk in the dusk of the evening, ending up at the home of one of the crowd where we would have milk and doughnuts or occasionally some good homemade ice cream. No movies, jazz, or automobile rides—how tame it would all seem to the youth of today. But we enjoyed it, and I shall always be grateful for the wholesome atmosphere that surrounded my early girlhood.

The Beehive House was built with the purpose in view of having a place large enough for the entertainment of Father's visitors and friends and held spacious parlors both upstairs and down that were well suited to its purpose for that day.

Of all the parties and receptions that took place in the Beehive House, quite naturally none stands out in my memory as does my own lovely wedding reception. Rather oddly, only two of Father's daughters had wedding receptions in the Lion or Beehive Houses, the other one being my half sister Nabbie, who married Spencer Clawson. The principal reason for this was that many of the girls married in polygamy, and so of course the weddings were very quiet affairs with perhaps only a special dinner by way of festivity. The ceremonies themselves always took place in the Endowment House, which was used for these ordinances before the Temple was finished.

My own two older sisters were both plural wives, and while they were very happily married, one of them to the husband of another half sister, they had no receptions to mark their weddings. When my turn came along, being the last of Mother's daughters and having my John all to myself, I decided to have a large reception.

Although my marriage took place some years after Father's death, I was very happy in the knowledge that he had known my chosen husband and approved of him. We had been sweethearts since we were little more than children, and I recall that I was only in my very early teens when Father first learned of my interest in John. John was ill at the time with typhoid fever, and quite often I would take some pigeons and a bucket of milk down to him. One day as I was walking through the office on my way out, Father stopped me and said, "Daughter, what have you got there?" I told him that Mother had fried some pigeons and was sending them with a quart of new milk to John Spencer, who was ill. "And who is John Spencer?" he asked. I replied rather proudly that he was the son of Daniel and Emily Spencer. Father gave me his slow smile, which was always so benign and warming, as he answered, "A fine boy, and fine parents. Take good care of him." And I have tried to do so ever since.

It was in order that I might have the small front parlor for entertaining John that Father moved over to the Lion House—just another incident of his constant thoughtfulness for the comfort and welfare of his family. The death of my youngest brother Feramorz had taken place very suddenly and tragically at sea, only a few months before John had asked me to marry him, and I felt that I couldn't leave Mother alone in her sorrow in this great house. When we told her our plans for our future happiness, however, she urged that the marriage take place soon and that we make our home with her in the Beehive House. This suggestion made us very happy, of course, and we immediately began preparations for our wedding and decided that it should take place within a few months.

My wedding dress was not made in the style of the eighties but was fashioned after a dress I had seen a Mrs. Leslie, an actress, wear when I was a very little girl. Mrs. Leslie had come to Salt Lake with the Irwins in the early sixties, and accompanying her was a young niece, Flora Bray. The latter gave me an adorable miniature gold album which I was greatly tempted to give to Colleen Moore for her doll house when she exhibited it here recently and probably would have done so had not my daughters demurred. I admired these people very much and decided even at that early day that when the time came for me to wear a wedding gown it should be made like the princess style dress worn by Mrs. Leslie.

We made the dress at home, so I had it just as I wanted it. The material was of heavy white brocaded satin, and a piece was sent to Laird, Shoeber, and Mitchell in Philadelphia so that I might have slippers made to match my gown. My stockings were of heavy ribbed silk which today would look more like golf socks than wedding stockings, but at that time they were wonderful to me.

Preparations for the supper began days and days ahead of the wedding day. Mother cooked and cooked, and so did everyone in the house who could wield an egg beater or measure a cup of flour. We prepared hams, tongues, turkeys, and chickens. We sent to California for gallon cans of peaches, pears, and cherries. Talula and I made cakes for three days—white cakes, gold cakes, layer cakes, cream cakes, and sponge cakes. Mother made the doughnuts, mince pies, and salads, and dear Aunt Eliza Burgess Young made the wedding cake with its many tiers, which Brother Brown, the caterer, iced and decorated.

On the morning of the wedding, John called for me in a big barouche drawn by a fine span of horses. No one could possibly have come in finer style nor have looked more handsome. The dress I wore to the Endowment House was of navy blue with a velvet skirt and a satin basque trimmed with cut-steel buttons. My hat was a dark blue velvet elongated turban with an ostrich feather on the left side and a little bird ornament in front. My wrap was a long grey and black ulster that I had worn to New York two years before and, as usual, I wore high, black, laced shoes.

My sisters Fanny and Talula comprised all our wedding party. When we reached the Endowment House where we were to be married, we were so early that we had to sit down on a bench outside and wait for the building to be opened—not a very dignified procedure for a bride and groom who had proved to be a trifle too impatient. I was far too happy, however, to let a little thing like waiting outside a church bother me.

After our marriage we went home to a quiet luncheon with members of my own family. Just before we sat down Mother called one of the maids to get some fresh water for lunch, but John, in his gallant way, insisted that he be allowed to get it. In a few minutes he came marching back in again, proudly bearing the coal scuttle which he had picked up in the kitchen and filled with water at the pump in the back yard without ever noticing his mistake. Of course everyone laughed, but I thought it an evidence of how much in love he was.

The house had been literally turned upside down and inside out for the wedding. Beds had been taken down, long tables set in the big front room downstairs where supper was to be served to 350 guests, and fires had been laid in the two Franklin stoves in the upstairs parlor, where we were to receive.

The wedding reception was as beautiful in every detail as I had hoped for in my fondest dreams. After the guests had come and gone with their many expressions for our happiness, the lights were all turned out, the fires seen to for safety, the doors locked, Mother's good-night kiss and embrace given, John and I went to our room. It was very late, and all had seemed quiet for a long time when a timid knock came on our door. I called out, "Mother, is that you? Come in." Mother opened the door and, holding her candle high above her head, walked up to the bed and said, "Clarie, do you know where I put the key to the little bedroom downstairs? I have been looking for nearly two hours for it and cannot find it."

The missing key belonged to the little room where Mother and I had slept the night before and which held the only available bed in the house, for the hired help filled all the others. I said that I couldn't remember seeing it anywhere but would get up and help look for it. Suddenly I said, "Mother, have you looked in the pocket of your petticoat?" She put down the candle, raised her skirt, and put her hand in her pocket and drew out the key. Then looking at us with a weary smile, she said, "Sure enough, here it is. Well, good night, children." Poor, dear Mother! Wandering around the house for two hours after all the labors of that day.

In 1932 we went back to the Beehive House for a reception in honor of our golden wedding anniversary. I held my bouquet in the same little holder of lace paper and tinfoil that John had given me on our wedding day. Many of our original presents were on display, and many of the same guests were invited. At my side stood a slender young niece in my white satin wedding gown.
