Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

9—Brigham Young At Home

HOLIDAYS

Father loved children very much and made our home entertainments and holidays just as delightful as the facilities of the day would permit. The Christmas celebrations of my childhood hold memories that are especially dear to me. No one in the entire household was ever forgotten, and this meant providing Christmas cheer for a great many people when one included the help and pensioners on the estate as well as the family.

Simple as our celebrations were, our elders were fond of reminding us how very much more fortunate we were than the children of two decades earlier when a good square meal was ample cause for celebrating any day in the year. The first Christmas in the valley—so we were told—everyone worked as usual. The men gathered sagebrush and some of them even plowed, for there was little snow and the ground was still soft. Christmas came on Saturday, but Saturday being a workday not even Christmas could interfere with the usual labors, and so the celebration was held on the Sabbath. Nearly everyone was still living in the old fort, and they all gathered around the flagpole in the center of the square, sang, prayed, shook hands, and joined around a sagebrush fire. They were completely filled with joy that their lives had been preserved in the great trek and that they had found a home where they might enjoy peace. They asked for nothing more.

By the time another Christmas rolled around many had moved from the fort to homes of their own, and there was considerably more of feasting and good cheer. One of the pioneers, Mrs. Catherine Wooley, wrote in her journal: "S.A. took the things out of the house. Betsy mopped the floor and I did the cooking. Had seventeen couples to eat besides E.D. and children, Betsy, Samuel and I. Got dinner over and then went in the house and took a rest; had refreshments at eight o'clock and at one and at three. The company was very quiet and did well; had a fine dance. December 26 clear and cold. The company left this morning after sunrise. We cleaned up and sent the borrowed dishes home. Pie and cake to the Dr. All well this evening only I am very tired."

Within the short space of three years the population of the city had increased to thousands, and the Christmas celebration took on a still greater air of gaiety. A brass band paraded up and down the streets, with the players mounted on horseback. They serenaded at Father's house as well as the homes of other Church leaders. All the toys were home made, the ads in the paper carrying no mention of commercial playthings. However, if a husband wished to delight his wife with a new bonnet on Christmas morning, there was Mrs. A. Smith, "Late of St. Louis," who advertised a superior assortment of velvet, silk, satin, and straw bonnets, and a variety of fancy goods and millinery.

For days before Christmas I would slip into the family store, north of the Beehive House, and watch John Haslam tie up little square packages of nuts and raisins during his spare time. It was doubly worth my while because I could always count on his slipping me a lump of sugar or some other tasty bit while he was working. We would receive these nuts and raisins on Christmas morning along with vinegar and molasses candy that the girls had made and an abundance of "store" candy—gumdrops and peppermint sticks.

There was no tree in our home, for at that time the Christmas tree had not even come into general use in the East, but we always hung up our stockings, and every child received one toy and some clothing. We girls would receive knitted scarves, nubias (headdresses), mittens, shoes, stockings, garters, and wristers. John Spencer's first present to me was a pair of silk knitted wristers for which he had spent an entire week's wages. I nearly died of humiliation when a young nephew said scornfully right in his presence, "Is that all you brought her?" Some of us younger girls once received some red cashmere hoods that Mother's sister had made for us. They were made with a pointed cape in the back and trimmed with white swansdown and would have been rather pretty except that they had been lined with green cambric and tied with green ribbons because they were the only materials available in the house. As it was, they were a dreadful mixture of colors, and I hated them vehemently.

The boys would often receive new capes for Christmas, those being the outer garment most commonly worn. My brother Ernest, who was a big, husky fellow and didn't feel the cold very much, would wear his about his waist in skirt fashion to the great amusement of the rest of us.

For Christmas toys the boys would get swords, drums, guns, and skates while we girls would be made happy with wooden-headed dollies. The heads were turned in our own carpenter shop, then painted and sewed onto cloth bodies. When the dolls were finished they would be beautifully dressed by our diligent mothers. There was a Betsy Long who had a shop on Main Street where she made lovely wooden dolls, and conveniently near by was a woman basketmaker who could make equally fine bassinets.

My first wax doll, Lucy Ann, was among the first shipment of dolls to come to Utah, and she has now become quite a historic lady. She was not given to me for Christmas but on a decidedly different occasion. Father had been in the habit of pulling my baby teeth as they came loose. His ingenious procedure was to go to the cupboard in his room and get a nice long string of rock candy to dangle before my eyes. He would tell me to eat it, and if the tooth did not come out with the candy he would examine it. I see now the wonderful psychology he used even in his dealings with children. If the tooth did not come out with the candy and he had to come to the rescue, I would never see the forceps.

When the time came for the extraction of my first double tooth he urged me to go to Dr. Sharp, the family dentist—I am quite sure because he was loathe to hurt me himself. I did not want to go, and Father coaxed without avail. I don't seem to have been very susceptible to coaxing, but once more I succumbed to a bribe. Taking me on his knee, Father said, "Daughter, the Zion's Co-op has just received a shipment of wax dolls, such as you have never seen before. They are very beautiful and have real hair and shoes and stockings. If you will let Dr. Sharp pull your tooth I will have John Haslam go down with you the minute your tooth is out, and you can choose any doll you want for your own."

Such diplomacy won, of course. The doll is still very dear to me, with her features blurred from too frequent washings of oil, the only cleansing agent my mother said could be used safely. The hair is a trifle thin from constant combing during her early years, the grey plaster shoes show signs of wear, and the stockings are only half there, but precious she is, with the quite elaborate wardrobe I made for her in later years. My daughters and granddaughters have all enjoyed her, and soon a small great-granddaughter will be old enough to realize that Lucy Ann is something more than just another doll.

The first Thanksgiving Day in the valley was not celebrated in November but on New Year's Day instead. Apparently, Father thought the latter date more convenient or desirable at that particular time, and late in December of 1851 he issued the following unique proclamation:

"Proclamation of Gov. B.Y. issued in Dec. 1851.

"I, Brigham Young, Governor of the Territory aforesaid, in response to the time honored custom of our fathers at Plymouth rock, by the governors of the several states and territories, and with a heart filled with humility and gratitude to the Fountain of all good for his multiplied munificence to His children have felt desirous to and do proclaim Thursday, the first day of January eighteen hundred and fifty-two, a Day of Praise and Thanksgiving, for all the citizens of our peaceful territory. And I recommend to all the good citizens of Utah that they abstain from everything that is calculated to mar or grieve the spirit of their Heavenly Father, on that day; that they rise early in the morning of the first day of the New Year and wash their bodies with pure water; that all men attend to their flocks and herds with carefulness; and see that no creature in their charge be hungry, thirsty or cold, while the women are preparing the best of food for their households, and their children ready to receive it in cleanliness and with cheerfulness. I also do request of all good and peaceful citizens that they abstain from all evil thinking, speaking, and acting on that day; that no one be offended by his neighbor; that all jars and discords cease. . . that all may learn truth and have no need of priests to teach them. That all may do as they would be done by. I further request that when the day has been spent in doing good, in dealing out your bread, your butter, your port, your beef, your turkies, your molasses and the choicest of all products of the valleys of the mountains, at your command as to the poor; that you end the day in eating with singleness of heart as unto the Lord with praise and thanksgiving, and songs of rejoicing. Retire to your beds early and rise early again and continue doing good."

Thanksgiving was never a day of excessive feasting at our home. We would have a good dinner sufficient unto our needs, but prayer and thankfulness were the first order of the day.

On Father's birthday one of the wives, Aunt Margaret Pierce, would train the children of the family in songs and dances especially learned or made up in his honor. There was always a large dinner in the Lion House and greetings from the officials and members of the Church, but very seldom any presents. Almost the only present I remember the family giving him was a "hair wreath" now on display at the state capitol. Hair work was just coming in at that time, and several of the girls of the family took it up, but this particular wreath of flowers was a very grand one which was made professionally. Hair from the heads of every member of the family was used in its making. I have a hair bracelet which was made about the same time, and the links of gold which hold it together are made from some of the first gold found in California in 1849.

One present that Father received—not from the family, however—was a handsome barouche. It bore his coat of arms and made an elegant equipage for taking distinguished guests about the city, but Father didn't like it. He said that it was too fussy. The carriage intrigued me very much, however, and I was fond of riding about in it whenever I had an opportunity. It stood in a carriage house in the southeast corner of the grounds surrounding our home. A small stream of water for washing the carriage ran in and out of the carriage house by means of a small trough, and we children would sit by the hour on a hot summer day and dangle our feet into its pleasant coolness.

Another gift which Father received was a piece of beautiful black silk moire to be used in making a fancy vest. This he brought to me one day, saying that there was more than enough material in the piece for a vest and it was too fancy for him anyway, so that I might have it if I wished. I made myself an elegant coat out of the moire with passementerie trimming down the back—a coat which I still have.

July 24, the anniversary of the arrival of the first pioneers into the valley, has always been the occasion for special celebrations, but I doubt that one ever has or ever will equal the one held in 1849 on the second anniversary, considering the facilities of the times.

A large cannon had been brought from Nauvoo the first year, part of the way on its own wheels and the rest of the journey in a wagon, and on the day before the celebration several of the brethren spent the day making cartridges for firing salutes. Forty-niners, on their way to California, had obligingly furnished seventy-five pounds of powder toward the venture. At 7:30, on the morning of the twenty-fourth, when the great sixty-five-foot national flag was unfurled, it was saluted by the firing of this cannon, the firing of guns, the ringing of the Nauvoo bell, and spirit-stirring airs from the band.

The main events of the day were held in the Bowery, an open-air building on the Temple grounds, and hither at 3:15, Father and his counselors were escorted by the following retinue: (1) Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform; (2) brass band; (3) twelve Bishops bearing the banners of their wards; (4) seventy-four young men dressed in white, with white scarves on their right shoulders and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his right hand a copy of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States, and each carrying a sheathed sword in his left hand. One of them carried a beautiful banner which bore the inscription, "The Zion of the Lord"; (5) twenty-four young ladies dressed in white with white scarves on their shoulders and wreaths of white roses on their heads, each carrying a copy of the Bible and Book of Mormon and one carrying a very neat banner inscribed with, "Hail to our Captain"; (6) Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Daniel Spencer, D. Fullmer, Willard Snow, and Erastus Snow; (7) twelve Bishops carrying flags of their wards; (8) twenty-four Silver Greys led by Isaac Morley, Patriarch, each having a staff painted red at the upper part and a bunch of white ribbon fastened at the top, one of them carrying the Stars and Stripes bearing the inscription, "Liberty and Truth."

As they left our house and marched through the streets the young men and women sang a hymn, the Nauvoo bell pealed, and the band played. When all had arrived at the Bowery, the audience, which had been waiting for an hour, shouted, "Hosanna to God and the Lamb!" and "Hail to the Governor of Deseret!" A meeting followed in which songs were sung and the Constitution of the United States was read and received with cheers.

The climax of the day came after the meeting, however. Canopies had been extended one hundred feet from each side of the Bowery, and beneath this awning dinner was served to several thousand people including some hundreds of California emigrants and threescore Indians.

The following year, the day was also celebrated in style, and I particularly love to think back on the description of the costume worn by the young ladies and young men in the parade which one observer chronicled: "The dress of 24 young ladies was white dress, blue sash and a pink and blue wreath of flowers on their heads. The gent's dress was white pants, red sash, blue coat and white hats with green ribbons and the choir was pink and white both gents and ladies."

Unique among all celebrations was that held on Independence Day in 1871 when the Mormons and the non-Mormons each held a separate celebration. The Mormons had a splendid procession, followed by a meeting in the Tabernacle where thousands of children sat in the center of the hall and sang. The actress Nellie Colebrook made a stately Columbia, with attendants representing the states and territories. In the audience sat the Hon. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony.

The non-Mormons had a procession and a meeting likewise. In the first-named they featured the Goddess of Liberty in a float, carriages with state and army officials and several wagonloads of ore and bullion.

During the meetings each side threw dirt unsparingly at the other group, but, beyond that, the day passed off peaceably enough.

The celebrations within my own memory were wonderful, although exceedingly noisy ones, with a barrage of firecrackers and guns lasting through the entire night. At 5 A.M. the bands would play, and at sunrise a salute would be fired for each territory (rather than state, since Utah had not yet attained statehood). Of course the parades were always the high spot of the day, and it was surprising the ingenuity and sometimes the naivete that was displayed in those pioneer processions.

There were sure to be a number of bands in any parade, bands having always played an important part in life among our people. When the very first companies left Illinois on the trek across the country, although they didn't have sufficient food for their needs, they had two bands to help uphold their morale, one evidently not being deemed sufficient for the purpose. Father always had a float of the wonderful fruit that was grown upon our place, and many others drove wagons in which they proudly displayed the beautiful flowers and luscious fruits that they had brought forth from the desert. There was one parade in which twenty-four young girls, including myself, rode on horseback. We wore riding habits of white unbleached muslin, which I designed and helped make, and fetching little round caps patterned very much like those worn today.

We seldom had a "celebration" except on the regular holidays, but the coming of the first railroad train into Ogden was the occasion for one of the most spontaneous and rousing celebrations that I have ever seen. I was only nine years old at the time and had been taken to Ogden, along with my mother's young sister Christine, by Aunt Amelia. The forty-mile trip in the carriage meant a very early start if we were not to miss any of the excitement, but we enjoyed every minute of it, and Crissie and I spent much of the time wondering what a train would look like. I believe that even Aunt Amelia didn't know quite so much about a "modern" train as she pretended.

The entire affair more than surpassed our fondest expectations. The rails were being laid into the city by the workmen, and as soon as they were in place the train would move along behind. The "celebration" followed right along with the laying of the rails and the oncoming train. It is difficult now to imagine what the coming of the railroad meant to the people of that day. No more freighting of the most necessary supplies by ox team and wagon. No more weeks of weary, dusty travel in order to reach the civilization that lay beyond the mountains, and no more danger from Indians and robbers while attempting to cover the ground in a stagecoach. I think that my father must have been especially happy about it, because the bringing of thousands of converts to Utah, with the attendant hardships and dangers, had been one of his greatest problems during his leadership of the Church.

It was small wonder that the iron horse was greeted with near hysteria. People were all dressed up in their best, the city was gay with flags and bunting, and the lively music of bands filled the air.

The reviewing stand was located at a spot which the train reached by midafternoon. High above the stand waved the banner, "Hail to the Highway of the Nation. Utah Bids You Welcome," and on the stand sat high officials of the Church and Territory. As the train with its three engines steamed proudly up to the front of the stand, the din broke forth. There were three cheers for the highway, the artillery boomed, the bands played, and the engines whistled, while the excited people in the crowd shouted and waved their caps and handkerchiefs.

But all of this was quite insignificant in my mind beside the fact that I received a whole orange to eat by myself, the very first one I had ever had. To be sure, I had tasted one before. Father had come into the house one day after the arrival of an immigrant train and handed an orange to Mother, saying, "Lucy, here is an orange. Divide it among the children." He had shown her how to peel it, and it was divided into sections. I, being the youngest, also received the peelings, which I dried and treasured carefully for perfume.

This other, however, was quite different. Aunt Amelia, who was a very queenly woman and used to having about what she wanted, had seen the oranges and, turning to Hiram B. Clawson, had said, "Hiram, get me a bag of those oranges." Hiram complied, and Crissie and I each received one of them. So what mattered a train, even though we had never seen a train before and this one had three engines?

Just a few years previous to the coming of the "iron horse," the inauguration of Abraham Lincoln in 1865 had been the occasion for the greatest celebration in honor of a President that the city had ever seen. Lincoln had particularly endeared himself to the Mormons by saying, when asked what policy he intended to pursue regarding them, "I intend to let them alone." This was all the consideration that our people asked of any President and much more than they had received of some.

On the day of his second inauguration a procession one mile in length moved through the streets of the city. The day was a wintry one, and the participants rode in sleighs decorated with streamers and rosettes of red, white, and blue. As they passed by the houses, they were greeted with enthusiastic cheers from onlookers at the windows and even on the roofs. Later they assembled at a stand for a meeting, which was followed by a banquet given by the city council, which Colonel George and his staff of Camp Douglas attended as special guests. Fireworks in the evening completed the day's rejoicing.

Two months later the city was thrown into deep mourning over the sad news of the assassination. Flags were displayed at half mast, and many business houses and homes were draped in crepe. Father's carriage, covered with crepe, was driven through the city streets.

Certainly no occasion in Utah, during the nineteenth century, was more deserving of celebration than the day when the Territory was finally admitted into the Union.

The people had fought for statehood for a great many years but had been denied because of their attitude on the question of polygamy. Finally, on the fourth of January, 1896, the news was received by telegraph that the long-fought battle was won. The superintendent of the telegraph station attempted to announce it to the citizens by running out into the street and blowing off an old shotgun. For a time the frightened bystanders thought that a holdup was in progress and took shelter in the doorways of neighboring stores, but as the truth gradually became known and the good news spread, the city took on a festive appearance, with flags and bunting decorating every store window and home.

Needless to say, after waiting nearly fifty years for statehood, the people planned the finest celebration possible. The committee in charge of the meeting in the Tabernacle, at which the official announcement of statehood was to be made, decided that as one feature they would have a large flag made, large enough to cover almost the entire ceiling of that enormous building.

The appropriation for decorations was only seventy-five dollars, which was entirely inadequate, so two members of the committee, Spencer Clawson and Margaret Caine—determined that their undertaking should succeed—proceeded to call upon the merchants of the city for donations. By this means enough money finally was raised. George Romney, the manager of a local shoe factory, consented to make the flag for only twenty-nine dollars, the actual cost of the extra labor employed. The time of the regular employees and all of the thread used was given free of charge.

The flag, when finished, contained 1,296 yards of yard-wide bunting, each of the stripes being two yards in width. Its length was 132 feet and its width 78 feet. It was so heavy that it required the united efforts of eight men to lift and carry it into the building. Ropes were sewn into the edges, and after great exertion the flag was elevated to within nine feet of the ceiling, where it produced a most wonderful effect. The new "Utah" star was ingeniously lighted by cutting out the star shape from a square of black felt, covering the opening with plate glass and placing back of it, in a reflector, five thirty-two-candle-power electric lights. At that time it was the largest flag that had ever been made, and I doubt very much if it has been surpassed in size since.

During the meeting the military band played the "Star-Spangled Banner" just as the forty-fifth star shone forth in all its glory. Twelve hundred flags were used in decorating the Tabernacle, and the light bill alone was $120. A truly vast sum and a vast amount of light for those days. In the evening a magnificent ball was held in the theatre with such dances featured as the lancers, the quadrille, the two-step, and the Berlin polka.

Nearly all of the grown-up members of our family were in attendance, with the ladies outdoing all previous efforts in the matter of dress. Aunt Amelia wore a blue dress of lute-string silk trimmed with real Valenciennes lace, which was said to have cost several hundred dollars, and a number of my sisters wore creations almost as elegant.
