Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

10—Brigham Young At Home

VISITORS

The Beehive House was the only place suitable for the entertainment of notable visitors in whom Father was interested, the one or two hotels in the city making little pretense beyond keeping a guest reasonably comfortable. Our parlors were spacious and tastefully furnished, and Mother could always be depended upon to serve a meal to which he was proud to invite the most distinguished persons in the land. Many statesmen and Government officials were our guests during Father's lifetime for, even after he ceased being governor of the Territory, he was generally acknowledged to be in reality the head of the commonwealth which he had founded.

Among the prominent visitors from the East and from foreign countries that were entertained in our home were General Sherman and his daughter, James A. Garfield, Ole Bull (the Norwegian violinist), members of a Japanese embassy, Prince Frederick of Wittgenstein, who came with Baron Rothschild, and, greatest-sounding of all, the Emperor of Brazil. The latter may have been a very temporary ruler, I do not know, but he was most elegant, and I was greatly excited to have a personage of high title in our very own home.

One of the first of these famous guests was Horace Greeley, who came by stagecoach in 1859. Being a newspaperman, he was bold enough to question Father about the practice of polygamy, and Father discussed the matter very freely with him. Mr. Greeley next wanted to know whether Utah would be admitted as a free state or a slave state, to which Father replied: "She will be a free state. Slavery here would be useless and unprofitable. I regard it generally as a curse to the masters. I, myself, hire many laborers and pay them fair wages. I could not afford to own them. I can do better than subject myself to an obligation to feed and clothe their families and care for them in sickness and health. Utah is not adapted to slave labor."

Mr. Greeley stayed for more than a week before pressing farther on into that West which he became famed for endorsing as a suitable place for shaping the destinies of young men. During the course of his visit a large reception and banquet was given in his honor by the Deseret Typographical and Press Association.

The next year, also of necessity by stagecoach, came Richard F. Burton, an English officer famous for his explorations in Africa, and the inimitable Mark Twain. Burton had heard a great deal of unfavorable comment about the Mormons—there was practically no other kind in that day—and came all the way out here to see for himself. As a result of his visit he wrote a book, The City of the Saints, wherein he says of Father: "The first impression left on my mind by this short visit, and it was subsequently confirmed, was that the Prophet is no common man and that he has none of the weakness and vanity which characterize the common man."

What Mark Twain thought of Salt Lake City and of Father, we gather from his book, Roughing It. What Father thought of Mark Twain, I do not know, but I'm sure it wasn't what the humorist would have us believe. Of the city and its people he said: "We walked about the streets of Great Salt Lake City and glanced in at the shops and stores and there was a fascination in staring at every creature we took to be a Mormon. We felt a curiosity to ask every child how many mothers it had and if it could tell them apart. . . . We strolled about everywhere through the broad, straight, level streets and enjoyed the pleasant strangeness of a city of 15,000 inhabitants with no loafers perceptible in it, and no visible drunkard or noisy people. A limpid stream rippling and dancing through every street in place of a filthy gutter; block after block of trim dwellings built of frame and sunburned brick—a great thriving orchard and garden behind every one of them, apparently, and a grand general air of neatness, repair, thrift and comfort around and about and over the whole.

"Such was the home of the Latter Day Saints, the stronghold of the prophets, the capitol city of the only absolute monarchy in America, Great Salt Lake City."

Of his interview with Father he wrote: "The second day we put on white shirts and went and paid a state visit to the king (Brigham Young). He seemed a quiet, kindly, easy mannered, dignified, self-possessed old gentleman of fifty-five or sixty and had a gentle craft in his eye that probably belonged there. He was very simply dressed and was just taking off a straw hat as we entered. He talked about Utah and the Indians and Nevada and general American matters and questioned our secretary and certain government officials who came with us. But he never paid any attention to me, notwithstanding I made several attempts to 'draw him out' on Federal politics and his high-handed attitude toward congress. I thought some of the things I said were rather fine. But he merely looked around at me at distant intervals, something as I have seen a benignant old cat look around to see which kitten was meddling with her tail. By and by I subsided into an indignant silence and so sat until the end, hot and flushed and execrating him in my heart for an ignorant savage. But he was calm. His conversation with those gentlemen flowed on as sweetly and peacefully and musically as any summer brook. When the audience was ended and we were retiring from the presence, he put his hand on my head, beamed down at me in an admiring way and said to my brother, 'Ah—your child, I presume? Boy or girl?'"

One of the most unusual persons we ever entertained was the irrepressible George Francis Train, who although practically unknown to this generation attracted as much of the world's attention as any individual of his day not connected with official life. He was a man who gloried in taking the part of the underdog, and of course he found a most apt subject for his sympathies in the Mormons. He had spent part of the year 1869 in a British jail in Ireland, where he had landed for espousing the Fenian cause and upon being released, hastened to America to find new battles to fight.

During a tour of New England he gave an impromptu speech in defense of the Mormons which he had gleaned from one given in Congress by our representative William H. Hooper. The speech created a sensation, and from then on he took up cudgels for the cause and was constantly engaged in controversy with the press and his audiences.

He next came stumping across the country announcing his candidacy for the Presidency of the United States in 1872 and gave two addresses in Salt Lake City. He was a very large fellow with a mop of curly, bushy hair and many eccentricities of manner. His speeches made up in delivery what they lacked in content, and he was received with great enthusiasm.

The visit of Schuyler Colfax, Speaker of the House, and his party in 1865 was, of course, a great occasion, since no one of such national importance had ever before braved the discomforts and dangers of a journey by stagecoach to gain firsthand knowledge of our Territory.

The party was met on a hill east of the city by an official welcoming party headed by the ex-delegate to Congress, William Hooper, who made a speech of welcome. Colfax responded in the fluent manner for which he was famous, and the party was then taken at once to the warm springs for a bath, which I have no doubt was most welcome. In the afternoon they attended a meeting in the Bowery, and on Saturday evening they were guests at a special performance in the theatre. One of the party in describing the performance said that "the playing, costumes and scenery were decidedly better than metropolitan theatres will average and the building in size and elegance was excelled by only five or six in the United States. The performance closed with an exquisite fairy spectacle which made it difficult to realize we were in the heart of the American desert."

Mr. Colfax did not think it becoming to his national importance to call upon Father (the only other person who had evinced such exclusiveness was the Indian chief, Walker), but when Father was so informed he went to call upon the Speaker, together with several of the Apostles. They had a very pleasant visit, which Mr. Colfax and his party later returned.

The Eastern visitors were the dinner guests of one of the leading merchants of the city, and one of them wrote of the affair: "A dinner to our party this evening at which President Young and the principal members of his council were present, had as rich a variety of fish, meats and vegetables, pastry and fruit as I ever saw on any private table in the east; and the quality and the cooking and the serving were unimpeachable. All the food, too, was native in Utah. The wives of our host waited on us most amicably and the entertainment was in every way the best illustration of the practical benefits of plurality that has yet been presented to us."

Of all the great men who called upon Father, I remembered best and admired most that fine gentleman and soldier, General William T. Sherman, Commander in Chief of the United States Army. He and his daughter were just returning from a tour of California and Oregon and made a brief stop in our city on their return East. They were staying at the Townsend House, and hundreds of people gathered in the street hoping that he would make a speech. At first he declined, but after a group of young choir girls had serenaded him with "Hard Times Come Again No More," he came out on the balcony and made a brief but earnest and sincere talk, telling them that he hoped that "hard times would come again no more" to our beautiful valley.

The next day he came to our home, and although I was banished from the great presence while he paid his respects to Father, I gazed long and hard upon his retreating back, as he left, from the vantage point of an upstairs window.

Probably the guest who stayed with us for the longest period of time, and certainly under the most peculiar circumstances, was a Captain Evans. Father had been placed under arrest for resisting the United States authorities, but through the intervention of Colonel Kane, who was always his staunch friend, he was allowed to remain under arrest in his own home with a guard in the house. The guard, Captain Evans, lived at the Beehive House and ate his meals there, which, incidentally, raised the number of breakfasts that Mother had to prepare from three to four, for he always had his breakfast alone after the family had eaten. He was very courteous and agreeable, and some of my older sisters were quite taken with the handsome "Gentile." In fact, we were not at all sorry to have Father under arrest, especially since he came and went as he pleased anyway.

Father was very much interested in the theatre and often invited visiting stars, musicians, and other artists to our home. Among those I remember best were Julia Dean Hayne; Lingard, the monologist, and his wife "Dickie," who was very blonde and had a very sweet voice; the Swiss Bell Ringers, who made merry music upon bells set in frames and upon water glasses placed in rows on the table; the British Blondes, who put on the light musical comedies that Father especially enjoyed; and Anna, the girl born without arms, who wrote with her toes. She sat on the floor and handled, or rather "toed" the pen with as much facility as we who have the use of our hands can do. I still have her letter to father in appreciation of his hospitality.

But all of these fade into insignificance in comparison with the thrill I had when we received Mr. and Mrs. Tom Thumb (Commodore Nutt and Minnie Warren) as guests in our home. The other children in the neighborhood could only see these midgets on the stage, but I had the great pleasure of sitting down to dinner at the very same table with them. There is a story told that Tom Thumb, looking up at Father, who was rather large in build, said, "There is one thing that I can't understand and that is this belief in polygamy." Smiling down at him, Father answered very genially, "I couldn't understand it either when I was your size."

Mrs. Hayne was by all odds the greatest favorite with our family as well as with the rest of the community. Father admired her very much and showed her every courtesy during her stay in the city, which lasted an entire year. These courtesies caused some gossip among the townspeople, and there were rumors to the effect that she was secretly married to Father, all of them quite without foundation. In a curtain call during her farewell appearance she paid him a very lovely tribute, saying, among other things, "To President Young, for many courtesies to a stranger alone and unprotected, I return these thanks which are hallowed by their earnestness, and I trust he will permit me, in the name of my art, to speak my high appreciation of the order and beauty that reigns throughout this house. I would that the same purity prevailed in every temple for the drama's teachings."

It was for her entertainment and in her honor that Father built and named our sleigh the "Julia Dean." The sleigh was a marvel in that day and would be a museum piece if it were still in existence. It was a great, long affair shaped something like a canoe, with the rear and front ends rising up very high and with the driver's seat placed between two graceful swans. It was drawn by six spirited horses and would seat twenty-four people comfortably, although when we children piled in for a merry ride over the frosty streets there was more likely to be twice that number tucked in between the buffalo robes and the blankets.

After the "Julia Dean" passed out of our possession it was used for a time as a band wagon and eventually wound up at a farm up in Davis County, where it served the lowly purpose of a feedbox for horses. Finally, one of the horses kicked it to pieces and brought an ignominious end to the once magnificent "Julia Dean."

It was in order to entertain his guests on a more elaborate scale that the Gardo House was built, although the popular rumor for many years was that it was built for Father's "favorite wife," Amelia Folsom, and it was commonly called "Amelia's Palace." The simple facts were that a more suitable place was needed, and Father was anxious to shift the burden of entertaining from Mother's shoulders.

Amelia may have been selected to act as hostess there, although she had no particular ability as a housekeeper, and it is true that she, together with Mary Ann Angell, was given a life lease upon the property at the time of Father's death, but the story of "Amelia's Palace" was the invention of a one-armed hack driver. He used to take tourists around the city to various points of interest and told this particular tale, along with many another colorful one, for the entertainment of his passengers. The house was not entirely finished when Father's death occurred, and both Aunt Amelia and Mother Young lived there only long enough to make their claims legal and then sold their leases to the Church.

After passing through the hands of two or three other people it became the property of Mrs. Emery Holmes, now the Princess Engalitcheff, who furnished it in regal style and gave elaborate entertainments there while she lived in Salt Lake. She insisted upon calling it "Amelia's Palace," and the name rather stuck until the house was torn down to make way for the Federal Reserve Bank. Father was very fond of giving names to all of his houses, and this particular one was named the Gardo House from a Spanish book that he had particularly enjoyed.

He usually spent the winters down in southern Utah, where the climate is very mild, and although he made the original plans for the house, the partitions were partly put in place during his absence. The rooms were finished much too small for his liking, and he was quite disgusted with the place when he saw it. In fact, he remarked that he could never look at it without thinking of the Tabernacle organ.

A magnificent set of dishes and glassware decorated with the initials B.Y. in gold had been ordered for the house but arrived after Father's death. The executors of the estate decided to sell them to the interested members of the family and agreed that the amount raised on them should be five hundred dollars. The dishes were sold "unsight and unseen," for they still reposed in barrels in our large woodshed. When they were unpacked they were put into twenty-five piles, and numbers were drawn for them. I was among those who bought some of the dishes, and later my mother's and brother's share came to me so that I have rather a large amount of the "B.Y. China." Many of the grandchildren have expressed disappointment that none of it had come into their possession, but it was simply because their parents did not have the means or were indifferent about buying it at the time.
