Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

11—Brigham Young At Home

EARLY-DAY COMMUNICATION

The first mail carriers in Salt Lake City were the incoming settlers and the first post offices, the covered wagons which had traveled through deep rivers and rocky mountain passes for more than a thousand miles. The letters or newspapers might be anywhere from three to six months old, and the information they contained anything but "news." Letters informing friends or relatives of the impending arrival of emigrants would sometimes be delivered long after the senders themselves had made their appearance. The news that Utah had been created a Territory came through many months after the act had been passed by Congress.

But never were letters received more gratefully! For the first few years after the exodus began, the Saints were scattered all the way from Illinois to Salt Lake, and most of them were living in wagon boxes or temporary camps. Sickness and death were all too common among them, as those who had arrived in the valley first well knew. Late in the fall of 1848 Aunt Clara Decker wrote: "The excitement was great as Taylor and Green rode into the city and distributed the letters without envelopes, tied round and round with buckskin thongs." Four men had come from Winter Quarters—the last camp of the Saints before the final push through the mountains—with 227 letters, many newspapers and gazettes, bringing the only mail that would get through before the snow made the mountain passes impassable. Another woman wrote of the cost of this mail service. "I paid $1.10 for postage or delivery charges on two letters from friends in the states but did not begrudge it for we were glad to get them."

Even after the mail had arrived in the valley, delivery was by no means prompt or certain. Many of the first arrivals had moved off to distant settlements and were not easily located. In one town the post office was merely a bushel basket in the general store, and anyone who expected or hoped for mail thumbed through the contents until he located his own. In Salt Lake City after the Sunday services in the Bowery, a list of names for whom letters were lying unclaimed, would be called from the platform.

The first letter to leave the valley was written by Father to Ezra Benson about one week after the arrival of the first company. He told of the new settlement in the valley, spoke with appreciation of the fact that every member in the company had come through safely, assured the pioneers on the plains of help, should they need it, and counseled them to be cheerful and praise God for His goodness.

It was much more difficult even to send mail back to the States than to receive it here, since practically all the travel was in this direction. The eastbound mail in the summer of 1849 was carried by Colonel Babbitt, the delegate to Congress from the Territory, and the letters were necessarily sent without benefit of envelopes or stamps, being simply wrapped in buckskin covers and tied with thongs of the same material.

It was almost as difficult to get the mail through to the outlying settlements in the Territory as it was to bring it from the East. One story of the unusual methods of mail delivery, which is only typical of dozens of such cases, is that of the carrier in Kanab. In order to make a short cut and avoid bad roads, a cable line was installed from the bottom of a high precipice to the top, a distance of about one thousand feet. At the top was a windlass to which a long rope was attached with a pulley and hook at the bottom. When the mail was outward bound, the sacks were attached to the hook. A man at the top wound the windlass, and up went the sacks to be replaced by the incoming mail.

Transporting the mails from Missouri to Salt Lake was largely a hit-or-miss proposition until 1850, when a contract was awarded to Samuel H. Woodsen, who in turn sublet it to Little, Hanks, and Decker. A Government contract was no insurance that the mail would come through on schedule, however. There was supposed to be a delivery once a month, but what with riding unbroken Mexican mules over roads that were poor at their best, it is not surprising that the settlers expected the mail carriers when they saw them riding down the hills. It was many years before conditions were bettered to any extent, and as late as the winter of 1858 it required seventy-eight days of hard trail breaking and suffering to carry the mail from Salt Lake City to Independence, Missouri.

Our families had a private post office in Father's offices between the Lion and Beehive Houses. Pigeonholes were arranged alphabetically, one for each member of the family. All of our mail was addressed to "Box B," and mail from Church headquarters bore the same insignia. At one time Richard W. Young was down in Richfield and wrote to me as Miss Klint Chung. At first, no one could locate the lady, but eventually someone figured out that it might be I. Evidently the name appealed to him, for he used it rather a long time in our correspondence.

In the spring of 1860 the age of speed was ushered in by that heroic experiment, the Pony Express. Weeks, actually, were cut from the time formerly required to send a letter when the riders performed the amazing feat of covering the distance from Salt Lake to the frontier in six days.

Stations were built every fifteen to twenty-five miles from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California, where fresh horses and provisions were kept. The rider would leave his station with his precious pouch or saddlebag, gallop like the wind over desert, plain, and mountain ridge, seizing a fresh mount at the station with scarce a glance away from the beckoning trail.

It was no ordinary rider and no ordinary horse that was expected to accomplish this task. The riders had to weigh less than one hundred pounds, consequently they were usually mere lads. They must have unquestioned courage, be excellent riders, and sign Alexander Majors' unique pledge that they would use no profane language, drink no intoxicating liquors, neither quarrel nor fight with other employees, and conduct themselves in every way to win the confidence of their employers. They also received a Bible from Majors which they were pledged to read.

The horses of the quality demanded for the express brought three or four times the price that an ordinary horse sold for. The fact that his pony had been carefully selected and could outrun the Indians' horses, saved the life of many a pony express rider.

The Pony Express was successful beyond the layman's wildest dreams as a means of rapid communication, but as a financial venture for promoters Russell, Majors, and Waddell it was a decided pain in the neck. The expenses ran out of all proportion to the revenue in spite of the fact that the charges for carrying letters were anywhere from one to five dollars for half an ounce. The reasons for this were numerous. It was necessary to keep eighty riders and four hundred horses in readiness to ride, although there were usually only about eight men in the saddle at one time. The riders received from forty to one hundred dollars a month and were fed and housed at the company's expense. Hay and grain for the ponies were freighted at a cost of twenty-five cents a pound, outside of the original cost, which was often very high. Besides all this, the Indians were constantly burning down the stations and killing or stealing the ponies. It is estimated that the company lost one hundred thousand dollars during the one year they carried on their noble experiment.

By the fall of 1861 the ten-day span of the Pony Express was made obsolete by the advent of the telegraph. The first pole for the Overland line was "planted" on the main street of Salt Lake City, July 10, 1861, by James Street, general agent for the company. There was no demonstration at the time, nor was any particular notice taken of the event, although the Church and civil authorities were extremely happy that this great stride was being made in linking them so much more closely with the rest of the world.

People in California had been somewhat fearful that the Indians and the Mormons would jeopardize the safety of the line, but they soon learned that they had nothing to fear from the latter. Mr. Street called upon Father, who received him most cordially and offered him every aid within his power.

Before long he found that he had need of Father's proffered aid. One of the greatest difficulties the builders encountered was the task of securing poles. There were no trees large enough for the purpose, except in the mountains, and these were not always easily available. A group of the Mormon pioneers had a contract to furnish poles which they refused to fulfill when they found that they were losing money.

Mr. Street apprised Father of the situation and was told in reply that he need not worry; the poles would be delivered as promised. Father then sent word to the contractors that they were to fulfill their agreement if it made paupers of every one of them. Not one man failed to deliver the poles.

The Mormon question was thus very happily disposed of, but a great deal more ingenuity was required in dealing with the Indians, who were at first inclined to greet this new progress of the whites with their usual destructiveness. To meet this situation, Creighton, who was in charge of the east end of the line, had two Indian chiefs send messages to each other over a distance of five hundred miles. Each told the other to meet him at the halfway point, and when the agreement was kept they were certain that the lines were imbued with a supernatural power and consequently worthy of their most wholesome respect.

The lines were completed by October 17, 1861, and the first use was courteously tendered to Father, who sent the following message to J. H. Wade, the president of the Pacific Telegraph Company:

Salt Lake City

Oct. 18th, 1861

Hon. J. H. Wade,

Cleveland, Ohio,

Sir:

Permit me to congratulate you on the completion of the Overland Telegraph Co. line west to this city, to commend the energy displayed by yourself and associates in the rapid and successful prosecution of the work so beneficial, and to express the wish that its use may ever tend to promote the true interests of the dwellers upon both the Atlantic and Pacific slopes of our continent.

Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the constitution and laws of our once happy country and is warmly interested in such useful enterprises as the one so far completed.

BRIGHAM YOUNG

To which President Wade replied:

Cleveland, Ohio,

Oct. 19, 1861

Hon. Brigham Young, President, Great Salt Lake City,

Sir:

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your message of last evening which was in every way gratifying, not only in the announcement of the completion of the Pacific Telegraph to your enterprising and prosperous city, but that yours, the first message to pass over the line, should express so unmistakably the patriotism and Union-loving sentiments of yourself and people.

I join with you in the hope that this enterprise may tend to promote the welfare and happiness of all concerned and that the annihilation of time in our means of communication may also tend to annihilate prejudice, cultivate brotherly love, facilitate commerce, strengthen the bonds of our once, and again to be happy union.

With just consideration for your high position and due respect for you personally,

I remain your obedient servant

J. H. WADE.

Soon after the lines were finished, Father established a private telegraph office in the east room of a little adobe building where the Hotel Utah underground garage is now located, with Willie Dougall as the first operator. Later it was moved to the room just east of the main Church office in the Lion House.

Far more interesting to me than the telegraph office was the room on the west side of the adobe building where Professor Barfoot conducted his wonderful menagerie. The exhibit included such awe-inspiring specimens as a stuffed two-headed sheep and some starfish. In the back yard were beavers, cougars, and other animals from the nearby mountains, safely imprisoned in imposing cages. Ten cents admission was charged to view the menagerie, but one could go in and hear the telegraph tick for nothing.

The telegraph office in Provo was located in the home of Aunt Eliza Burgess, Father's wife, who lived in that city. I spent one winter in her delightful home and remember well the room in the southeast corner of the house which comprised the important "office."

Long before the Overland route was completed, Father had visions of building telegraph lines throughout the Territory. What with colonizing, Indian raids, and the constant influx of emigrants, the need for direct communication was very great. In 1866 the Deseret Telegraph Company was organized, with Father as president, and he immediately sent out a circular to all the Bishops along the proposed route asking them to give the enterprise their earnest support. They responded with their usual enthusiasm, and many people served on the line for months without any pay except in the benefits that came when the work was completed. Father called the men on a "mission" to do this work, much the same as if they were called to go out and preach the gospel.

In October of that same year sixty-five wagons arrived in Salt Lake from the East bringing the necessary wire and insulators, and by December the line was completed between Salt Lake and Ogden. Within another year five hundred miles of telegraph wires had been erected throughout the length and breadth of the Territory and the small, remote settlements brought within direct communication to the rest of the world.

Father also called a number of young people on missions to learn the art of telegraphy and then scattered them throughout the Territory to act as operators. Many of the most efficient of these were young women who carried on their work after marriage with only brief periods off while they had their babies.

One young man by the name of William Bryan became so adept that Father hired him as his private operator during his trips about the Territory. He was intensely interested in both local and national happenings, and young Bryan would cut in on the wires, wherever they happened to be, and get the news which had been especially compiled for Father by his secretary in Salt Lake.

At one time, when Father and his party had been spending the night at Fillmore, the spring rains had left the roads in a almost impassable state, but as Father was very anxious to get the day's news he said to his operator, "Willie, I wish you would ride on ahead to Scipio and ask Salt Lake for everything of importance as soon as you can without injury to your horse."

Bryan rode to Scipio and found that the nearest approach to the telegraph wires was a good-sized woodpile in the Bishop's back yard. He hunted up the Bishop and told him that he would like some assistance in setting up his apparatus. The Bishop signified his willingness to help, but likewise his doubts of being able to do so successfully.

"Get a table," said Bryan, "and we will put it on top of your woodpile, and I will put my instruments to work up there."

The Bishop brought the table, and in a short time the wire was cut and the instruments installed. Darkness and falling snow soon added to their difficulties, but the Bishop met this situation by bringing a lantern and an umbrella to hold over the diligent operator. By the time Father arrived Bryan was sitting up there in the cold, busily copying the day's happenings as he received them from Salt Lake.

"Say, Willie," called Father, "is that your office tonight?"

"Yes, President Young," he replied, "this is headquarters tonight."

The telegraph brought to an end the necessity of using the Pony Express as a means of rapid communication. However, it could not handle the letters, newspapers, or passengers, and so, for a few years, the stagecoach held the spotlight as the carrier of our still far from daily mail. Russell, Majors, and Waddell lost their mail contract by foreclosure, and it was taken up by Ben Holladay, financier, politician, and sportsman in his own peculiar way.

During the sixties Holladay decided to travel by stagecoach from the Pacific Coast to Atchison, Kansas, a distance of about two thousand miles. He likewise decided to make the trip in less time than it had ever been made before, except by Pony Express, and accomplished his objective by arriving at his destination in exactly twelve days and two hours, beating the regular mail schedule by five days. The trip cost him twenty thousand dollars, and the wear and tear on stock and vehicles, not to mention the wear and tear upon himself. It is the fastest trip on record ever made in a Concord stagecoach.

The Concord coaches must have been terribly uncomfortable for the long journeys over the mountainous roads. The bodies swung on leather straps, and there were no springs of any description. Nine passengers rode on the inside and one or two on the outside when it was not necessary to carry an armed guard, which was very seldom. The fare from Atchison to Salt Lake was $250, and it mattered not the least whether the passenger weighed three hundred pounds or one third that amount. The lightweight paid just the same as the heavyweight.

As usual, the Indians were the greatest menace the stagecoach encountered. The mail stations were substantial stone buildings with loopholes in the walls for the firing of rifles, and there was always a plentiful supply of rifles. A United States senator once scoffed at the danger of attacks by saying that "the only hostile Indians on the plains were a few kept by Ben Holladay and brought out whenever he needed a new mail appropriation or an excuse for the non-performance of duty." But I rather suspect that the senator didn't take a ride West to prove his contention.

Perhaps, if he had, he would have had the same experience as that of a woman who, a lone passenger in a stagecoach, looked out after an unusually wild ride and found the driver gone. The horses went on of their own accord until the next station was reached, and later the driver's body was found with an arrow through the forehead.

Albert D. Richardson, who came with the Schuyler Colfax party, took a light-minded view of the situation when he wrote of their trip across the plains: "We were a sort of traveling arsenal with two or three weapons to the man. Attacked, we should have been dangerous indeed—if not to the Indians, at least to each other. One night a huge grizzly bear was seated right in our road. His education had been sadly neglected for, with the grossest disrespect to nation and state dignitaries, he refused to budge one inch. So we turned out and gave him a wide berth. Like the man in the story, he was bigger than us and we forgave him."

For a time in 1862, the Indians became so hostile that it was extremely difficult to bring the mail through at all. Stations were burned, coaches robbed, and passengers killed until it became necessary to send out a detachment of thirty armed men from Utah to guard the stagecoaches until U. S. troops could arrive to take the work over. At one place they found twenty-six sacks of mail, a great portion of which had been cut open and scattered over the plains. Letters had been opened and pillaged in such a way as to indicate that renegade whites had been connected with the robberies.

The mail was usually lashed to the bottom of the coaches so as not to discommode the passengers and, after being dragged through numerous mountain streams, frequently arrived in such a sad condition that it had to be hung out to dry before it could be read at all. "We are aware however," said one scribe philosophically, "that it is useless to complain."

After the advent of the railroad, the stage-coaches were still used for many years to serve the outlying towns. Often in this mountain country they carried thousands of dollars' worth of gold dust and bullion. Consequently they were seldom safe from the onslaughts of highwaymen. When they became a rarity, in later years, they brought fancy prices from collectors, the sums paid for them often running into four figures. We had several on our place at one time, but their romantic past meant little to us. We adored them simply because they made such elegant playhouses.

While the trials of getting newspapers printed and distributed compared in no way to the difficulties of bringing the mail across the plains, still they were enough to cause many a headache for the poor printers—for of all the things the pioneers lacked, rags to use in the manufacturing of paper practically headed the list.

During 1846, while the Saints were still encamped in Winter Quarters, with his usual foresight, Father had sent William W. Phelps to Philadelphia to buy a printing press and a full printer's outfit. The press arrived before the first company had left for the mountains in 1847, and with it were a few boxes of type, a meager supply of paper, and some ink. It was no small job to keep the latter from freezing while it was stored in covered wagons or dugouts.

For a full year after the first companies left Winter Quarters, there was no opportunity to send the materials on, and after some thousands of pioneers had arrived in the valley, Father wrote back to Ezra T. Benson, "The people are all wanting you to send on the printing presses, type, paper, ink, etc. that they may begin to receive knowledge once more through the medium of the press and, as you will see, the people are beginning to be scattered into different cities and towns in the valley; and that is the most convenient way of communicating it to them."

It was another two years, however, before the presses could be brought across mountain and plain and put into action. On June 15, 1850, the first copies of the News sold on the streets of the city for fifteen cents. Father appointed Willard Richards editor, Horace K. Whitney typesetter, and my cousin Brigham H. Young pressman. Travelers through the city were charged twenty-five cents a copy, but as this sum included the notice of their names, places of residence, and time of arrival and leaving, they probably were fully compensated.

The printers now found that their troubles had only just begun. The pioneers weren't discarding enough rags to keep up the supply of carpets, not to mention having enough left over for the manufacture of paper. What few rags did come in were usually colored, and the printers possessed neither the skill nor the materials for bleaching. The situation became so bad that for a time the paper was forced to come out as a half sheet and that a very dark grey, which caused the editor to lament, "But dark grey is better than no paper, which will soon be the case unless more rags are forthcoming."

I remember so well Brother George Goddard, who used to go from house to house gathering rags for the paper. Mother always dressed me in immaculate white pinafores, and if I happened to tear one she would utter the dire threat, "Brother Goddard will come and pick you up and put you in his rag bag." I took it all very seriously and was frightened to death of him.

In time, paper was shipped in from the States, and the News was able to come forth proudly on white paper, also the announcement that "until further notice we are obliged to stop paying cash for rags, but they will be taken on subscriptions to the news and on tithing."

It was all very grand, of course, to have the News printed on fine, white paper from the States, but, as usual, the costs of transportation were so excessive that the thirty thousand dollars paid out for paper each year brought only about one fourth of what was needed. The leaders were anxious to begin the printing of schoolbooks and the various Church works. Finally the need became so serious that in 1861 Father imported a paper mill at a cost of between twenty and twenty-five thousand dollars.

This eased the situation considerably, and the News came out a full sheet, a good color, and with pleasing regularity so long as the water wheel didn't break, the water didn't freeze, or enough rags could be begged or bought at five cents a pound to keep the mill going.

Each change and advance in methods of communication and transportation brought this inland empire into closer touch with the rest of the world until the brightest dreams and hopes of the pioneers were realized by the coming of the railroad in 1869. What it must have meant to my Father can best be imagined, for one of the most tremendous tasks he encountered in the far-flung activities of his career was that of bringing the thousands of emigrants every year over the covered-wagon trails of the West. After twenty-one years of it, he must have been very happy indeed to consign them to the safety and speed of the railroad.

He seems to have had a very definite instinct for railroading, for when he was making his first journey across the plains, he often paused to point out to his associates the route that the coming railroad would use in its course across the continent, and in time the reality proved that his visioning was correct.

Not the least of the advantages offered by the great project was the opportunity given the people of the Territory to work for, and to sell supplies to, the contractors. The situation probably had mutual advantages, for it would have been far more difficult and expensive to import both laborers and foodstuffs than it was to find them right at hand.

Father took a contract for the grading and masonry of 190 miles of road from the head of Echo Canyon to the lake shore. In order to complete the work by the time agreed upon, he needed some thousands of men more than could be spared from the farms, and so he wrote to Franklin D. Richards, in charge of emigration abroad, to make arrangements with the steamship lines so that the emigrants would arrive well ahead of schedule.

"All men physically able to work," he wrote, "will be passed free from Omaha to the terminus and can at the same time travel with their families and friends on the cars, and so on with the trains to this place where they can be distributed on the work required. The number of free passages from Omaha . . . which is in the cash part of the route, will probably enable you to emigrate more than you had anticipated with the money at your command for emigration purposes and will by so much farther aid me in fulfilling my contract."

His contract amounted to about two and one quarter million dollars, and some of this was subcontracted to others, principally John Sharp and my brother Joseph A., who did the heavy stone work of the bridge abutments, cut tunnels in Weber Canyon, and sent men into the mountains to cut timber for ties.

We in Utah watched with avid interest as daily reports came that the shining rails from East and West were drawing closer together. Both sides had their titans of nature to conquer. The Union Pacific had the rugged mountains of Wyoming, through which they must cut a path, and the Central Pacific struggled over the deserts of Nevada where, at times, it was necessary to haul water a distance of eighty miles.

It was at noon on May 11, 1869, when the signal came that the last spike had been driven and the two iron horses stood nose to nose. The national flag was unfurled, the bands played, and salutes of artillery were fired from various parts of the city sending out the glad word that the great work was accomplished. Father was on his annual tour through southern Utah at the time, and therefore was unable to take part in the celebration either, at Salt Lake or Promontory.

Father had hoped that the overland railroad would pass directly through Salt Lake City and was very much disappointed when it became definitely known that the route was to be through Ogden, nearly forty miles to the north. However, he was not one to waste time mourning over lost advantages, and long before the completion of the Union Pacific, he made plans to build another railroad connecting the capital city of Utah with the main line.

The Utah Central Railroad Company was organized in March, 1869, with Father as president, and the echoes of the celebration for the overland had scarcely died away before the ground was broken for the new railroad. Father advanced all the money for the preliminary surveys for the first two years, paying the engineers and furnishing all supplies, and none of it was paid back until after all the work was completed. His brother, John W. Young, had direct supervision of the building of the road.

The Union Pacific builders lacked the funds to meet the final settlement with Father and the other local contractors when their work was finished but, as is often the case, misfortune carried a blessing under her dark coat. In lieu of the same amount in cash, they accepted six hundred thousand dollars' worth of rails, locomotives, cars, and other equipment, all of which were utilized in the building of the Utah Central.

The building of the road was another example of the way in which the pioneers co-operated when they wanted to accomplish something really big. Men left their fields willingly to work on the railroad, with pay a most uncertain factor, and the women along the route often left their household duties to go out and prepare feasts for the workmen. Usually the right-of-way was granted without any difficulty, but if it wasn't Father saw that the line went right ahead anyway.

One man, by the name of Wood, had been on a mission, and when he came home and found the railroad running right in front of his house, he simply went up in smoke. He was going to do something drastic to Father—"the idea to usurp authority to build a railroad right past his front porch!" He came storming up to see Father, who, first thing, asked him about his mission. Brother Wood was so angry he wouldn't tell him anything about it. Father said, "All right, we have been hunting for a name for this little place and now we have one. We'll call it Woods Cross." And Woods Cross it is to this day.

The celebration for the completion of the road occurred January 10, 1870. It was frightfully cold, but just the same, people came from all over the Territory to take part in the rejoicing. Father drove the last spike with a steel mallet made of Utah iron bearing on the top an engraved beehive and an inscription—"Holiness to the Lord."

The railroad is said to have been one of the most remarkable ever built in the country in that there were no Government subsidies, no contributions from capitalists, no outside help of any kind. It was built and owned by workingmen.
