Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

12—Brigham Young At Home

MANUFACTURING

The Saints were advised by Father before they left Winter Quarters to take with them a few head of sheep as well as the "best tools and machinery for spinning or weaving or dressing cotton, wool, flax or silk or models and descriptions of the same." It was advice which the women of the companies followed to the best of their ability and were glad that they had, for they soon found that clothing fashioned of discarded wagon covers offered little by way either of variety or attractiveness.

For the first couple of years the entire process of making clothing, from the shearing of the wool to the sewing of the garments, took place in the individual homes. When a mother or one of the girls needed a new dress, she took the wool from the backs of the sheep grazing near the house, washed, carded, spun, dyed, and wove it into cloth, and then engaged in the final task of cutting it and sewing it up by hand.

By 1849 one small part of this process was taken out of the home when Amasa Russell built a machine on City Creek for carding wool—said to be the first in the Western part of the country. There was still enough left, however, for the women to do at home that the desire for a new dress was likely to be a suppressed desire as long as necessity would allow.

By this time converts to the Church had begun arriving in considerable numbers from England, and Father had learned that the men from the manufacturing centers had much valuable experience which could be used for the benefit of the pioneers. Consequently he wrote to Orson Pratt in Liverpool saying, "We want a company of woolen manufacturers to come with machinery and take our wool and convert it into the best cloth. We want a company of cotton manufacturers who will convert cotton into cloth and calico and so forth and we will raise the cotton before the machinery can be ready. We want a company of potters—we need them. The clay is ready and the dishes wanted. Send a company of each if possible, next spring. Silk manufacturing and all others will follow in rapid succession. We want some men to start a furnace forthwith, the coal, iron and moulders are ready. We wish the presiding elders of the conference to search out such mechanics as named and have them emigrate immediately."

In another year or so the millers announced that they were able to arrange for the cleaning and combing of the fleeces but warned the women who wished to have the wool carded that they must furnish the necessary grease—one pound to eight pounds of wool and perfectly free from salt. No other part of the manufacture of clothing left the home for some years. Operating the old hand loom was a laborious task, and the equipment in our home was in almost constant use. One year it merited the following announcement in the News:

"We understand that Governor Young has a loom in his sitting room in which has been wove by his family more than 500 yards of cloth the present season. If there are any poor folk among us, they need not be ashamed to work. If they are, go and live awhile with the Governor and they will get cured of their laziness. We also understand that the Governor's lady has offered the use of her loom to neighbors who have none, to weave their cloth and board them while weaving."

After the weaving of the cloth came the comparatively simple task of dyeing it. Simple, that is, after various roots and barks had been experimented with to discover what colors they would produce. In order to make the dye, the bark was boiled vigorously until it was rather well softened so that it could be easily stirred and mashed. The liquid would then be run through a sieve, after which it was treated with alum and blue vitriol so that it would harden and "set." Red dye was made from madder root raised in our own gardens, yellow was made from rabbit brush, and the blue came from Dixie indigo. These colors were combined to produce other shades, such as brown and green, although another very pretty shade of green was made from the sagebrush. Black was produced from the root of logwood.

During the late fifties and early sixties a number of woolen mills began operations in various parts of the Territory so that the old hand loom in the front parlor gradually fell into disuse. The spinning wheel continued in very active use, however, for a long time, and homeknit stockings were the rule throughout most of my childhood.

One of Father's greatest hobbies was "home manufacture for home consumption," even when it was not an absolute necessity. His own words on the subject were, "Let home industry produce every article of home consumption." He foresaw at an early date that the breeding of fine livestock would become an important industry in the Territory, and he urged everyone to acquire at least a few head of sheep or cattle. At one time he imported five thousand graded Merino ewes for his own flocks.

In order to provide feed during the winter months, when the wide open ranges were no longer available for grazing, Father experimented with the raising of alfalfa. The seed was planted down at Forest Farm, and when the first crop was ready for cutting, he advertised for someone who knew how to cure the hay. There seemed to be no one who possessed the desired knowledge, so he turned the task over to his overseer, Hamilton G. Park. Brother Park cut the lucerne and straightway stored it away in our capacious barn. He soon discovered, however, that his method was lacking somewhere in the essentials, for the lucerne began to smolder and smoke until, in fear that the barn itself was about to burn down, he dragged the crop all out in the open again.

Even after the weaving of cloth was transferred from home to factory the securing of a new dress was not simple, for it now cost in the coin of the realm what it had formerly cost in time. Perhaps this was one reason for the adoption of the Deseret Costume, which reduced the quantity of cloth required for a dress from upwards of ten yards to between five and seven and also dispensed with girting. Brother Heber C. Kimball wrote, regarding it, to his son, "It makes a wonderful stir with the ladies and is a great relief in expense to the brethren." As a matter of fact, the stir it made with the ladies lasted very briefly for the Deseret Costume was the height of ugliness.

Even in our underclothing we had to economize on cloth, and our pantalettes of unbleached muslin were made with a piece of cambric buttoned on just above the knees—a bit of elegance for the part that might show, only.

For many years every item of clothing that we wore, with the possible exception of an occasional hat—was made at home. Dresses, wraps, shoes, and stockings, all were manufactured on the home lots. It caused us no concern, however, for all of our young friends wore clothing of the same make. Our mothers were wonderfully adept at handling sewing needles or knitting needles, as the case might be.

The furore that was caused when professional bootblacks descended upon the city still causes me amusement, when I think back on it. The idea of paying someone to blacken and shine your shoes! Worse yet, the idea of paying someone the princely sum of twenty-five cents to acquire such trifling additional respectability. "Let the Boot Black Brigade reconsider the situation," protested the News, "and lower its prices so that all the people may enjoy its refining offices." Eventually prices were lowered, but it was a long time before anywhere near "all" the people felt constrained to have their shoes polished by other than their own efforts.

Unlike the wool industry, which has remained a basic one in the building of the state, the manufacture of silk never progressed very far beyond the experimental stage, even though the experiment itself was fairly successful. No one knew, for a surety, in those first years just what would grow in the valley and what would not, and Father was anxious to try anything that might aid in establishing a commonwealth.

He sent to France for the first mulberry seed, and when the precious package arrived it contained two or three pounds of what looked very much like mustard seed. It was first planted at Forest Farm, and he had the gardeners prepare the ground with the greatest of care, plowing and harrowing the acre about five or six times. He personally supervised the planting and had them put the seed in so thick that, as one gardener said, "the young trees came up like the hair on a dog's back."

Later on, several more acres were planted, and in 1865 a large cocoonery was built on the farm, and one of the wives, Aunt Zina D., put in charge of operations. The silkworms were also imported from France, and Aunt Zina learned to care for them very successfully. Later on, she went from one town to another teaching the women how to feed and care for the silkworms as well as to try and promote the industry. She had the honor of wearing the first silk dress to be woven in the Territory—woven, believe it or not, on a carpet loom.

After the trees had a good start at the farm, a number of them were transplanted up to our own garden, where Father took great interest in their care. He gave cuttings freely to anyone who would take them, and hundreds of families moved out of their respective front bedrooms and allowed the silkworms to move in.

A small cocoonery was built near the Beehive House, just north of the store. The building was of brick, and the downstairs was used for coal and wood, while the silkworms were kept upstairs under the personal supervision of George D. Pyper, then about fifteen years old and the son of Father's business manager. Later this lad was to become manager of the Salt Lake Theatre and general president of the Deseret Sunday School Union in all the world. But always he remained, as then, an unassuming, lovable friend.

The process of rearing young silkworms successfully was a very delicate one, and one that I preferred to watch from a distance. The eggs were about the size of a pinhead and had to be kept down in the cellar at a temperature of about fifty degrees until the mulberry leaves had come out. Then they were brought out into the warmth to hatch and placed upon the young leaves to feed. I have heard that the Chinese women place the eggs in their bosoms in order to obtain the necessary warmth for hatching but we, fortunately, had other means at our disposal.

After the worms were hatched they would be placed on the hurdles. The hurdles were frames about three feet square covered with white muslin. Small branches with tender young leaves would be put out for the worms to feed on, and when all the leaves had been eaten off, the debris would be removed.

Five of us girls would come to the cocoonery three times a day to lay the branches out, and when they were bare George would take them out. I tended the silkworms until they made me so deathly sick that Father said I didn't have to do it any more, and I gladly turned the task over to a more stout-hearted sister.

There was a small balcony on the cocoonery, and when George wasn't busy with the worms, he would sit out there and look down into the garden. He never ventured down, however, because the big, bald-headed eagle was likely to be sunning just below, and distance was a prime virtue where the eagle and young boys were concerned.

Alexander Pyper built a small silk factory on the corner of Third Avenue and Canyon Road where an excellent grade of silk was manufactured. Machinery was imported for winding, doubling, dyeing, and skeining the silk, and cocoons poured in from all parts of the territory to help feed the new venture. Silk handkerchiefs, with a picture of the Salt Lake Temple woven into the cloth, were manufactured there for many years and found a ready sale with the tourists.

For many years exhibits of home-manufactured silk were to be seen at every Territorial or state fair, but after the early enthusiasts had passed on, interest flickered and finally died until all that remains now of a once promising industry are a few rare pieces of "Utah" silk and some scattered mulberry trees.

The raising of sugar beets and the manufacture of sugar was destined to be second only to wool as one of the future great industries of the state which Father sponsored in the early days.

Since sugar was practically an unknown quantity with the first pioneers, the women resorted to every method their ingenuity could devise in order to provide some manner of sweetening for the family food. Beets, squash, and carrots from the garden were boiled down until they produced a dark, gummy substance that imparted some sweetness to the food but little else, in the way of flavoring, that could be called desirable.

During my childhood, while sugar was still scarce, Mother had a round cheesebox that held her allotment for an entire year. We were never allowed to waste any, even after it became plentiful, and if ever I left any syrup or molasses on my plate, it was put away for me until the next meal.

An interesting story told in connection with the scarcity of sugar was related to me of the time when Father visited up in Bear Lake. A friend who spent his boyhood days there stated that "there was no pleasure, there was no satisfaction possible greater than the thought that President Brigham Young was going to visit the community." When the news spread that Father was coming the good people of the town put their heads together to plan how best they could provide for his entertainment. It was decided that he should stay at Pugmire's, since Pugmire undoubtedly possessed the finest home in the valley. Someone had heard that he enjoyed a bowl of bread and milk, and so the one Jersey cow in the county was hastily requisitioned and installed temporarily at Pugmire's. Who had the best chinaware was the next point in order, and the chinaware was exhibited at Relief Society so that a proper choice could be made.

They now reluctantly faced the question of whether or not he used sugar, and if so, what they were going to do about it, since there was no sugar in the valley. Here my friend's grandmother spoke up and proudly announced that she could furnish the sugar. When they raised skeptical eyebrows, she led them into her bedroom and, putting a chair upon the kitchen table, she stood on the chair, cut a hole in the factory that covered the ceiling, and brought down a five-pound salt sack—filled with sugar. In answer to the question, "How did you get it?" she replied, "Every time I have bought fifty cents worth of sugar I have taken one tablespoon and put up there, because in my early childhood I was taught reserve."

While vegetables, melon rinds, corn stalks, and fruit were boiled down to make molasses, such sweetening was of little use for fine cooking or drinks, and the people were about half starved for sugar. Anything that seemed to offer a possibility was seized upon and experimented with. At one time the people of Provo discovered a sticky sap on the leaves and twigs of the trees that had a sweet taste, and they turned out by the score to gather it. The sap was washed from the leaves, after which it was boiled down to syrup and finally to a sort of crude sugar. Since it retained a bitter taste from the leaves and twigs, it was not considered much of a success.

An enterprising citizen of the north end of the Territory tried to make sugar from the sap of the box elder tree in a manner similar to that by which he had formerly made maple sugar in the East. He succeeded in making a syrup and a confection of sorts, but it was a far cry from the refined table sugar that the housewives longed for.

For a long time there was nothing to do but appease the sweet tooth as best one could with molasses and sorghum. The white sugar beet was found to offer the best promise since it could be grown so abundantly, and word was sent to all emigrants to bring a good supply of the seed in order that each family might plant a crop and make enough syrup for its own use.

By 1851 there were three factories in the valley for the making of molasses. Uncle Joseph Young, with two other men, put one up on Emigration Street, one and a half blocks east of City Creek bridge, where they urged all who had a surplus of beets, carrots, or parsnips to bring them along, "well cleaned as for family use and we will make all the molasses we can and return the owners of the vegetables one-half of the molasses made."

It was easily seen that, struggle as they would, the pioneers could produce nothing resembling refined table sugar, and once more Father turned to the missionaries in the Old World in the hopes that men could be found who knew the process of manufacturing sugar. In the spring general epistle of 1851 he and his counselors stated, "It is our wish that the presidency in England, France and other places should search out such practical operators in the manufacture of sugar as fully understand their business, and forward them to this place, with all such apparatus as may be needed and cannot be procured here."

John Taylor, who was in charge of the French mission at that time, took the suggestion to heart and organized the Deseret Manufacturing Company with a capital of $60,000. He purchased machinery in Liverpool at the cost of $12,500 and then paid another $5,000 import duties. As usual, with anything destined for the Territory of Deseret, the initial cost was only a beginning. The apparatus was shipped by boat to New Orleans and thence to Fort Leavenworth, where it was loaded onto wagons drawn by two hundred ox teams for the twelve-hundred-mile journey across the plains.

The heavily loaded wagons arrived in Salt Lake City in the fall of 1852 and for some unknown reason continued on south to Provo. There a heartbreaking discovery was made. By some sad inadvertence the all-important bone-cooking, sugar-clarifying retorts had not been made nor even so much as ordered. The promoters were filled with dismay at having spent a fortune and facing the prospect of having to spend another before they could hope even to begin to operate successfully.

Since the Church leaders had encouraged the venture, they came magnanimously to the rescue and purchased the elephant which was only a shade less than white. As Trustee in Trust for the Church, Father immediately posted notices assuming all equitable claims against the company.

The machinery was hauled back to Salt Lake City, and the erection of a factory commenced on the Big Cottonwood River. In the meantime a portion of the machinery was attached to the waterworks of the public machine shop and utilized in making molasses. Father urged the Saints to plant sugar beets generously, feeling almost certain that they would soon be able to make sugar successfully.

The factory commenced operations in February of 1855, and while hundreds of bushels of beets were run through the French machinery, nothing resembling sugar ever came out—the nearest thing to it being a good grade of molasses.

While this first great effort resulted in failure, the pioneers continued to raise beets and to experiment in the manufacture of sugar until their persistence finally won results and the industry took its place among the great ones of the West.

Father made considerable money during his lifetime in the sense that the term is generally used, and for one brief period he made money literally, as well. The first year that the Saints spent in the valley they managed to get along in fairly good fashion by the age-old custom of barter but, by the end of that year, when their numbers had grown to several thousand, some medium of exchange became almost a necessity. There was a considerable amount of gold dust in the valley, of which a goodly portion had come into the possession of the Church through tithing, and Father made an unsuccessful attempt to turn it into gold coins.

He designed the coins, together with John Taylor and John McKay. On one side the words "Holiness to the Lord" were to be printed, with emblems of the priesthood, and on the reverse side, two clasped hands denoting friendship, with the denomination of the coin. They were to be made in two-and-a-half, five-, ten-, and twenty-dollar pieces. The attempt failed at the start when the crucibles were broken in the first trial.

They then decided to issue paper money in receipt for carefully weighed-out quantities of gold dust, and in a meeting held in the Bowery on December 28, 1848, the people voted authority to Father to issue the new currency bills. Two different types were issued very shortly, the first hand written on safety paper signed by Father, H. C. Kimball, and Thomas Bullock, and the other, printed bills known as the Kirtland bank notes.

For the first few weeks of 1849 Father and his assistants did practically nothing else but "make" money. Bullock would write out the bills, after which Father would sign them, and they would be stamped with the seal of the twelve Apostles. The demand for the bills was so great that often they were forced to work far into the night.

After about ten days of writing the bills by hand, a small printing press was devised for the Kirtland bank notes. Several of the Church officials signed the new bills, and Father imprinted them personally in the new press. Day after day the men worked weighing in the gold and printing and passing out the currency. At last the demand was satisfied and the crude little printing press set aside.

Among the Mormons the paper money was accepted at first without question, for as one writer said, "To those who knew the sound of his voice, Brigham Young's signature made the new money legal by common consent." During the summer, however, when the forty-niners were passing through the valley by the hundreds, they demanded money that could be used in California, which in turn made some of the local merchants doubtful about taking the bills. The High Council handled this matter briefly by recommending that "the licensed butchers who had refused to sell meat for the paper currency be required to do so or give up the butchering business." The butchers decided to accept the currency.

In another six months equipment for making gold coins was perfected, and all the old paper money was called in and destroyed. The engraving on the coins was plain and simple, but as one of the chief mechanics said concerning the dies for the five-dollar pieces, which he personally had made, "If I do say it myself, it was as perfect a piece of money as ever came from a mint."

Even this gold coin was not accepted abroad entirely without prejudice. Merchants attempting to buy goods in St. Louis discovered that their twenty-dollar pieces were accepted at only eighteen dollars, and years later at Camp Floyd the Commandant suggested concerning the five-dollar pieces, "As this coin is understood to be worth only (about) four and a half dollars he recommends to the soldiers not to receive it for more than that sum, and, better still, not to take it at all."

Gold is gold, however, no matter whose name is engraved on the face of the coin, and the Mormon mint continued to do a brisk business with the large amount of gold dust on hand and that which was constantly coming in from California. In time these coins were destined to rise to many times their face value in the collector's kit—had the merchants and soldiers but known it.

Many other industries less important than the ones mentioned here received Father's earnest support and encouragement. It was his constant advice to the people that they not indulge in expensive luxuries that would involve them in debt, but rather produce through their own industry every necessary article for home consumption. He would tolerate laziness in no one, and at one time he wrote: "You know, and my wives and children know that it is in my mind that those who do nothing but sit in rocking chairs can live on potatoes and buttermilk, while those who do the labor should have both the substantial food and the luxuries."

It seems strange, at first glance, that Father should not only have given no encouragement to mining, now the foremost industry of the state, but should have actively discouraged the people either from attempting to dig ore in the near-by mountains or from rushing to the gold fields of California. His reasons for doing so, however, were excellent and showed great foresight.

The pioneers were absolutely dependent upon the foodstuffs they raised in order to sustain life, and they would have been in a sorry plight, indeed, had they turned from raising grain to digging ore. At that time too, of course, freighting was so terribly expensive that it is highly improbable mining could have been made to pay. Besides all this, he had even a deeper reason. It was not his wish that the Saints should acquire great wealth, for their religion had been bought at a tremendous price, and he intended that nothing should come among them, if he could prevent it, that would in any way lessen their spirituality. Speaking in a Sunday meeting of the newly discovered gold in California, he said, "I hope that the gold mines will be no nearer than 800 miles. Prosperity and riches blunt the feelings of man."

Several of the members of the Mormon Battalion had been in California at the time of the discovery of gold at Sutter's mill, and upon their return to Utah some of the leaders urged Father to allow the Saints to move on westward and take advantage of the riches to be found there. His reply was, "If we were to go to San Francisco and dig up chunks of gold, or find it in the valley, it would ruin us. The true use of gold is for paving streets, covering houses and making culinary dishes and when the Saints shall have preached the gospel, raised grain and built up cities enough, the Lord will open up a way for a supply of gold to the perfect satisfaction of his people. Until that time, let them not be over anxious, for the treasures of the earth are in the Lord's storehouse and he will open the doors thereof when and where he pleases."

In spite of this advice, several families joined the ranks of the forty-niners and went on to California, and still others wanted to go but heeded his counsel for "all the Saints to remain in the valleys of the mountains, make improvements, build comfortable houses and raise grain."

Not long ago I was talking with Cyrus E. Dallin, the sculptor, who told me an interesting story concerning his father's attempt at mining in the early days.

Although not a member of the Church, he had come West with one of the companies and settled in Springville. He felt quite positive that there were precious metals in these mountains, but since Father had forbidden any mining he came up to Salt Lake to see what could be done about the matter. The two men sat and argued for a long time, each one being just about as good as the other. Finally Father told Mr. Dallin to go home and come back again after he had had time to think it over. After a short time the would-be miner returned, and Father said, "I have had my secretary write out a permit for you to go into the hills and do some mining. This paper is your permit." He handed him a paper which read, "This permits C. E. Dallin to go into the hills and mine, but absolutely forbids any member of the Mormon Church to assist him." Since there was no one except Mormons in the Territory, Mr. Dallin found his permit of no value.

Mining for coal and iron had been engaged in on a small scale since 1852, but there was no effort to open up the mines to any great extent, beyond what was needed for immediate use, nor to search out the gold and silver deposits which many believed were hidden in the mountains. In 1860 the following item appeared in the News: "We have recently been presented with a specimen of virgin copper found in Cedar Valley some ten or twelve miles from Camp Floyd, which those well versed in mineralogy, to whom it has been exhibited pronounce equal to the best they have seen. If it exists in that vicinity, as is alleged, in any considerable quantities, it would probably pay well for working, if any felt disposed to engage in such an enterprise, but in these days, gold is the principal thing sought after and a man who would engage in copper mining in an inland country like this, might by some, be considered in a state of insanity." This is amusing, since this vicinity now boasts the greatest open-cut copper mine in the world.

After the coming of the railroad the mines, naturally, opened up very rapidly. The year before the railroad came through, Utah had two mining districts. Three years later there were thirty-two. Within three months after the driving of the last spike, ten tons of silver lead ore were hauled by ox team to Ogden, where it was shipped to San Francisco, and shortly afterward ten tons of copper ore were shipped from Bingham. Whether or not Father ever looked with any great favor upon the development of the mining industry, I do not know, but at any rate two of the main reasons for his opposition had vanished. The railroad had made shipping a comparatively easy and inexpensive matter, and the people were no longer dependent upon what could be raised on the home lot in order to keep body and soul together.

In equal disfavor with the miners were the doctors and lawyers, but for somewhat different reasons. It was believed that, in the first place, the Saints ought to be able to get along peacefully without recourse to lawsuits and, in the second place, such matters should be handled by the Church leaders and not by professional lawyers. For some time there were no written laws among the pioneers, nor were there any jails. When disputes arose that required the functioning of a magistrate, the elders of the Church sat on the bench and meted out such punishments as fines or public floggings. Not infrequently they were called to act in the cases of emigrants to California who were having trouble among themselves over such matters as a division of chattels, or with the Mormons through trespassing on their property.

When laws and courts finally did come into being, they were shunned by all faithful Latter-day Saints, and on one occasion those who did not shun them quite carefully enough were called to order in a rather severe fashion. During the year 1856 the Mormon spectators had been warned frequently that too many of them were hanging around the courthouse. As they continued to ignore the warnings, Father found other means of removing them, which Heber C. Kimball describes as follows:

"One day Brother Brigham sent Thomas Bullock to take their names for the purpose of giving them missions, if they had not anything to do of more importance. So Brother Brigham counseled me to make a selection—for Las Vegas, some thirty, who are ordered to sell their possessions and go with their families as soon as the weather will permit, for the purpose of going down on the Rio Virgin to raise cotton: another company of forty eight to go down to Green River to strengthen that settlement, make farms, build mills and so forth and some thirty-five or forty to go north to the Salmon river and eight to go to the East Indies. These are all good men but they need to learn a lesson."

If the lesson seems to have been too severe, let it be remembered that this empire could not have been built in the heart of a desert by less rugged and forceful methods and also, that in the great task of colonizing the Territory, men were accustomed to be asked at any time to take their families and possessions and move on to establish another home.

The physicians were held in somewhat higher esteem than the lawyers, and two of them at least, Dr. Willard Richards and Dr. Bernhisel, were among the leading members of the community. Just the same, it was only in the direst extremity that a professional was called upon to administer to the ailing, prayer and good old home remedies finding first favor with the staunch pioneer families. I do not remember of a doctor's being called to our home more than once or twice during my entire girlhood.

Famous among these early-day remedies was a tea made from mountain rush, commonly known as "Brigham Tea." Just how Father learned that this plant had medicinal properties is not exactly known, but it is rather likely that he gained the knowledge from the Indians.

The mineral waters of the warm springs were found, at an early date, to have beneficial values, both for bathing and for drinking, and fortunately they were close enough at hand to be easily available for everyone's use.

On the whole, the Latter-day Saints, then as now, were rather a healthy group of people, due as much as anything, no doubt, to following the precepts of our religion, which forbids the use of tobacco, strong drinks, tea, and coffee.

Even so, I am rather afraid that Mark Twain overstated conditions just a trifle, when he wrote concerning his visit in 1859: "Great Salt Lake City was healthy—an extremely healthy city. They declared there was only one physician in the place and he was arrested every week regularly and held to answer under the vagrant act for having 'No visible means of support.'"
