Clarissa Young Spencer, Brigham Young at Home ( 1961)

13—Brigham Young At Home

EMPIRE BUILDING

On July 24, 1847, the first company of the Mormon pioneers emerged from Emigration Canyon and gazed upon a broad valley. Most of the little band of 147 souls saw only barren stretches where the one growing thing was the grey sagebrush, but Father must have envisioned a city with homes, green gardens, and fertile fields, for he said with an air of complete satisfaction, "This is the place."

Scarcely had they halted their wagons before they had chosen a site for the Temple, made plans for the laying out of the city, and put their plows into the ground. The last-named effort failed completely, however, until the hard, sun-baked ground had been soaked by the waters of the near-by City Creek Canyon stream.

Attention was then directed toward building the fort, which served as a home for most of them during the first two years. During the trek to the valley the pioneers had been divided into companies of ten, fifty, and one hundred, each governed by a captain, and this same organization continued for a time after their arrival. In building the fort, two "tens" would go to the mountains for logs, staying there for one week at a time. Some of the men would handle the axes, and others would do the hauling, while two or three stood guard for Indians. Father was counted as one of the best when it came to swinging an ax.

The fort was built in the form of a rectangle and stood on the block now known as Pioneer Square, four blocks south and three blocks west of the Temple. The walls were nine feet high and over two feet thick and enclosed twenty-seven log houses. The houses were built only with an eye to furnishing temporary shelter and certainly afforded but the slightest degree of comfort. The bare ground served for floors, the doors were hung with rawhide hinges, and the windows were covered with anything that the meager contents of a pioneer's wagon would yield. The roofs were of brush covered with dirt, and when the heavy snows fell and melted, the water soaked through onto the hapless inhabitants. If one member of the family happened to be sick in bed, others held utensils over him to catch as much of the water as possible. Swarms of mice and bugs on the inside and the howling of wolves on the outside added to their discomfort.

The following year the city lots were portioned out, and the settlers began to build their individual homes. There were several good reasons for this. The fort, even with additions, had become terribly crowded with the arrival of fifteen hundred more people in September of 1847. Their numbers were large enough now to insure a reasonable degree of safety from the Indians and—the roofs of the cabins began to fall in.

City lots were sold, at first, for $1.50 each, but the farming land was obtained by drawing. No unmarried man could have a lot unless he could furnish substantial evidence that he was intending to marry in the near future. The wards of the city, rather than individual lots, were fenced off in these early days.

Many people remonstrated with Father when he insisted that the streets be made so wide, but he felt sure that the time would come when his stand would be justified. At first, these broad thoroughfares were used for farming with just enough space left in the middle for vehicles to pass through. This practice was somewhat inconvenient for the drivers, however, because there were bars at the end of each street opening into a main thoroughfare, which had to be taken down and replaced each time a wagon went through.

The "city" houses were not a vast improvement upon those built in the fort. The first attempt at making adobe brick failed because there was alkali mixed with the clay which would cause the bricks to expand and burst when exposed to rain. The pioneers finally learned how to make good "dobies," however, and before long many substantial homes had been built in the valley of either adobe or logs from the mountains.

The valley of the Great Salt Lake was Mexican territory when the Saints drove their wagons onto its sagebrush-covered wastes, but Father immediately took possession in the the name of the United States Government, raised the American flag, and named the territory "Deseret." He was elected governor by a provisional territorial government. Three years later, in September, 1850, Millard Fillmore signed the law creating Deseret a Territory of the United States and—three months after that, the Saints learned about it. It seems that the news was published in the New York Tribune and a returning missionary brought the paper home with him by way of the Isthmus of Panama and California. Father was named governor, and his commission was signed by Fillmore and Daniel Webster, who was then Secretary of State. His salary was $3,500 a year, $2,000 of which was to be used for looking after the Indians and for contingent expenses of the Territory. Only two other local men were named as officials. The rest came from the East, arriving in the summer of 1851, after having experienced some serious trouble with the Indians on the way.

During his term as governor, Father created what was probably the original W.P.A. project. He had a mud wall built around the city, ostensibly for protection against the Indians, but in reality to make work for the hundreds of immigrants who had arrived and had nothing to do. The wall was to be twelve feet high and six feet thick at the base. At every forty rods bastions were to be built, with tiers of portholes. The building material was the good earth, wet and reinforced with willows, brush, or anything else that grew along the route. Several gates were planned, one with a highly optimistic eye to the future for the railroad when it should come, and others near the warm springs and City Creek Canyon. The estimated cost was $33,809.78, which may look small alongside of present-day Federal projects but was a goodly sum in that day. The wall was designed to be ten miles long, and much of it was completed, probably all except the portion which was to run along the Jordan River. Of course, it disintegrated very rapidly, but while it lasted it made a splendid place for the boys of the city to play and fight their imaginary battles.

I am quite sure that one of the greatest tasks Father encountered during his strenuous lifetime was that of bringing the thousands of immigrants safely to Zion. For twenty-two years, until the Union Pacific steamed down Echo Canyon, it demanded his constant thought and energy.

Before the Saints had ever left Illinois, he asked them to enter into a solemn covenant that they would never cease their efforts until every person who desired to follow them to their hoped-for haven, and was unable to come by his own means, should be given the opportunity. In 1849 a sum of five thousand dollars was raised for the purpose and christened "The Perpetual Emigration Fund."

The money was lent out to members of the Church who wished to come to the valley and repaid by them after their arrival, as soon as their circumstances would permit.

During the entire journey, companies were under well-organized supervision. In the first great exodus each family was required to have a certain amount of food and other supplies before starting out on the long journey across the plains. In the case of converts coming from Europe, they were first taken to Liverpool in charge of Mormon elders and then put on board ship where they were divided into companies, each company having its own supervisor. Sometimes the ships were chartered almost entirely by Mormon immigrants, several hundred of them being aboard. They would hold daily meetings and provide various forms of entertainment to make the time spent on the long voyage more agreeable.

On reaching America, the same system of supervision was employed both during the railroad journey and the longer trip by wagon from the terminus. Upon reaching Salt Lake City, they were met by Church officials and sent to whatever part of the Territory happened to be most in need of settlers.

Some idea of the great number of pioneers who poured into the valley during the first few years may be gained from the census of 1848, the second year of the settling of Deseret. The census of March, 1848, listed the population of the city as 1,671 persons, with 428 houses erected. The records show that "by Sept. 1848 Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball had conducted into the valley 3120 persons, 1020 wagons, 205 horses, 63 mules, 3287 oxen, 1682 cows, 518 loose cattle, 1045 sheep, 375 pigs, 1509 chickens, 91 cats, 216 dogs, 6 goats, 20 geese, 7 beehives, 19 doves, 1 squirrel and 5 ducks."

Every spring Father sent out wagon trains to Florence, Nebraska, to carry food to the emigrants along the route. The "church wagons," as they were called, traveled in different units, each with its commander, and took supplies to those who might be in need, as far as the Missouri River.

In 1862 the emigrants' foodstuffs were all drafted because of the Civil War, and it was necessary to send flour and other supplies to them before they could even begin their journey across the mountains. When the train of wagons reached the bridge on the Platte River, an unfriendly bridge keeper refused to allow them to pass over, saying that the timbers in the bridge were unsafe. The Mormons offered to swim their cattle over and roll the wagons across by hand, but the keeper still declined to let them by. They next offered to float the wagons as well and carry the flour over by the sack, but nothing could move the obdurate keeper. He was determined that they should not pass. The Mormons had not brought their flour all this way just to turn around and take it back, however. Under cover of the darkness of night, they took their wagons downstream and searched until they found a sandbar that reached from side to side. Eight oxen were hitched to one wagon and driven into the water at a fast run. Eventually the entire load was crossed over with the loss of but the contents of one wagon. The boxes had been caulked so that the flour was not at all damaged by the water.

The next morning as the cavalcade drove back to the road and serenely past the bridge keeper, the latter gaped at them in amazement and exclaimed, "You d—Mormons can go anywhere."

Most dramatic of all stories concerning the thousands of men, women, and children who suffered the hardships and dangers of the great trek is that of the "Handcart Pioneers," those valiant souls who, lacking other means of reaching Zion, elected to walk and pull their meager possessions along by hand.

Father had considered this means of transportation thoroughly and believed it to be entirely practical, provided the emigrants followed instructions carefully. Outfits of oxen and wagons were expensive, and many Saints who were anxious to join their friends in the valley were unable to do so because of the cost. The oxen traveled very slowly and held the companies back several precious hours each day. All in all, it was decided to give handcart emigration a fair trial and, accordingly, some two thousand persons reached the valley by this means during the year of 1856.

The handcart was made of hickory or oak and was built the width of the usual wagon so that it could follow in the tracks made previously by the wagon trains. There was a lead cart which carried flour, food, clothing, bedding, cooking utensils, and a tent, and a family cart which carried the remaining chattels, babies, or persons too ill to walk.

The companies were outfitted in Iowa, supervised by men sent from Salt Lake, experienced in the difficulties of trekking over the plains of Iowa and Nebraska and the mountains of Wyoming and Utah. The first companies, who left in June, reached the valley after a hard, but successful, journey and were welcomed enthusiastically by the Saints upon their arrival in the early fall of the year. Late in July, however, two other companies left Iowa who, because of this late start, suffered great disaster before they reached their journey's end. Their cattle were run off by the Indians, and their food supply ran perilously low at an early date. Bedding had been discarded along the way to lighten the loads, and when snowstorms overtook them in the mountains of Wyoming, their suffering was intense. Deaths among them were frequent, and the time finally came when they could push on no farther but sank down to await whatever fate might befall them.

Six hundred miles from Iowa City, Elder Franklin Richards and a group of returning elders had met up with the emigrants and, realizing the seriousness of their condition, had hurried on to report their situation to Father. October conference was in session when they arrived, and Father immediately issued a call for volunteers to go to their assistance. He said to the people, "We want twenty teams by tomorrow to go to their relief. It will be necessary to send two experienced men with each wagon. I will furnish three teams loaded with provisions and send good men with them and Brother Heber C. Kimball will do the same. If there are any brethren present who have suitable outfits for such a journey, please make it known at once so we will know what to depend upon."

The meetings were dismissed, and everyone hurried home to gather food, clothing, and bedding to send with the rescue parties. When they reached the first of the camps, they found half-frozen people who had not eaten for forty-eight hours. Even with this succor, nine more deaths occurred that night.

More wagons and provisions followed, and eventually the survivors were brought into the valley, where all homes were thrown open to receive them and they were cared for most tenderly. It is estimated that about one sixth of the original number of 1,550 persons died on the way.

Additional handcart companies came during the next three years, but by making a start early in the season they came through without any greater mishap than attended other pioneer companies, although, at the best, the system was a very hard one.

The Great Mormon Tabernacle and the Temple located on the same block are two of the most famous buildings in the entire country, and the grounds upon which they stand are visited daily by hundreds of tourists. Since my father was the guiding genius in the erection of both structures, I feel that they deserve a place in any narrative of his life.

The first place of worship built upon the block was the Bowery. When the men from the Mormon Battalion returned during October, Father told them that it was too late to start farming but that they might make themselves useful by going into City Creek Canyon and getting posts for the Bowery.

It was built by the simple method of putting poles into the ground at short intervals, making the framework of a roof—also of poles—and covering it over with branches, sagebrush, or whatever else might be available. There was never better than a dirt floor, and anything that was handy might be utilized for seats, although after a short time crude benches were built.

I liked to go to meeting in the Bowery, because it was easy to see what was going on outside, and this might be entertaining if the sermon was dry. I suppose it was unsatisfactory to the authorities for the same reason. While the Bowery served fairly well as a meeting place in the summertime, it was quite impossible to hold meeting there during the winter months, so, after a few years, the "Old Tabernacle" was built on the space where the Assembly Hall now stands. The Bowery was still used, however, for overflow meetings and during the very hot weather for some years.

The "Old Tabernacle" was commenced in 1851 and finished one year later. It was built of adobes and had an arched ceiling which was supported without pillars. The seating capacity was about twenty-five hundred. Father used the co-operative plan of work in making this building, which was so successful in many of his other enterprises. One group of men cut down trees in the canyons, another group worked in the sawmills, while yet other groups were given the tasks of mixing mortar and making adobes.

About one half of the building was below the surface of the ground, possibly to help solve the heating problem. At the door were two huge brass caldrons filled with water, and near by was a dipper, so that the churchgoers might have a refreshing drink upon entering or leaving the building. There were large chandeliers of glass prisms that sparkled in the light of the oil lamps with a fascinating beauty.

I used to go to church with Mother and divide my time between admiring the glass chandeliers and playing with Mother's pearl-handled fan, which was a very lovely affair made of white silk and edged with swansdown. When both the fan and the glass prisms failed to hold my interest longer, I was given peppermints to keep me from fidgeting.

On the stand, at the west side, was a funny little door which seemed to me far too small for a man to walk through. A few minutes before the services began this would quietly open and Father would appear followed by his counselors and the twelve Apostles. They would take their seats, and then the choir would sing, a beautiful choir of fresh, young voices.

Brother Heber C. Kimball, one of the counselors, was quite bald, and as soon as he had taken his place he would pull a bandana handkerchief out of his pocket and put it over his bald head and down over his eyes. The ostensible purpose was to keep the flies away, but I shall always think that it was so he could sleep through the meeting undetected. I know he always appeared to be rather startled when he was called upon to speak.

The building was equipped with a fine pipe organ, which was run by water power. My sister Fanny played the organ, and Charley Moore did the pedaling. Poor Charley—he was so in love with Fanny that he would pedal for hours, if need be, just to be near her. She was very gifted musically and could come home from the theatre and play through the score of an entire opera after having heard it once. Father had given her a beautiful golden harp which, naturally, she loved dearly. One day he came home and said to her, "Fanny, would you be willing to give your harp to a blind musician?"

Fanny looked up at him very much concerned that her treasure should be threatened, but after a moment's hesitation she said, "Why, yes, Father, if you wish it."

"There is a man by the name of Giles," said Father, "who has just come over from England. Over there he made a living by playing the harp but he was unable to bring one with him. If you are willing, I should like to give him yours." Without more ado, the precious harp which had been hauled a thousand miles over plains and mountains by ox team was given to an almost complete stranger.

Father conceived the idea for the great elliptical, dome-shaped Tabernacle in rather an interesting manner. A convert by the name of Henry Grow arrived in the city from Philadelphia. He had been working for the Remington Company, who owned a patent right for slat bridge construction, and as a compliment to him the company gave him the privilege of using it in Utah, which fact he made known to the authorities upon his arrival here. Father sent him to both the Weber and the Jordan Rivers to build bridges over these streams, using this construction.

After the completion of these bridges, Father complimented Brother Grow very highly on the splendid workmanship which he had displayed, and in a conversation between them one day said, "Henry, I am desirous of constructing a building for our people, anticipating the future numbers, and I have been wondering what plan we should use, for I have built many buildings and no two alike, and I am anxious that this should be different to anything else. What do you think about the Remington construction? Henry, I had an egg for breakfast this morning, cooked hard, and in lieu of chopping it through the center, I cut it through end-wise and set it up on tooth-picks. I was strongly impressed that we might use this plan for the building."

Henry Grow replied, "If you will build me twelve pilasters, six to a side, solidly constructed with sandstone and permit me to experiment, as soon as they are completed I can give you the extreme size of the building which I think can be safely constructed."

Later on, Brother Grow advised Father that the building could be safely put up 150 feet wide and 250 feet long. Twelve great sandstone buttresses were built first and the roof erected by arching it over between the buttresses. As the work progressed the idea seemed entirely feasible, and so finally a front and a rear end were added and the building completed otherwise. The dome is built with a latticework frame which measures nine feet from the ceiling to the roof. Only wood was used in its construction, and because of the great scarcity of nails, the beams and trusses were held together with wooden pegs and cowhide thongs.

When completed, the vast elliptical dome rested upon forty-four buttresses. Between them are twenty doors, which permit the evacuation of the building in a very few minutes. The seating capacity is slightly under nine thousand people, but many more have been known to crowd in upon special occasions. It was completed in 1867, after having been only three years in the building, a remarkably short time considering the building facilities of the day.

As a child I often went to the Tabernacle with Father and sat with him upon the stand. In warm weather I would carry a palm-leaf fan which I would wave very gently in order that he might give full attention to the speaker, and in winter I would carry his grey shawl, which I would tuck about his knees to ward off the rheumatism. Always I brought along a little bucket of cold composition tea that Mother had made—sweetened, but without cream. This he would drink in place of water while preaching from the stand.

Perhaps an even more amazing feat than the building of the Tabernacle was the construction of the great pipe organ, which, at the time it was built, was the largest in the United States and the second or third largest in the world. Father had often remarked, "We can't preach the gospel unless we have good music," and while he was willing to go to the ends of the earth to get it, if necessary, he eventually found the wherewithal in his own Territory.

A convert by the name of Joseph Ridges came from Australia in 1856. Father learned of his talent as an organ builder before he sailed and sent instructions for him to bring to Salt Lake a small organ that he had made in Sidney. The organ was brought from the West Coast to Salt Lake sealed in tin cases and carried in twelve wagons drawn by mule teams, only to be found unsuitable for use in the great Tabernacle when it arrived. Neither Father nor Brother Ridges were daunted, however, and they set promptly to work to build a new organ out of the materials at hand.

They decided, however, that these materials must be of the best, and so specimens of wood were brought from all over the Territory. Finally from Parowan, some three hundred miles south of Salt Lake, was selected a fine grain of white pine which was free from knots. Thousands of feet of timber were required for the pipes, some of which were thirty-two feet in length, and the hauling of this wood to Salt Lake was in itself a tremendous task. At times there were twenty wagons on the way, each drawn with three yoke of oxen.

Glue was an important item for the construction of the pipes which was very hard to obtain, but this difficulty was surmounted by boiling strips of cattle hides and buffalo skins in large pots over fires. One hundred men were employed for a year doing this work alone. It is considered that if the organ had been bought in the East, it would have cost about $30,000, including the cost of freighting it to Salt Lake. What an amazing picture in contrasts is presented when one realizes that the organ which was built by such primitive methods as hauling timber by ox team and the making of glue from buffalo skins, can be heard in any home in the land by the mere turn of a dial.

As I mentioned before, the first plans for the building of the Temple were made only a few days after the arrival of the first company of pioneers in the valley July 24, 1847. They found but one tree in the entire valley and no green things of any description growing except on the banks of the mountain streams. The people knew they would have to work with all the energy they possessed in order to build shelter and raise enough food to sustain them through the coming winter, and yet only four days later Father, walking about with some of the brethren, struck the point of his cane into the ground and exclaimed, "Here we will build the Temple of our God." Wilford Woodruff drove a stake into the spot, and that very evening a ten-acre block was marked off which was to be the site of the Temple.

Four years later the Saints met in conference and voted to begin building the Temple. They were still destitute and struggling day in and day out to make a home in the wilderness, but they made plans to erect an edifice which eventually was to cost four million dollars and to take forty years to complete. Do I praise too highly when I call such courage and vision magnificent?

In July of 1857, when the news reached the city that Johnston's Army was approaching, only the fifteen-foot wall that surrounds the block and the foundation for the Temple had been completed. When everyone in the city prepared to leave their homes, it was decided that all the work that had been done on the grounds should be entirely obscured. Excavations were refilled and masonry covered up until no vestige remained of the work of years.

After the army had quietly ensconced itself at Camp Floyd the Saints returned to their homes, and shortly afterward building operations were again commenced.

The foundation was first filled with stone taken from near Fort Douglas. When Father found it was rubble, he ordered it all taken out and granite blocks cut.

It was decided that the walls must be of the finest material obtainable, and as a fine deposit of grey granite had been discovered in the Little Cottonwood Canyon, some twenty-five miles southeast of Salt Lake, preparations were made to haul great blocks of this stone to the temple site by the only power at hand—ox teams and wagons. Some of these granite blocks were so large that it was necessary to have four yoke of oxen to bring in a single stone, and that over a period of three or four days. Finally Father decided to build a canal in order that the blocks might be brought down on boats but, before this project could be finished, the railroad had arrived in Utah, and a side line was built to the quarries. Later the canal was used for irrigating purposes.

Father planned the Temple, and the architect was Truman O. Angell, but neither the Temple nor the other wonderful buildings that he planned could have been made realities without the whole-hearted co-operation of the people. They were always ready and willing to sacrifice any part of their time and means that might be required for the good of the cause.

For a long time the people who worked on the Temple were paid in "white orders" or "red orders," which meant that they received their compensation in farm produce or meat at the tithing office. The late John F. Bennett, who in time became prominent in merchandising and banking circles, was employed, when a youngster of thirteen, at the Church blacksmith shop, which was organized for the purpose of making and sharpening all the tools used on the Temple. He was given a small wheelbarrow which contained all the weight he could push, and a string with which to lead two blind boys, the three of them having the responsibility of transferring the tools from the Temple to the shop.

For this work he received two and one-half cents an hour or twenty-five cents a day. He only received it, however, until the blind boys became so proficient that they were able to make the trip alone, when he lost his job. Many another man, who later attained wealth and positions of prominence in the state, could tell similar stories of the humble part played in the erection of this great edifice.

The architecture of the Temple combines both the Gothic and Roman in style. Six granite towers surmount the roof, the highest of them measuring 210 feet. On the east center tower stands a figure representing the embodiment of the Heavenly messenger who appeared to John the Revelator and proclaimed the restoration of the gospel. The statue, which is twelve and one-half feet high, is made of hammered copper and is heavily gilded with pure gold leaf.

The walls of the Temple had reached only a height of twenty-five feet when Father's death occurred in August, 1877. It was the greatest of the many buildings he designed. I wish that he might have lived to see it completed.

At the time of Father's death an editorial printed in the Deseret News read: "The leading papers of the United States have each published notices, the Cable has flashed the word to Europe, and all parts of the civilized world have been stirred to their depths by the sad news. The name of Brigham Young is familiar all over the globe. His greatness is universally acknowledged, but his goodness is known only to the few."

But that editorial was published over fifty years ago. By now I believe that my father's goodness, as well as his greatness, is universally acknowledged. The historian Orson F. Whitney says of him: "Brigham Young, so long as he lived was the foremost citizen of Utah—not in an official way, but by virtue of his ability, personal magnetism and commanding influence. His position at the head of the church comprising in its membership most of the inhabitants of the territory, gave him much of his influence, but not all. He was by nature a leader of men, with a genius of organization and government. With or without office he would have been influential in any community. His power was unusual, but it was one of the forces of his time, and was undoubtedly necessary to the accomplishment of the great colonizing work that he had undertaken."

During his lifetime he peopled this Western territory with about one hundred thousand souls, founded over two hundred cities, established schools, factories, telegraph lines, railroads, and temples. He was dauntless in his great enterprises, fearless in following his beliefs, diplomatic in his dealings with statesmen or Indians—and with his family generous, affectionate, and understanding always. I honor and revere his memory.
