B. H. Roberts, Rasha the Jew ( 1932)

I

Rabbi's Letter to Pastor Abraham Silverstein

I

Rabbi's Letter to Pastor Abraham Silverstein

DEAR MR. ABRAHAM SILVERSTEIN:

I will comply with your request and fully state, for publication in your Redeemed Hebrew, how I stand with regard to your Christ, since you ask me to do so.

After reading over your book, Old Man Swartz, which, I confess, was written with the object of decoying Jews into the faith of Jesus of Nazareth, I have carefully gone over every prophecy you mention and find that many of them do not at all refer to the coming of the Messiah. Your arguments are well founded on the Christian interpretation of the Scriptures, but do not at all tally with the interpretation of our ancient traditional writings. Some of your quotations, I will concede, run in line with Messianic prophecies, but, as I shall prove to you, do not refer to Jesus as the Messiah, but to another who is yet to come.

Mr. Silverstein, we are Jews, of the old stock. We refer to our forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We stand on the platform built by Moses and the holy prophets. We will not deviate one iota from what has been set down in the Old Testament and on that we stand.

I can therefore seek my salvation in the Old Testament and if it offers me forgiveness of my sins, I have only to accept and have what I want. Your "Old Man Swartz" evidently did not know that salvation was provided for him in the Old Testament, and I can see that you have carefully evaded the issue in your book. If he had known the Scriptures as I do, he would not have answered that his sins are not forgiven him, but would have found his Savior in the Old Testament without even touching the New Testament. According to the Scripture quotations I am going to give you, your Jesus of Nazareth is indeed an impostor. You will, of course, pardon me the use of this harsh expression, but if a man proclaims himself to be what, according to the Scriptures, he is not, then he is an impostor.

Your modernist preachers are rapidly coming to this same conclusion. They at last come forth with their denials of the so-called virgin birth of Christ, the miracles performed, the divinity and many other items which have become stereotype expressions in the language of the Christian religion. I would not dare bring forth my study on the subject were I in Russia; nor in Germany where the "Kreuzhacklers" are still persecuting the Jews, nor in Hungary,—for the same reason. But here in Canada, I am afraid of nothing, nor would I be in the United States. And so let me proceed in giving you a few Scriptures and remarks to show you that you, as a born Jew, have walked on the wrong path and I entreat you, as Naomi entreated Ruth, to turn back to the path of your fathers, and for you to say to me, "Your God shall be my God and your people my people."

First then, the God of the Old Testament, Jehovah, is the God of all the world. This cannot be denied even by the Christian. His name is Jehovah and what he says must be preferred to what others have to say, no matter who they are. He is first and he is last, as your New Testament states, in the Green vernacular, he is the Alpha and the Omega. I could quote more than will here be quoted, but I will confine myself only to chapters in the book of the ancient prophet Isaiah. It is God, Jehovah who speaks here.

The Jews are not cast away, as states your New Testament.. See Isaiah 41:9. [^1]

["Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away."]

Jehovah's glory will not be given to another (either to Jesus or anyone else). See Isaiah 42:8.

["I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images."]

The Jews are redeemed by Jehovah without the help of Jesus. Read carefully Isa. xliii:1.

["But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine."]

There is no need of Savior, outside of Jehovah, for Jehovah says that he is the Savior of the Jews. What need have we of another? Read Isa. xliii:3.

["For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee."]

The words of Jehovah himself, which no Jew of Christian can deny are these, "I, even I am Jehovah and beside me there is no Savior." Isa. xliii:11.

Jehovah called "The Savior." Isa. xlv:15, xlv:21; Isa. xlix.26.

["Verily, thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior."

"Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? Have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Savior; there is none beside me."

"And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob."]

Jesus is not the King of the Jews. Jehovah is. See Isaiah 43:15.

["I am the Lord, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King."] Jesus is not the forgiver of sins, nor the atonement, if you please. God forgives our sins, not for Jesus' sake, but for his own, (Jehovah's sake). Read Isa. xliii:25; xliv:22; Isa. lv:6 and 7.

["I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins."

"I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee."

"Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon."]

Jesus is not the Alpha and the Omega, but Jehovah is. Read Isa. xliv:6; Isa. xlviii:12.

["Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God."

"Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called: I am he: I am the first, I also am the last."]

There is no other God beside Jehovah. God Himself says that he does not know of any, and yet you call Jesus God. Read Isa. xliii:8; [^2] xlv:5, 6.

["I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me.

"That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me: I am the Lord, and there is none else."] It is not Jesus of Nazareth, through whose words the world was created. It is blasphemy to say so. Jehovah has created and does still create all by himself—alone. Read Isa. xliv:24; xlv:7, 18.

["Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself."

"I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil. I the Lord do all these things.

"For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited; I am the Lord, and there is none else."]

The salvation of the Jews through the Old Testament God is not worldly, or temporary, but everlasting, world without end. Read Isa. xlv:17.

["But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end."]

The Gentiles too are to be saved by Jehovah and not by Jesus. Read Isa. xlv:22.

["Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else."]

Jehovah is not to be compared to anyone, certainly not to Jesus. Isa. xlvi:5.

["To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like?"]

There is no need of any more than this. These quotations, as given by me interpret themselves. Just for argument's sake, as you told "Old Man Swartz", imagine there is no New Testament, although, indeed there is one. And here you are, seeking salvation and forgiveness of your sins. Can you be saved and have your sins forgiven? Most assuredly, for Jehovah promises to blot them out and remember them no more forever and ever, world without end.

He, Jehovah, is the Savior, and beside him there is no other and never was and never will be, for he is the First and he is the Last. Is this plain enough?

Can you not see that your New Testament is a fiction, that your Jesus of Nazareth was an impostor and died the death of an impostor? How can he forgive sins when Jehovah himself alone can forgive?

And lastly, my friend,—my deluded and misguided friend, why go to a New Testament, when the Old and reliable Testament of Jehovah provides all that your Christian religion claims, for the believer? I am glad that I am with Jehovah! I am glad that I believe in his saving power and redemptive strength; I am glad that through him my sins are all forgiven. "Come now and let us reason together," saith Jehovah, "though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isaiah 1:18).

Let me entreat you to come back to the faith of your fathers and use the knowledge you have of the Word of Jehovah for his glory and not for the glory of another.

You may publish this, if you wish, without my name alongside of your reply, which I am very anxious to receive. You promised to send me the reply before publishing it.

Very sincerely yours,

"RASHA."

Footnotes

"Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears."

But verse 10 may have some bearing upon the point:

"Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me."

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. I have placed in square brackets the passages of "Rasha's" citations in full in each case for greater completeness.
[^2] 2. Reference to Isa. xliii:8 must be the wrong citation because that passage says:
