Prophets of God orient us toward the most important things in life, and the most important things in life all center on the atonement of Jesus Christ. His redemptive sacrifice is the most important event in time or all eternity. A sure testimony of his redemption and resurrection is the most important possession we can acquire. A solemn promise to live as Jesus bids us is the most important commitment we can make. And the most important activity in which parents, siblings, friends, teachers, and leaders can engage is to help others come to Christ. President Gordon B. Hinckley summed up the matter in a most powerful and instructive way:

“With all of our doing, with all of our leading, with all of our teaching, the most important thing we can do for those whom we lead is to cultivate in their hearts a living, vital, vibrant testimony and knowledge of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, the redeemer of the world.... I would hope that in all we do we would somehow constantly nourish the testimony of our people concerning the Savior. I am satisfied—I know it's so—that whenever a man has a true witness in his heart of the living reality of the Lord Jesus Christ, all else will come together as it should.... That is the root from which all virtue springs among those who call themselves Latter-day Saints.”1

The ultimate purpose of all scripture is the same as that of modern prophets—the witness of Jesus Christ and the bringing of souls to him. This is as true for the Old Testament as it is for the Book of Mormon or New Testament. In fact, in a literal way, the Old Testament is the foundation of both the Book of Mormon and the New Testament. All three books of scripture, the Old Testament, New Testament, and Book of Mormon, testify of the Messiah's mission, message, and manner. Sometimes we forget that the earthly Jesus regarded the Old Testament as the principal witness of his messianic role. “Search the scriptures,” he said to the Jewish people in Jerusalem, “for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me” (John 5:39).

Jesus is actually being a bit reproving here, which would be easier for us to see if the “and” in this verse were read as “but.” He is saying, in essence, “You study the scriptures because you think that activity brings eternal life, but the scriptures testify of me, and I give eternal life.” In Jesus’ day, the scriptures comprised the canonical books of the Old Testament, called the Torah. The Jewish sages of Jesus’ day believed that the act of studying the Torah brought eternal life. This belief is confirmed in a statement by the great rabbi and contemporary of Jesus, Hillel, preserved in the Mishnah: “One who has acquired for himself Torah has acquired for himself the life of the world to come.”2 But Jesus pointedly taught that the scriptures did not bring salvation. Sacred writ was given to testify of him, and he, God, was the vehicle of salvation. It never was, and never will be, written words on a page that atone for sins: only the blood of the Messiah atones for sins. The scriptures do, however, bring earnest seekers to Jesus Christ and his doctrine.

The Old Testament testifies of Jehovah, the premortal Jesus Christ, and his unmatched power. It proclaims forcefully as well as subtly that the Lord's “mighty acts of deliverance anciently were types of... his ultimate act of deliverance, the Atonement.”3 The very concept of a redeemer is first and best exemplified for us in the Old Testament law of redemption, initially set forth in Leviticus 25. As first used in sacred writ, redemption “is a purely Hebrew word, belonging to the realm of family law, which denotes primarily the action of the next of kin to recover the forfeited property of a kinsman or to purchase his freedom if he has fallen into slavery.”4 Such is the essence of the Savior's work spiritually, and such is the way the Old Testament uses temporal matters to teach about spiritual, eternal matters.

Indeed, the Old Testament helps all of us to see that where the mortal life of Jesus Christ is concerned, everything about him had a foreshadowing, an ancient symbolic precursor, a specific likeness and similitude in earlier Israelite history. The Old Testament witnesses the coming of the earthly Messiah, the very same Being who ruled the universe as Jehovah before he took up his earthly tabernacle and was born as Jesus of Nazareth. The Old Testament demonstrates that the recorded actions of Jesus in the New Testament were a fulfillment of all the laws, ordinances, and institutions enacted in ancient Israel and that they revolved around the covenant God had made with his children.

In truth, the Hebrew term berith, which is translated as “testament,” primarily means “covenant.” That is to say, the Old Testament is really the Old Covenant, containing the laws, ordinances, sacrifices, symbols, and promises given to premeridian Israel by Jehovah, the premortal Christ. The New Covenant, or New Testament, documents the fulfillment of those laws, ordinances, sacrifices, symbols, and promises to ancient Israel with the coming of Jesus of Nazareth. The Old Covenant also describes ancient Israel's great apostasy, beginning at Mount Sinai, which led to the institution of the law of Moses. The New Covenant presents the new as well as restored laws, ordinances, sacrifices, symbols, and promises that constituted a new priesthood dispensation.

Thus, not only does the Old Covenant anticipate the New but the Old Covenant derives its name in relation to the New. No one described all of this better than the prophet Jeremiah:

“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

“Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

“But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people” (Jeremiah 31:31–33).

The Old Testament is the foundation not only of the New Testament but also of the Book of Mormon. The doctrine presented in the Book of Mormon is built upon the teachings of the brass plates, which may be thought of as a version of the Old Testament originating in the Northern Kingdom, just as our current Old Testament (King James Version) is a reflection of the Southern Kingdom, or Judean, version of the Old Testament record. The great Book of Mormon scholar Sidney B. Sperry said, “The Brass Plates may well have been the official scripture of the Ten Tribes.”5

It will be remembered that after the death of King Solomon, the house of Israel (with its united twelve tribes) split into two kingdoms: the Northern Kingdom, also known as the Kingdom of Israel, or Ephraim, headquartered in Samaria; and the Southern Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Judah, headquartered in Jerusalem. Both kingdoms kept scriptural records that contained the same core teachings and prophetic books, including the five books of Moses, a history of God's dealings with ancient Israel, and the prophecies of many Old Testament prophets (1 Nephi 3:3, 20; 4:15–16; 5:11–14).

Lehi was of the lineage of the tribe of Joseph through Manasseh from the Northern Kingdom. He became custodian of the brass plates, a kind of Northern Kingdom version of the Old Testament, which included information about his forefathers (1 Nephi 3:3). The profundity of the Book of Mormon witness of Jesus as Messiah and Son of God is directly tied to the profundity of the Northern Kingdom version of the Old Testament in which it is grounded. The Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ (Title Page), and the brass plates contained many more of the testimonies, prophecies, and profound witnesses of the Messiah than did the Southern Kingdom version of the Old Testament with which the rest of the Christian world is familiar. The teachings of Zenock, Neum, and Zenos—prophets of the Old Testament era not preserved in our Southern Kingdom version—are truly magnificent in their messianic expressions (1 Nephi 19:10–21; Alma 33:14–17; 34:7; Helaman 8:18–20).

Given that the Old Testament is the foundational book for other scriptural records—records that have as their primary purpose to stand as testaments of Christ—it is fitting and accurate to characterize the Old Testament as the human family's first and foundational testament of the Lord Jesus Christ. Elder Bruce R. McConkie confirmed that assessment in these words:

“The Old Testament contains a revealed and abbreviated account of the creation of this earth, of man, and of all forms of life. It tells of the fall of man and of the Lord's dealings with Adam and the ancient patriarchs before the flood. It speaks of the Abrahamic and Israelitish covenants. A major portion tells how Israel became a nation, possessed their promised land, and, as the sheep of the Lord's pasture, were fed the prophetic word down through the ages. Included are poetical, prophetic, legal-istic, doctrinal, didactical, and historical books. And, above all, interwoven through the whole account, from Adam to Malachi, is the promise of a Savior, a Redeemer, a Deliverer, a Messiah, a Suffering Servant, a Son of God, who would be born of woman, atone for the sins of the world, die and rise again in glorious immortality, and then return to that God whose Son and witness he was. The Old Testament is designed and prepared to teach the truths of salvation and to bear witness of the one who should come to redeem mankind and put into full operation all of the terms and conditions of the Father's great and eternal plan of salvation.

“As to the New Testament, it recounts the fulfillment of the ancient promises.”6

In large measure, it was the contents of the Old Testament, the brass plates version, that the prophet Nephi was referring to when he exclaimed, “Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him” (2 Nephi 11:4).

The Hebrew and Aramaic word Messiah and the Greek word Christ (christos) mean “the anointed.” When used as the title of an office, the terms refer to the Anointed One, the Deliverer-Redeemer-King whom the Jews were eagerly awaiting and who came to earth as Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus was the Anointed of the Father in our premortal existence to be his personal representative, to bring salvation to all of our Heavenly Father's children, to put into effect all of the terms and conditions of the Father's plan of exaltation. Thus, Peter says, “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power” (Acts 10:38).

Within the Old Testament, many types and shadows are to be found which point to the Messiah, our Savior, and his powers. As is the Lord's way, however, the most poignant and visible symbols of the Messiah were living symbols—those persons whose callings, speech, and actions mirrored Christ's, those who were themselves anointed in ancient Israel to perform their special duties in imitation of the Anointed One to come in the meridian of time, those whom we recognize as prophets, priests, and kings. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: “No doubt there are many events in the lives of many prophets that set those righteous persons apart as types and shadows of their Messiah. It is wholesome and proper to look for similitudes of Christ everywhere and to use them repeatedly in keeping him and his laws uppermost in our minds.”7

In ancient Israel, the three groups of people who were anointed to perform their responsibilities were prophets, priests, and kings. Prophets were anointed to their callings. The prophet Elisha, for example, was anointed prophet by his predecessor, Elijah (1 Kings 19:16). Priests were anointed to their office, as outlined in Exodus 40:15. Kings were anointed by the prophets (1 Samuel 10:1; 16:13; 2 Samuel 5:3; 1 Kings 1:39; 19:16; 2 Kings 9:3, 6; 11:12). These anointings were performed using olive oil, or olive oil mixed with spices, and represented Jesus Christ and his atonement.8

Jesus Christ, the Anointed One, of course, fulfilled all three roles of prophet, priest, and king, and even more. Thus, the very lives of Old Testament personalities—prophets, priests, and kings—are similitudes of the life of the great Prophet, Priest, and King, the Anointed One of the Father, the Holy One of Israel. In fact, it is about Jesus and all his precursors we sing when we give voice to the words, “He lives, and while he lives, I'll sing. He lives, my Prophet, Priest, and King.”9

In this volume, we examine briefly a number of representative individuals whose lives and activities typified, paralleled, and foreshadowed the life and ministry of Jesus Christ, the great Prophet, Priest, and King of our profession (Hebrews 3:1). Our goal is to begin to see how the Old Testament testifies of the Savior in many ways and points us to him. If we hope to live up to the invitation proffered by President Howard W. Hunter “to live with ever-more attention to the life and example of the Lord Jesus Christ,” we must begin to see all things bathed in the light of the Lord of life.10 Such attention must start with the Old Testament—the human family's first testament of the Lord Jesus Christ.

NOTES
