Many prophets lived on the earth from the days of Adam to the meridian of time. Sacred writ is crystal clear that all of them testified of the Messiah, the Anointed One, who came to earth as Jesus of Nazareth. Abinadi said:

“For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things? Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth? Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted?” (Mosiah 13:33–35; emphasis added).

The words of Peter are no less impressive: “The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all:).... Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly.... And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins” (Acts 10:36–43).

Even Jewish rabbinical writings of Peter's day and beyond proclaim that “all of the prophets prophesied only concerning the days of the Messiah.”1 Many of the rabbis and Jewish leaders did not recognize their Messiah-King as he walked the dusty roads of Galilee and Judea. But the prophecies of the prophets and seers are catalogued in the Hebrew Bible, our Old Testament, the human family's first testament of Jesus Christ, and those prophecies are sure and clear.

Many of the prophets foretold Christ's coming as they lived lives and lived in circumstances that paralleled, modeled, fore-shadowed, and typified the life and message of Jesus the Messiah. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught, “There are many events in the lives of many prophets that set those righteous persons apart as types and shadows of their Messiah.”2 We have examined the lives of a few of these prophets, and we have also looked at some priests and kings who, in their anointed roles and anointed stewardships, have pointed to the Anointed One.

Many other human types and shadows of the Messiah could be added to our discussion. One is Jonah, whose three days and nights in the belly of the whale specifically prefigured the Messiah's death, burial, and sojourn in the spirit world and whose preaching paralleled the preaching of the Messiah. Jesus’ own witness points us to Jonah as a similitude:

“Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee. But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and behold, a greater than Jonas is here” (Matthew 12:38–41).

Not incidentally, Jonah's name means “dove,” a symbol of Jesus’ identity as Messiah and Son of God given at his baptism (Matthew 3:16–17).

Similarly, Jonathan, the son of Saul, was like Jesus a son of a king and one who loved the future King David (1 Samuel 13–23). Jonathan's name means “gift of Jehovah or God” and points us to Jesus, who is our gift from God. Jonathan willingly risked his life for David—one of the most unselfish attitudes in all the Old Testament, considering that David could naturally have been regarded as Jonathan's rival (1 Samuel 18:1–4). Jonathan's attitude recalls both the work and actions of Jesus, who not only taught the principle that greater love hath no man than that he lay down his life for his friends (John 15:13) but actually demonstrated it.

Another similitude of Jesus Christ is the prophet Hosea, the meaning of whose name points us to the whole mission and message of Jesus—“salvation” or “he saves.” Hosea lived in the tragic final days of the Northern Kingdom of Israel. He was commanded to marry an adulterous woman, Gomer, who symbolized covenant Israel of that day. Hosea himself symbolized the Lord—his forgiving nature and his continuing relationship with Israel even though Israel had committed spiritual adultery. This story meshes with Jesus’ typology of the Church as the bride and himself, Christ, as the Bridegroom (Matthew 9:15; John 3:29); compare Revelation 21:2, 9; D&C 33:17; 65:3; 88:2).

Rulers such as Josiah and Nehemiah were types and similitudes of Jesus in important ways. Josiah (“Jehovah supports or sustains”) was a restorer-king, who was killed as a young man by Gentiles while trying to save Israel. Nehemiah (“Jehovah comforts” or “Jehovah is comfort”) was a prophetic governor of Judea who rebuilt Jerusalem and her walls, much as the future Messiah will rebuild Jerusalem at the last day.

Indeed, much more might be said. But the examples we have discussed substantiate the claim of scripture that all things given of God testify of the Son of God, the Messiah, and are a typifying of him. The most poignant and powerful types and symbols of Christ are the people we encounter in the pages of the Old Testament—the prophets, priests, and kings we read about in the first testament of Jesus Christ. They point us to him who is the embodiment of every good deed, every righteous thought, every foreordained action that we see in the lives of the prophets, priests, and kings in ancient Israel. Thus, Jesus is the Second Adam, the actual King of Righteousness (Melchizedek), the New Moses, the Son of David, the return of Elijah, or Jeremiah, or any of the other prophets. In sum, Jesus is the Prophet, Priest, and King of our profession (Hebrews 3:1). He is the Messiah of the Old Testament and the Christ of the New.

Our challenge is to take the lessons taught in the ancient written testimonies and use them to become more Christlike—more like the Messiah to whom all of the prophets looked and of whom they spoke. Perhaps the greatest lesson on types and similitudes is the one which some of us find the most difficult to accept, but by not accepting it, we rob ourselves of the true picture of our own relationship and similarity to God: We too are similitudes of the Messiah.

All persons who take upon themselves the name of Christ are a similitude of Christ. Every person who is baptized as Christ was baptized is a similitude of Christ. Every man who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood “is or should be a type of Christ,” said Elder Bruce R. McConkie. “Those who lived before he came were types and shadows and witnesses of his coming. Those who have lived since he came are witnesses of such coming and are types and shadows of what he was.”3 In short, every person who is washed, anointed, and ordained in the name of Christ, every person who immerses himself or herself in living the gospel of Christ, every person who is a witness of Christ—all these are living, walking, breathing similitudes of the Lord Jesus Christ.

What is even more startling is that the Lord has told us that the celestial kingdom will be populated with similitudes of Jesus Christ. President Joseph F. Smith recorded:

“As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great.

“And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality;

“And who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name” (D&C 138:11–13).

We know that we need Christ. We know that we must find Christ. We know that we must come unto Christ. But we also know that we must someday become like Christ. The first place we can find Christ is in the Old Testament—the foundation of all the other testaments of Christ. We can take a step closer to finding Christ by studying those who were similitudes of him. And we can take a step closer to becoming more like him by learning the lessons of those whose lives elucidate his life more completely. This is the great value of the Old Testament. This is the great gift that it gives to us.

NOTES
