B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXX

THE RISE OF NEW MOB FORCES — A STATE'S ABDICATION OF GOVERNMENTS

AFTER the departure of the great body of the church from Nauvoo, which, as I have previously said, was accomplished by the latter part of April, 1846, [^1] purchasers for the property of such as remained, and also of those who had departed without selling their houses and lands, became fewer, and prices lower, since prospective buyers from a distance and the people immediately surrounding Nauvoo saw no need of purchasing property at a fair price, which inevitably must become theirs at their own price. The result of this condition was that it became impossible for this remnant consisting, for the most part, of the destitute, the aged, infirm and sick, to remove. And surely a people who had still any faith left in humanity, would be justified in the belief that these could remain until an asylum was found for them by their friends who had already gone in search of a new place of settlement. But in this, be it said to the shame of the people of Illinois, they were deceived.

IMPATIENCE OF MOB FORCES FOR THE DEPARTURE OF THE SAINTS

During the preparations for the exodus, Major Warren, as stated in the previous chapter, had been stationed with a small military force in Hancok county, to keep the peace; but about the middle of April he received orders to disband his force on the first of May, [^2] as that was adjudged by "the public expectation," to use a phrase of Major Warren's, when the last of the "Mormons" would have left the state. As soon as it was understood that there were still left in Nauvoo a number of "Mormons" who would likely remain through the summer to continue efforts to dispose of property, an uproar was raised in the surrounding counties, meetings were held and resolutions adopted, demanding that this remnant leave at once, under threats of "extermination." [^3] When the governor saw this new furor breaking out, he countermanded his order to Major Warren, and ordered him to hold his position and to preserve the peace until he received further orders.

Major Warren took up his quarters at the "Mansion" in Nauvoo (formerly the noted residence of the Prophet Joseph Smith), and on the 14th of May sent a dispatch to the Warsaw Signal to the effect that "the Mormons were leaving with all possible speed: that the ferry was crossing them over the river as fast as possible; that an estimate of 450 teams and 1,350 souls had left within the week: that new settlers were taking their places, etc." Information was also received from La Harpe, Ramus and other points, that the "Mormons" were fast leaving these neighborhoods. On the 22nd he reported: "The Mormons still continue to leave the city in large numbers. The ferry at this place averages about 32 teams per day, and at Fort Madison, 45. Thus it will be seen that 539 teams have left during the week, which average about three persons to each, making in all 1,617 souls." [^4]

3The new impetus given to mob violence, however, was not to spend its force without occasioning some outrage, and a number of cowardly attacks were made upon the saints. [^5] On the 11th of May, Major Warren found it necessary to issue the following proclamation, which appears in the Quincy Whig of May 20th:

WARREN'S PROCLAMATION

"To the Citizens of Hancock County:—The undersigned again deems it his duty to appear before you in a circular. It may not be known to all of you, that on the day after my detachment was disbanded at Carthage, I received orders from the executive to muster them into service again, and remain in the county until further orders.

4I have now been in Nauvoo with my detachment a week, and can say to you with perfect assurance, that the demonstrations made by the Mormon population, are unequivocal. They are leaving the state, and preparing to leave, with every means that God and nature has placed in their hands. Five ferry boats are running at this place night and day, and many are crossing at Nashville and Fort Madison. This ought to be satisfactory.

4The anti-Mormons desire the removal of the Mormons; this is being effected peaceably, and with all possible despatch. All aggressive movements, therefore, against them at this time, must be actuated by a wanton desire to shed blood, or to plunder. This course, I know, is deprecated by three-fourths of the anti-Mormon population, and must not be indulged in. I therefore exhort all good citizens to stay at home, with an assurance that they shall be duly advised of all movements which may take place, in which they feel interested.

4A man near sixty years of age, living about seven miles from this place, was taken from his house a few nights since, stripped of his clothing, and his back cut to pieces with a whip, for no other reason than because he was a Mormon, and too old to make successful resistance. Conduct of this kind would disgrace a horde of savages.

4Captain Agnew, near Pontoosuc, has received written orders over the signature of Major M'Calla and Colonel Levi Williams, to rendezvous his company at Pontoosuc, next Friday, armed and equipped according to law, and other notices of a similar character, I have no doubt, have been issued to other portions of the country.

4How Squire M'Calla and Colonel Williams can reconcile conduct of this kind with the resolutions adopted at Carthage, a few weeks since, determining to await the action of the neighboring counties, (in the adoption of which resolutions they both acted a conspicuous part), is not for me to say. But, I beg leave to remind them, that an order was issued last fall, (when the troops came into the county), that not more than four armed men should assemble together, other than the state troops. This order has never been withdrawn, and will be enforced.

4The force under my command is numerically small; but backed as I am, by the moral force of the law, and possessing, as I do, the confidence of nine-tenths of the respectable portion of the old citizens, my force is able to meet, successfully, any mob which can be assembled in the county; and if any such force does assemble, they or I will leave the field in double quick time.

4To the Mormons I would say, go on with your preparations, and leave as fast as you can. Leave the fighting to be done by my detachment. If we are overpowered, then re-cross the river and defend yourselves and property.

4[Signed] "W. B. WARREN."

4Major, Commanding Illinois Volunteers.

4Nauvoo, May 11th, 1846."

Major Warren's reference in the above proclamation to the fact, that there existed a previous military order "that not more than four armed men other than state troops" should assemble in Hancock county, and his declared competence and intention to enforce that order, and make amenable to the law those who attempted mischief by mob violence, had the effect of quieting matters down for a time, but only until Major Warren's force was disbanded.

5A meeting was held at Carthage on the sixth of June, to make preparations for celebrating the Fourth of July, the national holiday. It was suggested at that meeting that, as all the "Mormons" had not left the state, the people of Hancock county could not be considered free; and under those circumstances, they ought not to celebrate the Fourth with the usual rejoicings. The meeting was therefore adjourned to convene on the twelfth, for the purpose of taking into consideration why it was that all "Mormons" had not left the city of Nauvoo. That "happened" to be the day fixed by the governor on which to raise volunteers for the Mexican war, which, in the meantime, had been declared; so that there was considerable excitement among the militia of Hancock county; and the mob leaders doubtless thought the time propitious for making a demonstration against the few saints still remaining in Nauvoo.

5"GOLDEN'S POINT" INCIDENT

A large body of men were found willing to march into that city, but it was learned that the new citizens who had purchased much of the property of the now exiled people, were unwilling to allow the mob forces to enter Nauvoo. Meeting with this unexpected opposition, the mob-militia marched to Golden's Point, distant from Nauvoo some six miles down the river. [^6] At this juncture, Stephen Markham returned to Nauvoo from the camp of the apostles in the wilderness, for some church property; but it was rumored by the anti-"Mormons" that he had returned with a large body of men—"Several hundred * * * completely armed, prepared and determined upon fighting;" and as Markham's name was a terror among the enemies of the saints, the mob took to flight. [^7]

6The military committee at Quincy having control of the mob forces, either chagrined by the cowardice of those who had collected at Golden's Point, or appalled at the prospect of innocent blood being shed retired from the position which had been assigned them. [^8] This disorganized the mob and they dispersed to their homes, but agreed to assemble again at the call of their leaders; and laid an injunction upon the "Mormons" remaining in Nauvoo not to go outside of the city limits, except in making their way westward.

THE HARVEST PARTY AND PICKETT INCIDENTS

This order of the mob, later in the summer, was disregarded by a party of new citizens and a few saints who went into the country several miles, east of Nauvoo, to harvest a field of grain. [^9] While engaged in their work, they were surrounded by a mob and captured. They were deprived of their arms, stripped of their clothing, and cruelly beaten with hickory goads. [^10] This outrage created intense excitement in Nauvoo, and the new citizens and saints made a united effort to bring the perpetrators of it to justice. But while the parties accused of the crime were under arrest, in the hands of the officers, a second "Mormon" party, consisting of Phineas H. Young, his son, Brigham Young, Richard Ballantyne, James Standing and Mr. Herring were kidnapped, and held by their tormentors fourteen days as hostages for the "safety" of those who had assaulted the harvesters; during which time they were constantly threatened with death. They finally escaped, however, and returned to Nauvoo.

7The parties accused of making the assault on those in the harvest field, took a change of venue to Quincy, but were never brought to trial.

Among those arrested for attacking the party of harvesters was Major M'Calla; and in his possession was found a gun taken from the party of harvesters. The gun was recognized by several persons, among whom was Wm. Pickett, not a "Mormon;" [^11] and he it was who took the gun from M'Calla. For this action by Pickett, M'Calla and his friends made out a charge of "stealing," and got warrants for the arrest of Pickett, Furness and Clifford. Pickett, it would seem, had incurred the hatred of the mob by his bold resistance to their plans, and they desired to get him into their power. Word was brought to him by a friend that the warrant was merely a subterfuge to get him into the hands of his enemies; consequently, when one John Carlin, a special constable from Carthage, undertook to arrest him, he asked if he would guarantee his safety; being answered in the negative, Pickett resisted the officer and would not be taken. Though it is claimed afterwards, in company with several friends he went before the magistrate at Green Plains, who, it was said, issued the warrant for his arrest. But as this officer had no record of the warrant, he refused to put Pickett under arrest or hear the case. Of the other parties accused Furness was taken before the magistrate where he gave bail for his appearance and was set at liberty; Clifford, having been taken ill, was left at Nauvoo.

8The mob, now, however, saw an opportunity to accomplish their purpose of destroying Nauvoo. An officer had been "resisted" by a citizen of that place, and his fellow citizens approved his course! "Nauvoo was in rebellion against the laws!" Carlin issued a proclamation calling upon the citizens to come as a posse comitatus, to assist him in executing the law. And under this call the old mob forces of Hancock county were soon assembled at Carthage, and the command of the posse given to Captain James W. Singleton, of Brown county, and J. B. Chittenden, of Adams county.

8The citizens of Nauvoo petitioned the governor for protection, and he sent to them Major James R. Parker, with a force of ten men from Fulton county; and also authorized him to take command of such forces as might volunteer to defend the city against any attacks that might be made upon it. Parker was also empowered "to pursue, and in aid of any peace officer with a proper warrant, arrest the rioters who may threaten or attempt such an attack, and bring them to trial;" also to assist with an armed posse any peace officer making an arrest, and with a like force to guard the prisoners, during the trial, and as long as he believed them in danger of mob violence. The commission bears date of August 24, 1846. [^12]

Thus equipped, Major Parker went to Nauvoo and issued a proclamation calling upon the mobs then collecting, in the name of the people of Illinois, and by virtue of the authority vested in him by the governor of the state, to disperse. The issue, then, was no longer between the mob forces and the "Mormons;" it was between the recognized authority of the state and this lawless banditti. Major Parker announced that he was authorized and prepared to assist the proper officers in serving any writs in their hands.

9In answer to this proclamation Carlin, "the special" Carthage constable issued a counter one to the effect that if he met with resistance from Parker, he would consider his detachment as a mob, and proceed accordingly. To which Parker replied, if the forces under Carlin undertook to enter Nauvoo, he would treat them as a mob. Parker also wrote secretly to Singleton, and expressed a desire to bring about a settlement of the difficulty without shedding blood. To this communication Singleton replied that in Parker's proposition he saw nothing looking to the expulsion of the remnant of the "Mormon" people left in Nauvoo; and "that is," said he, "a sine qua non with us." It will be remembered that Carlin's professed object in calling for a posse was to arrest William Pickett for resisting an officer; but now something more is demanded—the immediate removal of the "Mormons," the surrender of Nauvoo, etc. Singleton concluded his terms to Parker, the representative and appointee of the governor of the state, in these words:

9"When I say to you, the Mormons must go, I speak the mind of the camp and country. They can leave without force or injury to themselves or their property, but I say to you, sir, with all candor, they shall go—they may fix the time within sixty days, or I will fix it for them." [^13]

9SINGLETON-CHITTENDEN-PARKER AGREEMENT

A basis of settlement, however, was finally agreed upon between Singleton and Chittenden, on the one part, and Parker on the other. The terms agreed upon were that the "Mormons" move out of the city, or disperse within sixty days. A force of twenty-five men to remain in the city during that time, half the expense of maintaining them to be paid by the people of Nauvoo; for which amount they were to give bond; that the "Mormons" surrender their arms, which should be returned to them after they left the state; that as soon as those arms were surrendered the forces under Singleton were to disperse; all hostilities to cease between the respective parties as soon as the agreement was accepted. [^14]

10The singularity about this proposed agreement is that not one word is said about giving up Pickett, to arrest whom the forces under Singleton were ostensibly called out by Carlin, the special constable. Does it not reveal the fact that the Pickett episode was merely a ruse—a pretext for gathering a mob to drive away the helpless remnant of the "Mormons," and sack Nauvoo?

10This secretly arranged settlement concluded by Colonels Singleton and Chittenden on the part of the mob, and by Major Parker and others on the part of the citizens of Nauvoo, according to Gregg, was "unanimously rejected" by Singleton's forces, both by "his officers and men amid great excitement." [^15]

10At this Singleton and Chittenden withdrew from their commands, and one Thomas S. Brockman, of Brown county, was put in command by Carlin. Parker also withdrew from service, [^16] and Major Clifford succeeded him in command at Nauvoo by a commission from Governor Ford.

THE RISE OF BROCKMAN

Brockman—now raised to the dignity of a "general" [^17]—and placed at the head of about eight hundred men, [^18] with six pieces of cannon, made active preparations for an assault upon Nauvoo, taking a position on the south side of Mulholland street, about one mile east of the city.

THE QUINCY COMMITTEE—ILLINOIS' ABDICATION OF GOVERNMENT

At this juncture there appeared upon the scene what is frequently called the "Quincy Citizens' Committee of One Hundred," but which more properly should be called the "Quincy Anti-Mormon Committee," for it was selected by an anti-"Mormon" public meeting held at Quincy: "Said committee," remarks Dr. Conyers, was chosen and sent by "a meeting of anti-Mormons of Quincy, in which meeting it was publicly proclaimed that none but decided anti-Mormon men go on said committee." [^19] "Nominally," says Conyers again, this was to be "a committee of mediation, but ostensibly to help the mob do what, to all appearances, they could not accomplish without the loss of blood." [^20]

From his position at the head of Mulholland street Brockman issued his orders and the terms upon which he would grant peace. The terms he offered were much more outrageous than those proposed by Singleton and Chittenden: [^21] and therefore rejected by the people of Nauvoo, both by "Mormons" and non-"Mormons." Brockman addressed his insolent terms of peace to the "commanding officer of Nauvoo, and the trustees of the Mormon church." The "commanding officer" was Major Clifford, who had succeeded Major Parker in that position. He was vested with the governor's commission as Parker had been, and it was to this representative of Illinois' executive that the demand of Brockman to surrender the city, and to stack his arms, was addressed; [^22] so that he and his mob forces were pitted against the laws and lawful authority of the state. Mobs, it would seem, had become more powerful than the state authorities; or, rather, the lawful authorities of the state were so lost to all sense of shame, so recreant to the trust reposed in them, so neglectful of the honor and dignity of the state, that, as the sequel will show, they permitted their own representatives to be driven in disgrace from the field by the mob led by Brockman; and furthermore those same authorities were so lost to every principle of humanity, that they permitted the helpless and unoffending people to be driven from their homes out into the wilderness, many of them to perish from exposure.

13The citizens of Nauvoo were not willing to allow Brockman's mob to enter the city without making some effort to prevent him; and although their forces numbered not more than three hundred, [^23] they presented a determined front to the mob. They converted some steamboat shafts into cannons—five pieces in all—and threw up fortification on the north side of Mulholland street, facing the mob's camp. These works were under command of Captain Andrew L. Lamoreaux.

13On September 10th, 11th and 12th, there was some desultory firing on both sides, without much advantage being gained. On the thirteenth, however, the mob forces advanced in solid column from their encampment in the fields, making a desperate effort to reach Mulholland street, the principal street leading into Nauvoo from the east. If the onset was desperate, the resistance was equally determined. Brockman's column had nearly reached Mulholland street when a spirited attack on the part of the Nauvoo forces drove them back to the place of their morning encampment. This attack by the Nauvoo forces resulted in a number being killed and a still greater number being wounded. [^24]

14When it is remembered that the attack upon Brockman's column of seven or eight hundred armed men, with six or seven hundred unarmed spectators—whom the attacking party from Nauvoo doubtless took also for the enemy—was made by a force of less than three hundred men; that they checked Brockman's column and drove his forces back to the place of their morning encampment, the achievement speaks well for the defenders of Nauvoo; for their courage, steadiness, and soldierly qualities.

DANIEL H. WELLS—DEFENDER OF NAUVOO

Among those who distinguished themselves in this engagement was Esquire Daniel H. Wells, one of the old settlers of Hancock county, on whose addition to the city plot the temple was erected, and who but a short time previous to Brockman's assault upon Nauvoo had formally accepted the faith of the Latter-day Saints by baptism (August 9th, 1846). The great injustice practiced towards the Latter-day Saints, as well by those who constituted the state and local administration of the law, as by the old citizens, aroused the fierce indignation of "Squire Wells," as he was familiarly called; and in all their conflicts and difficulties he was their ardent and undeviating friend; and now their brother by formal acceptance of the faith. He was a tower of strength to them in resisting the advancement of Brockman's forces in this day of battle, and the success of the attack which checked the forward movement of Brockman's mob was largely due to his brave and timely action in leading Captain Andrew L. Lamoreaux's company into action to the support of Captain Hiram Gates and William L. Cuttler's companies already hard pressed by the overwhelming odds against which they fought. [^25] Henceforth Daniel H. Wells will be known as a prominent leader in all the affairs of the church until the close of his eventful life.

15Negotiations for peace were now renewed through the agency of the "Quincy Committee." The citizens of Nauvoo, seeing that the state authorities would render them no assistance, but permitted even their own authority to be braved by a lawless mob, and knowing that they would eventually be overpowered, submitted to the following terms of settlement:

NAUVOO TREATY OF SURRENDER

"Articles of accommodation, treaty and agreement, made and entered into, this sixteenth of September, A. D. 1846, between Almon W. Babbitt, Joseph L. Haywood, and John S. Fullmer, Trustees in Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints of the one part;—Thomas S. Brockman, commander of the posse, and John Carlin, special constable and civil head of the posse of Hancock county, of the second part—and Andrew Johnson, chairman of the citizens of Quincy, of the third part—

16ALMON W. BABITT,

16JOSEPH L. HAYWOOD

16JOHN S. FULMER,

16Trustees in Trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

16ANDREW JOHNSON,

16Chairman of the Com. of Quincy.

16THOS. S. BROCKMAN,

16Commanding Posse.

16JOHN CARLIN,

16Special Constable."

As soon as these terms of surrender were signed, there was a hasty flight of the "Mormon" population and also of those new citizens who had taken part in the defense of Nauvoo, as they had no confidence that the terms of the treaty would be respected. Brockman and his force marched through the city in the afternoon of the 17th, and camped in the south side of it near the river. The march through the city is said to have been orderly, without the least "trespass upon persons or property." "The streets were deserted—the most obnoxious persons had left the city, leaving but little to provoke the resentment of the victors." [^27] But if this orderly conduct was true as to Brockman's forces marching into the city and going into encampment, restraint was soon abandoned and a reign of riot, drunkenness and robbery took its place. And this upon the same authority as that which reports the "orderly entrance" into the city, Mr. Brayman, the special representative of Governor Ford, on this as on former occasions when the executive considered reliable information necessary on Nauvoo affairs. [^28] The "orderly entrance" into Nauvoo was made on Thursday, the next day, Friday, the 18th, Mr. Brayman reports:

BRAYMAN'S REPORT TO GOVERNOR FORD

"On my return from Carthage to the city, on Friday about noon, I learned that the 'Quincy Committee' had closed its labors at sunrise, and left for home, leaving a sub-committee to complete the reception and delivery of the arms of those Mormons who had not departed.

17I also learned that, in addition to the duty which General Brockman had assumed, under treaty of superintending the removal of the Mormons from the state, had issued an order for the expulsion from the state of all who had borne arms in defense of the city against his force, and all who were in any manner identified with the Mormons.

17It could scarcely be believed that such an order, in such palpable and gross violation of the unanimous pledge which had been endorsed by the 'Quincy Committee,' had been given. But, on applying to General Brockman, I learned that such an order had been given, and would be executed. This order was rigorously enforced throughout the day, with many circumstances of the utmost cruelty and injustice. Bands of armed men traversed the city, entering the houses of citizens, robbing them of arms, throwing their household goods out of doors, insulting them, and threatening their lives. Many were seized, and marched to the camp, and after a military examination, set across the river, for the crime of sympathizing with the Mormons, or the still more heinous offense of fighting in defense of the city, under the command of officers commissioned by you, [i. e. the governor] and instructed to make that defense. It is, indeed, painfully true, that many citizens of this state, have been driven from it by an armed force, because impelled by our [state administration] encouragement, and a sense of duty, they have bravely defended their homes, and the homes of their neighbors, from the assaults of a force, assembled for unlawful purposes.

In the face of the pledge given 'to protect persons and property from all violence,' (excepting, of course, Mormon persons and property), it may be estimated that nearly one-half of the new citizens of Nauvoo have been forced from their homes, and dare not return. Thus far, these citizens have appealed in vain for protection and redress.

18It remains yet to be seen whether there is efficacy in the law, power in the executive arm, or potency in public opinion, sufficient to right this gievous wrong. It is disgraceful to the character of the state, and a humiliation not to be borne, to permit a military leader, acting without the shadow of lawful authority, but in violation of law and right, not only to thwart the will of the executive, but to impose upon citizens the penalty of banishment for acting under it.

18On Friday evening, the anti-Mormon force was disbanded, and sent home, with the exception of one hundred volunteers, who remained to enforce the provisions of the treaty upon the Mormons, and to carry out General Brockman's orders, for 'the protection of persons and property from violence.'"

18Governor Ford corroborates the account of Brayman as to the conduct of the mob miscalled a posse comitatus, and adds some details which Brayman fails to mention:

FORD'S CORROBORATION OF BRAYMAN

"When the posse arrived in the city, the leaders of it erected themselves into a tribunal to decide who should be forced away and who remain. Parties were despatched to hunt for Mormon arms and for Mormons, and to bring them to the judgment, where they received their doom from the mouth of Brockman, who there sat a grim and unawed tyrant for the time. As a general rule, the Mormons were ordered to leave within an hour or two hours; and by rare grace some of them were allowed until next day, and in a few cases longer. The treaty specified that the Mormons only should be driven into exile. Nothing was said in it concerning the new citizens, who had with the Mormons defended the city. But the posse no sooner obtained possession, than they commenced expelling new citizens. Some of them were ducked in the river, being in one or two instances actually baptized in the name of the leaders of the mob, [^29] others were forcibly driven into the ferry boats, to be taken over the river, before the bayonets of armed ruffians; and it is believed that the houses of most of them were broken open and their property stolen during their absence. Many of these new settlers were strangers in the country from various parts of the United States, who were attracted there by the low price of property, and they knew but little of previous difficulties, or the merits of the quarrel. They saw with their own eyes that the Mormons were industriously preparing to go away, and they knew of their own knowledge of that effort to expel them with force was gratuitous and unnecessary cruelty." [^30]

19In addition to atrocities above detailed the mob took possession of the temple and desecrated it by their drunken revels. Indeed it was here they made their headquarters and passed their sentence of banishment upon many of the new citizens. [^31] At this juncture Colonel, afterwards General, Thomas L. Kane, of Pennsylvania, visited Nauvoo while Brockman's forces were still in possession of it with headquarters in the temple, and thus describes the mob desecration of this Latter-day Saint holy sanctuary:

COLONEL THOMAS L. KANE A WITNESS OF THE TEMPLE'S DESECRATION

"In and around the splendid temple, which had been the chief object of my admiration, armed men were barracked, surrounded by their stacks of musketry, and pieces of heavy ordinance. These challenged me to render an account of myself, and why I had the temerity to cross the water without a written permit from a leader of their band. Though these men were generally more or less under the influence of ardent spirits, after I had explained myself as a passing stranger, they seemed anxious to gain my good opinion. * * * They also conducted me inside the massive, sculptured walls of the curious temple, in which they said the banished inhabitants were accustomed to celebrate the mystic rites of an unhallowed worship. They particularly pointed out to me certain features of the building, which, having been the peculiar objects of a former superstitious regard, they had, as a matter of duty, sedulously defiled and defaced. The reputed sites of certain shrines they had thus particularly noticed." [^32]

20Colonel Kane was conducted to the baptismal font which he was informed was held in the highest degree of affection by the exiled saints. "On this account," he remarks, "the victors had so diligently desecrated it, as to render the apartment in which it was contained too noisome to abide in."

20They permitted him to ascend into the steeple "to see where it had been lightning struck the Sabbath before. * * * Here in the face of a pure day, close to the scar of the divine wrath left by the thunderbolt, were fragrants of food, cruses of liquor, and broken drinking vessels, with a bass drum and a steamboat signal bell, of which I afterwards learned the use with pain."

20At nightfall Colonel Kane crossed the river to the camps of the exiles. Here he could hear the sounds "of a revel of a party of the guard within the city:"

20"Above the distant hum of the voices of many, occasionally rose distinct the loud oath-tainted exclamation, and the falsely intonated scrap of vulgar song; but lest this requiem should go unheeded, every now and then, when their boisterous orgies strove to attain a sort of ecstatic climax, a cruel spirit of insulting frolic carried some of them up into a high belfry of the temple steeple, and there, with the wicked childishness of inebriates, they whooped and shrieked, and beat the drum that I had seen, and rang in charivaric unison their loud-tongued steamboat bell." [^33]

GREGG

The historian of Hancock county, Mr. Gregg, is strangely silent upon these outrages of Brockman's mob, except for saying in his History that "the force left in the city, not satisfied with the withdrawal of the Mormons, dealt pretty roughly with the ring leaders of the obnoxious new citizens. A few of them were ordered to leave." [^34] In his Prophet of Palmyra, however, published ten years later, after giving Colonel Kane's account of his visit to the deserted city; also the vivid description of the "deserted city" and the sufferings of its exiled inhabitants by a correspondent of the Missouri Republican, he adds:

21"The enormity and folly of that last raid upon Nauvoo, and the unnecessary severity employed in the treatment of the fugitives, has never been fully estimated by those engaged in or who sanctioned it. Heaven grant that henceforth and forever, no county, or nine counties, or state, may adopt this method of dealing with its offenders." [^35]

21On which passage, when one takes into account Gregg's general attitude toward this whole subject of mob atrocities in Illinois, from before the killing of Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo and Illinois—one may exclaim, Behold! he weeps! "Kind soul! These be gracious drops!" But they are a bit belated.

21The new citizens appealed to Governor Ford to be reinstated in their possessions; and after investigations made by Mr. Brayman and his reports thereon, the governor recruited one hundred men with whom he entered the county and proceeded to Nauvoo where he arrived on the 28th of October, encamped about the temple, and there remained until the 14th of November, when he returned to Springfield, leaving part of his force in Nauvoo under command of Major Weber. Governor Ford's term of office expired with the closing year and he was succeeded by Governor A. G. French, who was inaugurated on the 8th of December; and on the 12th the new governor withdrew the militia force under Weber; announcing that withdrawal in a short note to the people of Hancock county, "exhorting to peace and quietness." [^36]

After a time most of the new citizens returned to the homes they had purchased for little or nothing from the now exiled founders of the City Beautiful—Nauvoo. [^37] But Nauvoo never prospered under its new masters. As if out of sympathy for those who had redeemed it from a wilderness, and some portions of it from a swamp, its fields and gardens reverted well-nigh to primitive conditions, to wilderness and swamp lands. Its decline was as rapid and disastrous as its rise had been sudden and glorious. A French communistic society, the Icarians, had purchased considerable property in the deserted city, and into their hands passed the temple, which the saints at such sacrifice had erected. Externally, the building had been completed in the spring of 1846, even to the gilding of the angel and the trumpet at the top of the spire. During the winter of 1845-6 various rooms of the sacred edifice were completed and dedicated for ordinance work, and there hundreds of the faithful saints received their "endowments"—the sacred mysteries of the faith. The main court of worship was also prepared; and on the evening of April 30th, 1846, the building was privately dedicated, Joseph Young, the senior president of the first council of seventy, offering the dedicatory prayer. On the first of May, 1846, under the direction of apostles Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff, the temple from basement to dome was publicly dedicated, according to the order of the holy priesthood, revealed through Joseph Smith.

22

THE TEMPLE

The temple was always a source of envy to the enemies of the saints, and it was feared that if it continued to stand it would be a bond between its exiled builders and the city from which they had been so cruelly driven, and an inducement for them to return. On the tenth of November, 1848, an incendiary, therefore, set it on fire, and the tower was destroyed, and the whole building so shattered, that on the twenty-seventh of May, 1850, a tornado blew down the north wall. One Joseph Agnew, confessed to being the incendiary. [^38] Finally all the walls were pulled down and the stone hauled away for building purposes, until now, not one stone stands upon another that has not been thrown down. Even the very foundation has been cleared away, and the excavation for the basement filled up and the site covered with shacks of buildings.

NAUVOO

In 1846, when the exodus of the saints was enforced, Nauvoo had a population variously estimated from twelve to twenty thousand, [^39] and was one of the principal cities of Illinois in population, manufacturing enterprises, commercial possibilities, and the center of a rapidly developing agricultural region, unsurpassed in the United States. [^40] We have already seen that Joseph Smith in the closing months of 1843 had suggested a petition to the national congress of the United States for the construction of a canal around the Lower Des Moines Rapids, at the head of which Nauvoo was situated; and that such a canal has since been constructed by the general government at a cost of $4,582,009; [^41] and that he also took the preliminary steps for the erection of a dam in the Mississippi for the creation of water power for manufacturing purposes. Subsequently the Nauvoo Water Power Company took over the franchise granted to President Smith, and on the 29th of April, 1845, commenced the construction of a dam in the Mississippi for the creation of water power [^42] that would undoubtedly have made Nauvoo one of the first manufacturing centers of the United States; and which with all its other advantages would easily have made Nauvoo the metropolis of the Mississippi valley; but all this prospect faded from above the horizon of possibility, under the repeated acts of injustice perpetrated by the people of western Illinois upon the Latter-day Saints.

24Nauvoo in 1920 (U. S. census reports) numbered but 1,020 inhabitants, many of whom are Germans. The principal occupation is grape-growing, vineyards covering some portions of the city plat, which was once the principal business center. The whole place has a half-deserted, half-dilapidated appearance, and seems to be withering under a blight, from which it cannot recover.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] THE SEA-WORTHINESS OF THE SHIP BROOKLYN Elder Pratt elaborates the idea of the closing statement of the above paragraph in two articles in the Millennial Star, vol. vi, No. 12, December, 1845. In the Word and Will of the Lord given through President Young at Winter Quarters, it is said on this point: "Thy brethren have rejected you and your testimony, even the nation that has driven you out." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxvi:34).
[^2] THE ENTRANCE OF THE SHIP BROOKLYN INTO SAN FRANCISCO BAY—JOY OF THE COLONY ON BEHOLDING THE FLAG OF THEIR COUNTRY The epistle will be found in extenso in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1042, et seq.
[^3] SAMUEL BRANNAN, LEADER OF THE BROOKLYN COLONY FROM NEW YORK TO CALIFORNIA See ante chapter lxix.
[^4] Minutes of this conference are published in Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 35-6. In addition to considering the question of the removal of the eastern saints to the west, the conference denounced the course of William Smith, an apostle—the late President Smith's brother—while among them, and approved the action of the church authorities at Nauvoo in excommunicating him.
[^5] The Messenger succeeded The Prophet, and was edited by Parley P. Pratt. The appearance in Nauvoo of the first number was noticed in the Nauvoo Neighbor for July 23rd, 1845.
[^6] New York Messenger, Dec. 29>, 1845.
[^7] This was a cheap passage; but there was some prospect at the time of a much cheaper rate. A merchant of New York in the Pacific trade proposed taking 200 "at $16 per ton" for the room occupied, "and fifty more for nothing," contingent, however, upon his obtaining the government freight consisting of naval stores to be carried into the Pacific. Not much dependence, however, was placed upon this offer. (See Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1094).
[^8] A partial list of their names is given in Times and Seasons, copied from the New York Messenger, but some changes were made in that list before the time of sailing, hence it is not complete or accurate. A complete list is given in Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 546-7, note; and a biographical notice of each member will be found in that writer's Pioneer Register and Index, History of California, vols. ii-v.
[^9] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1127.
[^10] Ibid, p. 1113. The testimony respecting the ship Brooklyn's "newness," a "first class ship," and a "fast sailer," etc., is not unanimous. See Note 1, end of chapter.
[^11] Quoted in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1113.
[^12] History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xvii, p. 315.
[^13] Mrs. Augusta Joyce Crocheron locates the second storm "off Cape Horn," (Western Galaxy, vol. i, March, 1888); Bancroft locates it in the latitude of Valparaiso—about 30 south latitude (History of California, vol. v, p. 549). Mrs. Crocheron also gives the date of the Brooklyn passing the "Golden Gate" as the 31st of July, 1846. (Western Galaxy as above, p. 83).
[^14] Said rules are published in extenso in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1127-8.
[^15] Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 307.
[^16] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, pp. 549, 551; also Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 306, 307; Brannan's letter, where the names of the transgressors are given.
[^17] Spanish, meaning place of "good herbs."
[^18] So writes Mrs. Crocheron, before noticed. Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 550, repeats the alleged saying of Elder Brannan on seeing the American flag waving over the fort—"There is that damned flag again!" but gives no authority for the alleged remark; and for himself discredits the exclamation, by adding—"but it has been the fashion greatly to exaggerate their disappointment"—i. e., on finding the United States in possession of San Francisco. The Brooklyn's company had learned at Honolulu, from Commodore Stockton, just then departing for Monterey, of the prospect of the United States occupying California; and there is no evidence that the saints were displeased with that prospect. (See Note 2, end of chapter).
[^19] Mrs. Crocheron's narrative, Western Galaxy, March, 1888.
[^20] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 551.
[^21] Brannan himself gives an account of this incident in a letter to the saints in England, Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 306-7. He felicitates himself on his acquittal in the exclamation—"but the truth was mighty and prevailed!" The History of California, by Tuthill, p. 214-5, refers to this incident as "the first jury trial of California," and says that it was won by Brannan. In Ryan's Judges and Criminals, pp. 59-60, is a burlesque account of the examination, and implies that the trouble was over funds. The Monterey Californian refers to the incident as a split in the "Mormon" ranks, which if it should result in scattering them, will be good for the country. In this last publication the "Mormons" are spoken of as "a plain, laborious, frugal people, not meriting the opprobrium heaped upon them." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 552 and note).
[^22] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 551, where he says: "All bear witness to the orderly and moral conduct of the saints, both on land and sea. They were honest and industrious citizens, even if clannish and peculiar."
[^23] In California Annals it is called Stanislaus City. (See Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 553 and note).
[^24] In the History of San Joaquin County, pp. 100-1, it is said that Stout claimed the farm that had been fenced, and advised others to enter lands individually, each for himself. This created trouble. Brannan was summoned to New Hope, and decided that the house and farm must be reserved for the twelve apostles, whom Brannan at the time expected to arrive on the Pacific coast that season. Stout was dissatisfied with the decision and left the place, as did others.
[^25] Glover's Mormons in California, is in Ms., and was written from memory in 1884, at the request of Franklin D. Richards, then church historian. (See Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, pp. 550-3 and notes).
[^27] In a letter to Hedlock, president of the British Mission, Brannan also wrote, under date of Feb. 1st: "I have made arrangements with the government (U. S.) that we are to pass out of this country to California, by sea and by land, unmolested." (Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 77.)
[^28] See Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 1877, ch. iii. Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 251. Brannan's first letter is recorded in History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 12-13.
[^29] See Note 3, end of chapter, on the character of Brannan.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, p. 50.
[^31] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 554, and same author's History of Utah, p. 593.
[^32] Communication to the Western Galaxy, Tullidge, March, 1888.
[^33] Western Galaxy, Tullidge, vol. i, March, 1888.
[^34] History of California, vol. v, p. 545.
[^35] Pratt's Autobiography, pp. 374-5.
[^36] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 879.
[^37] Pratt's Autobiography, p. 375.
[^38] Pioneer Register and Index, Bancroft's History of California, vol. ii, p. 728.
[^39] Ibid.
[^40] Deseret News, weekly, May 18th, 1889.
[^41] 41. See ante chapter lii, footnote 13.
[^42] 42. Nauvoo Neighbor, impression of March 5th, 1845; also 12th of March same year. The mighty power of the Lower Des Moines Rapids, more than three score years after earlier essays of the "Mormons" at Nauvoo to that end, was harnessed for the service of man, by the erection of a dam in the river between Hamilton on the Illinois side, and Keokuk on the Iowa side, about nine miles south of Nauvoo. The dam was completed in 1916. It is 4>>>>>>>,700 feet long, 32 feet high, from the river bed; 42 feet at the base; built of solid concrete, and with the power house creating 200,000 horse power, costing over $22,000,000. It was constructed by the Keokuk and Hamilton Water Power Company. The power is transmitted by wire to St. Louis and to other Missouri and to Illinois and Iowa towns.
