B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

40CHAPTER LXXII

40THE CAMP OF ISRAEL'S MARCH FROM NAUVOO TO COUNCIL BLUFFS

40IT IS time now that we return to the companies who led the exodus from Nauvoo. We have seen that the exodus began early in February, the first families crossing the river on the 4th. They were immediately followed by a large number of other families, because the river, meantime, had frozen over and they could cross on the ice.

40

THE FIRST IOWA ENCAMPMENT

The first encampment after leaving the west bank of the Mississippi was on Sugar Creek, in Iowa territory, about nine miles from Nauvoo. The cold, attended by severe snow storms, became intense and remained so for some days; [^1] and while this facilitated the exodus by enabling many to cross the river on the ice, it caused great suffering in the camps. Then, too, many left the city ill prepared for life in the wilderness in midwinter. In many cases their food supplies both for themselves and teams were exhausted in a few days, and they became a burden upon those who had proceeded with better judgment. Some confusion existed also as the camps had not yet received that efficient organization which characterized them later.

Many of the saints acted as if they feared the twelve and other leading elders would depart into the wilderness without the body of the church. Then again, so anxious were certain over-zealous ones to be with the very head of the movement, that they crowded themselves forward and upon these leaders in such a state of unpreparedness that they hampered the movement rather than aided it. Eight hundred men reported themselves at the Sugar Creek encampment, during the last two weeks of February, without more than a fortnight's provisions for themselves and teams. The head camp had not made more than one hundred and fifty miles west of Nauvoo, when President Young and the rest of the apostles who had started with a year's provisions for themselves and families had fed it all out to their less provident brethren. [^2] It was evident from the very start that resources for subsistence for this modern Israel in exodus must be created as they traveled. And their leaders were equal to the occasion. There was no complaining, so far as their annals show, because improvident and over-zealous persons crowded themselves into these first camps. [^3] With commendable patience the great leader and dominant spirit of this movement, Brigham Young, took largely upon himself the cares and trials of his people. When he reproved them it was never for their being there and in destitute circumstances. Now and always Brigham Young had stood by the poor. He it was who in the beginning of the exodus from Missouri, 1838, proposed that the brethren then enter into covenant to stand by and assist each other, to the utmost of their abilities in removing from that state; that they would "never desert the poor, who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General Clark, acting for and in the name of the state." [^4] And at the last general conference of the church held at Nauvoo, it was Brigham Young who proposed the covenant—"That we take all the saints with us, to the extent of our ability;" and explained that "our ability" meant their "influence and their property;" and he it was who prophesied that the Great God would shower down means upon this people to carry out their covenant to the very letter. [^5] It was not in character for him, then, any more than it was in the natural inclination of the man, to complain of the presence of the poor in the first camps of Israel.

THE MARCH OF AN INDUSTRIAL COLUMN

The camps were passing through a new and for the most part a sparsely settled country. Money and labor and household furnishings among those people were scarce. The saints here and there had a little money among them, they were going where it would not be of much value; they had household furnishings, indispensable as they thought upon leaving Nauvoo, but which the simplicity of their camp life taught them they could do without. These, money and household goods, were readily exchanged for food supplies and cattle to strengthen their teams. They were rich in labor power, and the country on both sides of their line of travel was scoured for work that could be done by contract, and not too much delay their westerly movement. Contracts were obtained for husking corn, for splitting rails and fencing fields, for grading stretches of roads, constructing bridges over troublesome streams, for removing fallen dirt from coal beds, digging wells, building houses, clearing farms, and whatever else offered itself, that was honorable employment, by which they might exchange labor for means of subsistence, or increase the efficiency of their teams, by increasing the number of their animals.

43Their journey through southern Iowa was a fortunate circumstance for the settlers in those parts. It gave an impetus to the development of their farms and towns. These exiles from their "City Beautiful" and their homes [^6] asked for no gratuities. Their basis of barter with Iowa and Missouri settlers was an even exchange of equal values, and their own pressing necessities often led them to give the settlers the better of the bargain in the exchange.

43Then, too, they could convert their labor power into values on their own account. Land was plentiful and nearly everywhere fertile. Much of it as yet was public land, unsurveyed and not yet in market. This could be settled upon, planted by those now upon it in the spring, and the crops left to be harvested by the companies which would come later in the season. Plant that others may harvest! Sow that others may reap! This the lesson of every civilization that is worth while; the sacrifice of present comfort for future advantage; the practice of present self-denial for future gain; by that process the world's capital was amassed; and what is akin to this, but beyond it in excellence, is the impulse or principle which leads to labor, to apparent bootless toil and self-sacrifice, that others may gain by it—that sows that others may reap. This the spirit of this New Dispensation of the gospel received by and exemplified in the lives of this modern Israel in its march towards and into a wilderness that as yet had no definite, objective point marked off in it—beyond the general idea of a likely settlement in the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains—as the future home of this marching column of exiles.

To get, if possible, some assurance of protection or word of encouragement from the governor of the then territory of Iowa, for this plan of settling temporarily on the public lands, President Young suggested, and the council of apostles approved, the drafting of a petition to the governor of Iowa, James Clark, stating the reasons for the passage of the camps of Latter-day Saints through the territory, and the probability of several thousand more following them; also the harshness of conditions of their banishment from their homes. As conclusion to all this, they said:

THE PETITION TO THE GOVERNOR OF IOWA

"We, the presiding authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as a committee in behalf of several thousand suffering exiles, humbly ask your excellency to shield and protect us in our constitutional rights, while we are passing through the territory over which you have jurisdiction. And should any of the exiles be under the necessity of stopping in this territory for a time, either in settled or unsettled parts, for the purpose of raising crops, by renting farms or upon public lands, or to make the necessary preparations for their exile, in any lawful way, we humbly petition your excellency to use an influence and power in our behalf, and thus preserve thousands of American citizens, together with their wives and children, from intense sufferings, starvation and death. And your petitioners will ever pray." [^7]

44The petition was approved by the council of the camp on the 28th of February. No reply was received to this communication. Iowa was on the eve of admission into the Union, and possibly the governor of the territory believed the passing of the saints through the south borders thereof, would be a problem which the incoming state officers should be left to solve. [^8]

SUFFERING OF THE ENCAMPMENT ON SUGAR CREEK

It was the first of March when the encampment on Sugar Creek was broken up. Doubtless the exiles were glad to leave a place where they had endured so much suffering from cold and exposure. In this women and children had been the chief sufferers. "Fancy," says one who has done much to perpetuate in graphic narrative the pictures of this exodus—"Fancy may find abundant subject for graphic story of the devotion, the suffering, the matchless heroism of the sisters, in the telling incident that nine children were born to them the first night they camped on Sugar Creek, February 5th, 1846." [^9]

45On this theme, Eliza R. Snow, herself a woman of education and refinement, a poetess withal, and a woman of both high character and ability, says of these births in camp:

45"We had been preceded [from Nauvoo] by thousands, and I was informed that on the first night of the encampment, nine children were born into the world, and from that time, as we journeyed onward, mothers gave birth to offspring under almost every variety of circumstances imaginable, except those to which they had been accustomed; some in tents, others in wagons—in rainstorms and in snowstorms. I heard of one birth which occurred under the rude shelter of a hut, the sides of which were formed of blankets fastened to poles stuck in the ground, with a bark roof through which the rain was dripping. Kind sisters stood holding dishes to catch the water as it fell, thus protecting the newcomer and its mother from a showerbath as the little innocent first entered on the stage of human life; and through faith in the Great Ruler of events, no harm resulted to either.

45Let it be remembered that the mothers of these wilderness-born babies were not savages, accustomed to roam the forest and brave the storm and tempest—those who had never known the comforts and delicacies of civilization and refinement. They were not those who, in the wilds of nature, nursed their offspring amid reeds and rushes, or in the recesses of rocky caverns; most of them were born and educated in the eastern states—had there embraced the gospel as taught by Jesus and his apostles, and, for the sake of their religion, had gathered with the saints, and under trying circumstances had assisted, by their faith, patience and energies, in making Nauvoo what its name indicates, 'the Beautiful.' There they had lovely homes, decorated with flowers and enriched with choice fruit trees, just beginning to yield plentifully.

45To these homes, without lease or sale, they had just bade a final adieu, and with what little of their substance could be packed into one, two, and in some instances, three wagons, had started out, desertward, for—where? To this question the only response at that time was, God knows." [^10]

45Reflecting upon the sufferings endured at Sugar Creek as the encampment was breaking up, Brigham Young had recorded in his Journal, these words:

"The fact is worthy of remembrance that several thousand persons left their homes in midwinter and exposed themselves without shelter, except that afforded by a scanty supply of tents and wagon covers, to a cold which effectually made an ice bridge over the Mississippi river which at Nauvoo is more than a mile broad.

46We could have remained sheltered in our homes had it not been for threats and hostile demonstrations of our enemies, who, notwithstanding their solemn agreements, had thrown every obstacle in our way, not respecting either life, or liberty, or property; so much so that our only means of avoiding a rupture was by starting in midwinter." [^11]

46Referring to the misrepresentations of the saints and their motives, which alone made necessary this enforced expatriation, he said:

46"Our homes, gardens, orchards, farms, streets, bridges, mills, public halls, magnificent temple, and other public improvements we leave as a monument of our patriotism, industry, economy, uprightness of purpose, and integrity of heart; and as a living testimony of the falsehood and wickedness of those who charge us with disloyalty to the Constitution of our country, idleness and dishonesty." [^12]

THE SPIRIT OF THE ENCAMPMENTS

It was high noon when the encampment on Sugar Creek was ready to move. Then five hundred wagons were put in motion, moving painfully and slowly northwesterly along the banks of Sugar Creek. After making five miles through the snow they camped again. "After scraping away the snow we pitched our tents and, building large fires, we soon found ourselves as comfortable as circumstances would permit; * * * and after bowing before our Great Creator and offering up praise and thanksgiving to him and imploring his protection, we resigned ourselves to the slumbers of the night." [^13] At midnight the weather had softened a little; the thermometer stood at 28 degrees Fahrenheit. The above described incidents were repeated many times, only often made more disagreeable by fierce, blinding storms and by alternating thaws and frosts, which rendered roads all but impassable by deep mud or frost-baked roughness. The second day's march brought the camp to the east bank of the Des Moines river, four miles below the little village of Farmington.

47With this advanced camp of the great exodus there had come a brass band, led by Captain Pitt. After encampment was made and the toils of the day were over, the snow would be scraped away, a huge fire or several of them kindled within the wagoned enclosure, and there to the inspiring music of Pitt's band, song and dance often beguiled the exiles into forgetfulness of their trials and discomforts. Then was realized the picture drawn by the Hebrew prophet—"The virgin shall rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy; and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow." The men of Iowa, it is said, looked on with amazement, when witnessing such scenes and were told that these were the exiled "Mormons" from Nauvoo, "bound they knew not whither, 'except where God should lead them by the hand of his servant.'" [^14]

A number of citizens of Farmington visited the camp, and, witnessing these festivities—I see not how they can be called otherwise, incongruous as they may seem to the circumstances of the exiles—invited the band to come to their village and give a concert. And the band accepted, with which the people of Farmington were highly pleased. And that was a circumstance oft repeated by the band in the settlements along the route from Farmington to Council Bluffs—where they arrived about mid-June—and always with the same good effect. In this respect this modern, exiled Israel differed somewhat from ancient, captive Israel. The latter "wept" when they remembered Zion, and "hanged their harps upon the willows in the midst thereof." And when their captors required of them a song and mirth, saying "Sing us one of the songs of Zion," the captives made answer—"How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?" [^15] And they wept. But not so this modern, exiled Israel; they sang and played and everywhere found favor, softened hearts, and changed the sentiments even of their enemies. [^16] It is conceded that the difference between the circumstances of the ancient and modern peoples, here partially and momentarily thrown into contrast, was very great, and I am not pressing the contrast too literally; but truly it is remarkable, I submit, and scores heavily on the side of the Latter-day Israel that they could thus forget all their sorrows and their wrongs and minister to the pleasure of those who, at best, had but small sympathy with them. And while they had much cause for the practice of aloofness from all except those of their own faith, it is to their credit that they were not soured, or hardened into social indifference towards their fellowmen, above all their fellow countrymen. The fact held in it a prophecy that the then impending and enforced expatriation would be but a temporary condition; that the saints would remain Americans in the sense of being loyal to the institutions and government of the United States, as the dominant power pledged to the maintenance of human freedom and civic righteousness in this western hemisphere—America! to these Latter-day Saints a larger land of promise for both Latter-day Israel and also for Gentile nations than was dreamed of by ancient Israel. [^17]

SUFFERINGS MADE LIGHT OF—GOD VINDICATED

And as the exiles were patient and cheerful in their actual sufferings, so, too, were they moderate, as a rule, in their reports of their trials. Chief among those reports worthy of all respect is one made by the late President John Taylor who participated in the scenes he describes. What he says of these matters was in a communication addressed to the saints in England. [^18] In this article, while he dwells at some length upon the sufferings of his people from the fury of the pitiless storm—the drifting snow, the pelting hail, and the icy chill of tempests, Elder Taylor does not forget to vindicate God, whose part it was to stand very near to his people in such trying times. In concluding his remarks on the exposure of the saints to cold and storms, he says:

49"We sustained no injury therefrom; our health and our lives were preserved—we outlived the trying scenes—we felt contented and happy—the songs of Zion resounded from wagon to wagon—from tent to tent; the sound reverberated through the woods, and its echo was returned from the distant hills; peace, harmony, and contentment reigned in the habitations of the saints."

49So, too, in speaking of the privations of camp life:

49"It is true that in our sojourning we do not possess all the luxuries and delicacies of old established countries and cities, but we have an abundance of the staple commodities, such as flour, meal, beef, mutton, pork, milk, buttter and in some instances cheese, sugar, coffee, tea, etc., etc. We feel contented and happy in the wilderness. The God of Israel is with us—union and peace prevail; and as we journey, as did Abraham of old, with our flocks and herds to a distant land, we feel that like him, we are doing the will of our Heavenly Father and relying upon his word and promises; and having his blessing, we feel that we are children of the same promise and hope, and that the great Jehovah is our God."

Such remarks as these lighten the rather somber picture that is sometimes drawn by writers who relate the story of the expulsion from Nauvoo, and the subsequent journey in the wilderness; and who in their anxiety to give a vivid picture of the sufferings of the saints, forget to vindicate the goodness of God who was with his people in those trying times, and who, by opening the way before them to obtain food and lands to dwell upon, and giving them strength as their day, made their afflictions light.

HEADQUARTERS OF THE CAMP OF ISRAEL

Accepting the theory that where the "Douglas" sits there is the head of the table, which translated here means that where Brigham Young is there is the "Camp of Israel," as this moving caravan of exiles was called, we trace the chief encampments as follows—"chief" because of the length of time they constituted the headquarters of the movement.

After Sugar Creek, Richardson Point, fifty-five miles west of Nauvoo, near a branch of Chequest Creek, and reached by Brigham Young on the 7th of March, became headquarters, and the camp remained at this place until the 19th of the same month, as heavy rains made the roads and swollen streams impassable. [^19] The next encampment was on the Chariton river where the leader established his headquarters on the 22nd of March, [^20] and remained until the 1st of April. Thence to an encampment on Locust river, reached by Brigham Young on the 6th of April. Garden Grove, so named by the saints, was made headquarters of the camp on the 25th of April, [^21] about one hundred and fifty miles from Nauvoo. Mount Pisgah, so named by Parley P. Pratt, [^22] became headquarters on the 18th of May; [^23] and on the 14th of June, Council Bluffs, on the Missouri, was reached and became headquarters. The first encampment here was made in the river bottom, but at the suggestion of the leader the camp was moved back on to the bluffs overlooking the river both because they could there obtain spring water, and be a little further removed from the Omaha Indians, living in the bottoms. [^24]

51

ARRIVAL AT COUNCIL BLUFFS

The arrival of the camp at Council Bluffs marks the first stage in the larger journey to the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. Its march across the territory of Iowa is a fine illustration of what may be accomplished by men under organization, supplemented and aided by the religious sentiment to inspire mutual patience and charity. It is safe to say that nothing in the history of our country, and perhaps not in the history of the world, quite parallels this journey from Nauvoo to Council Bluffs, [^25] except the subsequent march of the same people from the Missouri river to the shores of the Great Salt Lake, the "Dead Sea" of the intermountain west. It must be remembered that the ranks of the first camps were constantly swelled by fresh bands from Nauvoo, until by the fall of the year there were brought together, chiefly on the banks of the Missouri, but with some yet en route, "15,000 saints, 3,000 wagons, 30,000 head of cattle, a great number of mules and horses, and immense flocks of sheep." [^26]

ORGANIZATION PERFECTED EN MARCH

It has already been remarked that the organization of the camp was not perfected in the early stages of the journey, and this resulted in some disorder and disappointments. But the defects, in the main, were amended at the encampment on the Chariton river, on the 27th of March; [^27] and thereafter more system and better order prevailed.

The first steps in organization, when it was decided that the saints must leave Nauvoo, was to select twenty-five men called captains of hundreds; authorized in turn to select one hundred families, and see to it that they were prepared for their journey across the Rocky Mountains. The captains of hundreds were also instructed to select captains of fifties, and of tens, with clerks, guards, etc., and making such division of camp work as gave best promise of success. But so many in the first companies came only for the purpose of assisting in getting the exodus started, removing the public or church property, then returning to Nauvoo for their own families, that it resulted in some confusion. This together with the divisions getting separated by storms, bad roads, and the necessity of leaving the camps to find employment, made keeping in tact the plan of organization, as originally projected, at least for the first few weeks, impossible. At this 27th of March meeting, however, the camp's affairs were set in order. Brigham Young was unanimously elected president over the whole Camp of Israel. Three men were elected captains of hundreds [^28] (i. e. hundreds of families); six, captains of fifties; these captains of fifties took the place of the former captains of fifties, [^29] who were promoted to presidents over their divisions (except in the case of the first hundred which was left open for further consideration). [^30]

53Willard Richards was sustained as the historian of the church and of the camp. William Clayton was appointed clerk for the whole camp; and a clerk for each fifty was also appointed. There was appointed a commissary general for the whole camp—Henry Sherwood; also for each fifty there was appointed a contracting commissary and a distributing commissary. The subdivisions of the fifties into tens with their captains, guards, herdsmen, etc., was evidently left to be worked out by the officers of the respective fifties.

53This organization greatly facilitated the movements of the camp, and evidently pleased President Young; for some time after it was effected he remarked to some of the brethren whom he met in council, that "they were taking a course that would result in salvation, not only to that camp, but to the saints who were still behind. He said he did not think there ever had been a body of people since the days of Enoch who had done so little grumbling under such unpleasant circumstances. He was satisfied that the Lord was pleased with the majority of the Camp of Israel. But there had been some things done which were wrong." [^31]

When the camp moved it was customary to send out an advance company called "pioneers," who blazed the trail to be followed by the wagons. Sometimes they detailed a squad from their company to build a bridge or clear a way through the underbrush of the timber tracts they crossed; while still others would be detailed to find a suitable encampment. Trading or "foraging" expeditions, under the direction of the contracting commissaries, were sent out to scour the country for corn and cattle, in exchange for cash and household goods, table furnishings, feather beds, silverware, etc.; other parties were sent out to make labor contracts and thus all was orderly activity and intense individual and community life.

PLANTING THAT OTHERS MAY HARVEST

The camp arriving at Garden Grove on the 25th of April, the time had come to put into effect the plan determined upon some time before, viz., to fence and put in a crop of large acreage, leaving it for other camps to harvest as they came up to it later. The camp divisions within reach were called together, and a division of the labor force made. Three hundred and fifty-nine laboring men promptly reported for duty, exclusive of commissarians and herdsmen. From these 100 were selected to split rails; 10 were appointed to build fences; 48 to build houses; 12 to dig wells; 10 to build bridges; and the remainder were directed to clear land, to plow and plant. There was no place for idlers there; indeed idleness persisted in was made cause for disfellowship from the camp. "The camp was like a hive of bees," says George Q. Cannon, "every one was busy. And withal the people felt well and happy." [^32]

The appearance of permanency was given to this encampment by the appointment of Elder Samuel Bent to preside over the settlement, with Aaron Johnson and David Fullmer as his counselors. It was voted also that each man who remained there should have his land assigned to him in proportion to his family. Thus notwithstanding the settlement was founded by community effort, and was possible only through this cooperation, yet individual ownership of property was contemplated and provided for. Only in one respect was it modified.. "I advised," said President Young, "that if a man would not till his land, it should be taken from him." [^33] These views he had of land ownership, as we shall see, governed him throughout his colony-planting career—"No man shall hold more land than he can cultivate." The presidency of Garden Grove was instructed to carry out the above suggestions; to see that the crops were cared for and secured; that the people be taught the law of tithing—the payment of one-tenth of their increase to the church annually—and that the tithes be received and disbursed to the poor and sick among them.

55At Mount Pisgah the scenes of Garden Grove were reenacted. A farm of "several thousand acres," was inclosed and planted, and the place became a permanent settlement, [^34] of which William Huntington was made president, with Ezra T. Benson and Charles C. Rich as his counselors.

55This work accomplished President Young's camp moved forward until it reached the Missouri on the 14th of June, as already stated. The season was now late for planting, yet preparations for enclosing lands and plowing and planting were begun, while Bishop Miller with a number of men detailed to assist him began the construction of a ferry boat with which to cross the Missouri, and continue the westward march. Thus the Camp of Israel had become a veritable marching, industrial column; founding settlements as it marched; planting for others to harvest, and leaving behind them within easy reach bases of supplies that insured their own safety in case of emergency.

IRREGULARITIES IN THE CAMP OF ISRAEL

That irregularities should appear in the course of this western march was to be expected. The leader praised the Camp of Israel for uniformly good conduct, and assured them that God was pleased with the majority of the camp; "but there had been some things done which were not right," he was compelled to add. Among these things was a disposition on the part of a few—very few, however—to insubordination; a manifest desire to disregard camp regulations and draw off to themselves. Under his journal entry for March 21st, President Young says: * * * "I remarked today that Bishop Miller seeks to go ahead and separate himself from his brethren, but he cannot prosper in so doing, he will yet run against a snag and call upon me and the camp for help. [^35] We shall see in a subsequent chapter how the prediction was fulfilled. This disposition was severely reproved from time to time by the leader, and after the reconstruction of the camp organization on the 27th of March, these restless spirits were better controlled. [^36]

56Some thefts occurred in the camps which brought forth the sternest reproofs from President Young. He even intimated that persistence in thieving might lead to capital punishment. Answering the suggestion that such a course might lead to violence upon himself by the thieves, he replied with spirit: "I would rather die by the hand of the meanest of all men, false brethren, than to live among thieves." [^37]

A few men in camp had in their possession counterfeit money which they were base enough to pass off upon the Iowa settlers in exchange for corn and stock. On the occasion of a quarrel among these parties over the division of profits arising from their traffic, the affair reached the ears of President Young who at once went to their encampment. He reproved them for dealing in base coin and told the leader in the matter that "unless he repented and forsook such dishonesty, the hand of the Lord would be against him, and all those who partook of such corruption." [^38] It is noted that the words of President Young were fulfilled. The chief actor in the business, "and his whole family," remarks Geo. Q. Cannon, "became apostates and very disreputable people, and the hand of the Lord was visibly against him. The man also to whom he gave bogus money to pass eventually lost his standing in the church and went down." [^39]

57After entering the Pottawattomie Indian country a piece of bogus money was passed upon an Indian. Making the discovery the red man and his friends took an ox from the next passing company and killed it. When the matter was reported to President Young he declared, "the Indian had done just right." [^40]

57James M. Hemmick for some wrong sustained, fancied or real, challenged Wilber J. Earl to fight a duel—"Let James M. Hemmick be discharged from the service of this camp forthwith, by order of the council—[signed] Willard Richards, Clerk." Such was the prompt action of the council in that matter.

On the Chariton a boy shot an otter but on picking it up he found it was in a trap. He skinned the otter and brought the skin into camp. Soon afterwards a Mr. Davis, a trapper on the Chariton, came into camp and declared that he had lost six out of eight traps he had set on the river, and intimated that they had been stolen. Next morning President Young had a thorough search made of the camp for the traps, but none could be found. Colonel Markham was instructed to take the otter skin and the boy to Mr. Davis—"I instructed Brother Markham to say to the man, that if one of his traps were found within one thousand miles of that place it should be sent back to him with the man that took it." [^41] Speaking of the search made in the camp for the traps, President Young said: "Previous to this I had said that if any man in this camp was found stealing he ought to forfeit all his property." [^42]

58In addition to these manifestations of individual dishonesty there were those who would hunt and fish on the Lord's Day; some that were neglectful of prayer, [^43] and given to boisterous conduct, much to the annoyance of President Young, according to his mention of these things in his History, Ms., and his expression of the annoyance such conduct gave him. But while these things must be noted in a history of the great march, they represent but the aberrations in the community conduct, such as must be expected in any assembly of such numbers, and under such circumstances; and while regrettable as blemishes in the community life, and to be censured, they do not destroy the glory of achievement in this exodus, nor blot out the fact that this caravan of exiles was a righteous, god-fearing, religious people. Despite the individual delinquencies noted they were honest, industrious, self-sacrificing, and won the esteem, and trust and applause of the settlers in the country through which they passed, and of the savage tribes among whom they had now pitched their tents on the banks of the Missouri.

NOTE

THE WESTERN MOVEMENT HINDERED BY DETERMINATION OF THE PEOPLE TO BE WITH THE APOSTLES

The near approach to complaining on the part of the leader of the camps, referred to in note 3 of the text, was more in the nature of an explanation than of a complaint as to how the zeal and unpreparedness of some of the saints were hindering the progress of the general movement. President Young said: "When the removal westward was in contemplation at Nauvoo, had the brethren submitted to our [the twelve apostles] counsel, and brought their teams and means and authorized me to do with them as the Spirit and wisdom of the Lord directed, then we could have fitted out a company of men, who were not encumbered with large families, and sent them over the mountains to put in crops and build houses, and the residue could have gathered, beginning with the priesthood, and the gathering continued from year to year, building and planting at the same time. Were matters to be so conducted, none would be found crying for bread, or destitute of clothing; but all would be provided for as designed by the Almighty. But instead of taking this course the saints have crowded on us all the while, and have completely tied our hands by importuning and saying, 'Do not leave us behind. Wherever you go we want to go, and be with you;' and thus our hands and feet have been bound, which has caused our delay to the present time; and now hundreds at Nauvoo are continually praying and importuning with the Lord that they may overtake us, and be with us. And just so it is with the saints here. They are afraid to let us go on and leave them behind; forgetting that they have covenanted to help the poor away at the sacrifice of all their property." [^44]

Footnotes

February 26th, at 6 p. m., 10 degrees above zero.

February 27th, at 6 a. m., 5 degrees above zero.

February 27th, at 6 p. m., 21 degrees above zero.

February 28th, at midnight, 21 degrees above zero.

February 28th, at 6 a. m., 20 degrees above zero.

February 28th, at noon, 41 degrees above zero.

February 28th, at 6 p. m., 26 degrees above zero.

"Notwithstanding the snow storms and the inclemency of the weather," says Orson Pratt, "our camp resounded with songs of joy and praise to God—all were cheerful and happy in the anticipation of finding a resting place from persecution in some of the lonely, solitary valleys of the great interior basin of upper California, then a Mexican province, or whithersoever we might be led." (Orson Pratt's Journal, Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 362).

---
Notas:
[^1] BRIGHAM YOUNG AND FATHER DE SMET—DID THE DESCRIPTION OF SALT LAKE VALLEY BY THE CATHOLIC MISSIONARY DETERMINE BRIGHAM YOUNG TO SETTLE THERE History of the Church, Period I, vol. v. p. 85 and note; also ante, this History, chapter li, where the prophecy is considered at length; and chapter liii, where preparations of the "Mountain Expedition" is recounted at length.
[^2] CAPTAIN ALLEN'S CIRCULAR TO THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS' ENCAMPMENT AT MOUNT PISGAH, ANNOUNCING THE WILLINGNESS OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT TO ACCEPT THE SERVICE OF A BATTALION OF MEN TO MARCH TO CALIFORNIA Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 332-3; History of the Church, Period I. vol. vi. pp. 545-8, ante, this History, chapter lv.
[^3] ELDER TAYLOR'S ACCOUNT OF PRESIDENT YOUNG'S FIRST SPEECH ON RAISING THE MORMON BATTALION Resolved, that should we locate within the territory of the United States as we anticipate we would esteem a territorial government of our own, as one of the richest boons of earth, and while we appreciate the Constitution of the United States as the most precious among the nations, we feel that we had rather retreat to the deserts, islands or mountain caves than consent to be ruled by governors and judges whose hands are drenched in the blood of innocence and virtue, who delight in injustice and oppression, and whose greatest glory is to promote the misery of their fellows, for their own aggrandizement, or lustful gratification. See ante, chapter lxix, also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, p. 162.
[^4] ARGUMENTS EMPLOYED TO INDUCE "MORMON" VOLUNTEERS TO ENLIST See Taylor's hymn of 1846, "The Upper California:"
[^5] LETTER AND RESOLUTIONS TO PRESIDENT JAMES K. POLK, FROM PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG AND COUNCIL OF THE TWELVE History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, p. 85.
[^6] History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 52, 53.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, of that year, pp. 86-7.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 137.
[^9] These brethren were met by Brigham Young returning from their mission to Mount Pisgah, on the 4th of July, when they reported that they had raised eighty-four volunteers to go over the mountains that season, and $50 in money. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 6). For the suggestion that it was the glowing description of Salt Lake valley by a Catholic missionary—Father De Smet—that led Brigham Young to fix upon that valley as a place of settlement, (see Note 1, end of chapter). The above evidence as to intention of President Young settling his people in the Rocky Mountains, rather than on the Pacific coast of California or Oregon, may be further supplemented by the following entry in his Journal while the Mormon Battalion was being mustered into service:
[^10] In his Journal account of this meeting Elder John Taylor says: "Brother Young spoke and said that the companies must prepare teams and grain and implements of husbandry to send over the mountains as the season is so far advanced that there must be something done and that quickly; and as the folks were not willing to let the twelve go ahead any faster than they did, they must send on men and teams to prepare a place and plow and plant to receive us; for if we do not send men ahead it will throw us back another year and we will have to buy another year's provision. He then said he wanted to know how many were willing to go over the mountains and leave their families, and put it to the vote, and several held up their hands; he then said he wanted to know their numbers, for he was determined to go and leave his family if he could get any volunteers to go with him, and leave their families in the care of old men and boys. They would take mules, horses, and swift cattle that could travel thirty miles a day, and take grain and corn along. They then commenced numbering and numbered forty, among whom were the twelve. There were a great many men down who could principally all go, and there were a good many not at meeting. They spoke of the practicability of going this fall. Brother Brigham thought we could do it in thirty-five days." (Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry for 28 June, 1846.)
[^11] See ante, chapter lxix. As soon as the mission of Captain Allen was made known the excitement was allayed.
[^12] See Note 2 end of this chapter.
[^13] The circular is given in extenso in Tyler's Mormon Battalion, 1881, pp. 114-5. The words "accept the service," is the phraseology of the act of congress declaring war with Mexico. (See Congressional Globe, 13th of May, 1846). The declaration of war "authorized the president to accept the service of fifty thousand volunteers, and placed ten millions of dollars at his disposal. * * * The call for volunteers was answered by the prompt tender of the services of more than 300,000 men." (History of the United States, Marcus Wilson, Appendix, p. 682. Same, Lossing, p. 483; Stephens, p. 488).
[^14] Tyler's Mormon Battalion, p. 115.
[^15] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, entry for June 29th, p. 219. On the 30th of June, after being informed of Captain Allen's arrival by Thomas Grover, President Young makes this entry in his journal: "Tuesday 30: * * * I met Bros. Kimball and Richards in Bro. O. Pratt's tent. Decided it was best to meet Captain Allen in the morning, and raise the men wanted." (Ibid. p. 219.)
[^16] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1096.
[^17] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 11.
[^18] Little's report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 12.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] Ibid, bk. 2, pp. 11-12.
[^21] Ante, ch. lxxi.
[^22] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 12-13.
[^23] General Thomas Leiper Kane was born January 27, 1822; consequently was a very young man— mm he visited the "Mormon" camps at Council Bluffs. He was educated principally in Paris, and on his return to the family home in Philadelphia, studied law, and was admitted to the bar in 1846. He served with distinction in the War Between the States on the Union side. He raised a regiment in northern Pennsylvania that became famous for its valor, reflecting therein the spirit of its commander. He was several times wounded in action, and made brigadier general for gallant services on the field. Wounds and sickness compelled his retirement before the close of the war. He died in December, 1883.
[^24] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 15.
[^25] Elder Little notes this excitement in his report, by saying in recording his movements of the 23rd of May: "There was considerable excitement in consequence of the news that General Taylor had fought two battles with the Mexicans" (Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 16). And Lossing says that when "news of the two brilliant victories reached the states a thrill of joy went throughout the land, and bonfires, illuminations, orations, the thunder of cannons, were seen and heard in all the great cities" (Lossing's History of the United States, p. 483).
[^26] Lossing's History of the United States, 1872 edition, p. 483).
[^27] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 16.
[^28] Ibid, p. 16.
[^29] Ibid, p. 16-17.
[^30] Was Elder Little at this point presuming upon the alleged "silent partnership" of President Polk with "Messrs. Kendall, A. G. Benson & Co., et al?"
[^31] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 20-22. It will be observed that Elder Little's letter takes on the hue of the war times.
[^32] Ibid, p. 22.
[^33] Ibid, p. 22.
[^34] Ibid, p. 23.
[^35] Ibid.
[^36] Ibid, p. 25.
[^37] It is alleged by some writers that the president's plan of "possessing California, by the aid of the Mormons"—involving this call for the large number of that people to engage in the enterprise—"was afterward changed through the influence of Senator Benton." (Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, p. 52). But if calling the battalion was not only a hardship on the Camp of Israel, but an intended, and artfully planned injustice—to which view the writer just quoted wrongfully inclines—then whoever influenced the administration to cut down the call from one thousand from the camps to five hundred, reduced both the hardship and the injustice by one-half.
[^38] "Possibly the elder in his enthusiasm was disposed to exaggerate the president's promises; while on the other hand we may readily imagine that Polk, on further consideration, either with or without the promptings of enemies to the church, or of promoters of other military and colonization schemes, concluded that he had promised too much, that it was not altogether desirable or necessary to allow the Mormons too much power in California; that it would be as well to use rather than be used by them; and that there would be no difficulty in obtaining other volunteer colonist soldiers. Churchmen believe that Thomas Benton did more than any other to turn the president against them, which is not at all unlikely." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v. pp. 472-3).
[^39] Stevenson was a colonel of militia in New York, a ward politician and an ex-member of the legislature, who "had done some service for the administration that seemed to call for reward, and be was reputed to be a man of some energy and executive ability." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 500.) Bancroft also declares that it was a conversation with Amos Kendall about the "Mormons" that first suggested the idea of sending a New York regiment to California. (History of California, vol. v, pp. 472 note, and 501 and note). Stevenson's authorization to raise the regiment bears date of 26th of June, which was about two weeks after Little and Kane's departure for the west. A full account of the New York regiment will be found in Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, ch. xix.
[^40] Executive Document, No. 60, letter of the secretary of war to General Kearney, marked "confidential," 1846. In addition to the above instruction relative to raising a military force among the "Mormons," General Kearney was notified that the governor of Missouri had been instructed to raise an additional force of a thousand mounted men for the "Army of the West:" Kearney was ordered to invade New Mexico, take possession of Santa Fe, garrison it with sufficient force to hold it, and then push on to California to cooperate with the naval forces in taking possession of that land, leaving the Missouri and "Mormon" troops to follow him. It also contains the announcement of his elevation to the rank of brevet brigadier general and instruction as to his procedure in California.
[^41] There was present at this council meeting, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, John Taylor, "Uncle" John Smith, Levi Richards, Captain Allen and two others, (presumably the two dragoons who accompanied the captain on his mission). The council meeting was held at Elder John Taylor's tent on Mosquito Creek. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 1).
[^42] "Grand Island" is described by Captain Burton in his City of the Saints and Across the Rocky Mountains to California, 1862. Referring to the immediate valley of La Platte, about "Grand Island," he says: "The valley here is two miles broad, resembles the ocean deltas of great streams; it is level as a carpet, all short, green grass without sage brush. It can hardly be called a bottom, the rise from the water's edge being, it is calculated, about 4 feet per 1,000. Under a bank, from half a yard to a yard high, through its two lawns of verdure, flowed the stream straight toward the slanting rays of the rising sun, which glittered upon its broad bosom, and shed rosy light over half the heavens. In places it shows a sea horizon, but here it was narrowed by Grand Island, which is fifty-two miles long, with an average breadth of one mile and three-quarters, and sufficiently elevated above the annual flood to be well timbered." (p. 39).
[^43] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 4, 5.
[^44] The statement is supported by standard United States Histories; see also note 13, this chapter.
