B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

60CHAPTER LXXIII

60THE MORMON BATTALION

60THE destination of the exiled Latter-day Saints was doubtless, though vaguely, fixed, (1) by the prophecy of Joseph Smith of the 6th of August, 1842; at which time, it should be remembered, he declared that the saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by their persecutors, "and some of you," said he to his auditors, "will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities in the Rocky Mountains;" [^1] and (2) by the fact that when conditions at Nauvoo became intolerable to the Prophet, he actually started for "the Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains." [^2] This matter of their destination was frequently discussed by the council of the twelve when en route through Iowa; and even before leaving Nauvoo, [^3] as will be seen by reference to chapter lxix of this History.

UNCERTAINTY OF WESTWARD DESTINATION

It is true that in some passages of Latter-day Saint literature, the destination of the Camp of Israel seems indefinite; and both "Oregon" and "California" as well as the "Great Basin in the Rocky Mountains" are sometimes referred to as a probable destination. This arises both from the unorganized state of church literature, and because of the vagueness that accompanied the names "Oregon" and "California" in the decades of the first half of the 19th century. "Oregon" was then a land of unknown boundaries off in the northwest region of the United States. "California," a region without north or south boundaries very definitely fixed, but lying east and west between the summits of the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Ocean; and the great western Rocky Mountain plateau was for many years and especially in "Mormon" literature, called "Upper California." [^4] But a close consideration of our annals will reveal the fact that always it was settled in the minds of Brigham Young and his associates of the twelve apostles, that the "Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains" was the destination of the people they were leading to the west; not Oregon, and not the Pacific slopes of California.

61As early as September 9th, 1845, as we have seen in a previous chapter (lxix), it was proposed in a council meeting of the twelve that a company of 1,500 men be selected to go to the "Salt Lake valley;" and on the 8th of March, 1846, President Young urged the necessity of sending a pioneer company in advance "to the Great Basin," to put in crops that season. "We must divide and arrange the camps," said he, "so that a part may cross the mountains to the Great Basin soon enough to plant this spring; we must ascertain how many men can go forward from the camp, leaving their families somewhere on the road, so as to travel with all speed; three hundred men are wanted for the expedition." [^5]

After the Mormon Battalion was chosen and arrangements made for its marching, President Young suggested that "the soldiers," referring to the battalion, "might tarry and go to work where they disbanded, and said the next temple would be built in the Rocky Mountains; and I should like the twelve and the old brethren to live in the mountains where the temple will be erected, and where the brethren will have to repair to get their endowments." [^6] Somewhat later, he said:

62"I spoke of President Polk's feelings toward us, as a people. Assured the brethren [i.e. of the Battalion] that they would have no fighting to do; told them we should go to the Great Basin, which is the place to build temples, and where our strongholds should be against mobs. The Constitution of the United States is good. The battalion will probably be disbanded about eight hundred miles from the place where we shall locate." [^7]

62In a communication to President James K. Polk, under date of August 9th, 1846, signed by Brigham Young as president of the council, it was said:

62"The cause of our exile we need not repeat, it is already with you, suffice it to say that a combination of fortuitous, illegal and unconstitutional circumstances have placed us in our present situation, on a journey which we design shall end in a location west of the Rocky Mountains, and within the Basin of the Great Salt Lake, or Bear river valley, as soon as circumstances shall permit, believing that to be a point where a good living will require hard labor, and consequently will be coveted by no other people, while it is surrounded by so unpopulous but fertile a country." [^8]

62After this there can surely be no doubt as to the determination of the church leaders to settle in the Rocky Mountains, and that from the beginning of their contemplated exodus from Illinois and the United States. Finally active steps were taken to raise from among the camps a pioneer company to go over the mountains. In June Elders Parley P. Pratt and Ezra T. Benson were sent east along the line of encampments as far as Mount Pisgah to raise a portion of this company. [^9]

63Bishop Miller and his company, meantime, had completed a ferry across the Missouri at Council Bluffs, and began crossing to the west bank.

AN ADVANCE PIONEER COMPANY FOR THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS

On Sunday the 28th of June an important council meeting was held at which President Young again urged the importance of sending an advanced company of men as pioneers over the mountains, and called for volunteers who would be willing to leave their families with elderly men and boys while they, with especially selected teams and outfits, should make a dash for the mountains. Forty men volunteered at this meeting: among whom all of the twelve that were present. [^10] Doubtless more could be found in the surrounding camps who would be willing to go and preparations were accordingly begun for the journey. Indeed the day following several of the twelve, among them President Young, moved down to the ferry preparatory to crossing the river.

It was at this juncture in the affairs of the Camp of Israel that an event happened of large importance. Captain James Allen of the United States army arrived at Mount Pisgah on the 26th of June, accompanied by three dragoons. The camp was momentarily thrown into great excitement by this event, and the cry ran throughout the camp—"The United States troops are upon us! The United States troops are upon us!" The excitement and the cry of alarm rose from remembrance of the reported intention of the federal government before the saints began leaving Nauvoo, to prevent the movement to the west by the employment, if necessary, of the United States troops, as falsely reported by Governor Ford, already set forth in these pages. [^11]

64Captain Allen presented to the leading elders of Mount Pisgah A Circular to the Mormons, [^12] setting forth that he had been instructed by Colonel Stephen W. Kearney of the United States army, and commander of the "Army of the West," to "accept the service for twelve months of four or five companies of Mormon men who may be willing to serve their country for that period in our present war with Mexico; this force to unite with the Army of the West at Santa Fe, and be marched thence to California, where they will be discharged." [^13] Captain Allen hoped to "complete the organization of this battalion in six days" after his arrival at Council Bluffs, "or within nine days from this time." [^14]

The presiding brethren at Mount Pisgah did not feel authorized to take any steps in the matter of Captain Allen's communication on the enlistment of a battalion, but gave him a letter of introduction to President Brigham Young, directed to William Clayton as clerk of the camp, at Council Bluffs, for which place the captain started immediately and arrived on the 30th of June. Elder Wilford Woodruff also sent a letter, by private messenger, to President Young, informing him of Captain Allen's visit at Mount Pisgah, and the purpose of it. This messenger arrived at Council Bluffs on the 29th of June, the day before Captain Allen's arrival. [^15] The following day Captain Allen met with President Young and others in council at the tent of John Taylor, and presented the whole question of raising a battalion from the "Mormon" camps.

KEARNEY'S INSTRUCTIONS TO CAPTAIN ALLEN

The authority under which Captain Allen acted was an order from Colonel Kearney, at Fort Leavenworth. This order Captain Allen presented to Brigham Young and his fellow apostles when the council assembled; and because of its importance as a public document, is here given in full.

65"Fort Leavenworth, June 19, 1846.

65Sir:—It is understood that there is a large body of Mormons who are desirous of emigrating to California, for the purpose of settling in that country, and I have therefore to direct that you will proceed to their camps and endeavor to raise from amongst them four or five companies of volunteers, to join me in my expedition to that country, each company to consist of any number between 73 and 109; the officers of each company will be a captain, first lieutenant and second lieutenant, who will be elected by the privates, and subject to your approval, and the captains then to appoint the non-commissioned officers, also subject to your approval. The companies, upon being thus organized, will be mustered by you into the service of the United States, and from that day will commence to receive the pay, rations and other allowances given to the other infantry volunteers, each according to his rank. You will, upon mustering into service the fourth company, be considered as having the rank, pay and emoluments of a lieutenant-colonel of infantry, and are authorized to appoint an adjutant, sergeant major, and quartermaster sergeant for the battalion.

66The companies, after being organized, will be marched to this post, where they will be armed and prepared for the field, after which they will, under your command, follow on my trail in the direction of Santa Fe, and where you will receive further orders from me.

66You will, upon organizing the companies, require provisions, wagons, horses, mules, etc. You must purchase everything that is necessary and give the necessary drafts upon the quartermaster and commissary departments at this post, which drafts will be paid upon presentation.

66You will have the Mormons distinctly to understand that I wish to have them as volunteers for twelve months; that they will be marched to California, receiving pay and allowances during the above time, and at its expiration they will be discharged, and allowed to retain, as their private property, the guns and accoutrements furnished to them at this post.

66Each company will be allowed four women as laundresses, who will travel with the company, receiving rations and other allowances given to the laundresses of our army.

66With the foregoing conditions, which are hereby pledged to the Mormons, and which will be faithfully kept by me and other officers in behalf of the government of the United States, I cannot doubt but that you will in a few days be able to raise five hundred young and efficient men for this expedition.

66Very respectfully your ob't serv't,

66[Signed] "S. W. KEARNEY,"

66Colonel of First Dragoons.

66Per Capt. James Allen, First Reg. Dragoons, Fort. Leavenworth."

66APPEAL OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINT CHURCH TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR EMPLOYMENT

66It is necessary at this point to suspend the narrative of raising this battalion of men, in order that we may trace the events which led up to the remarkable circumstance of the government of the United States calling upon the camps of the saints for these volunteers.

On the 20th of January, 1846, the high council of the Nauvoo stake of Zion, acting, however, as stated in the document to be quoted, by the unanimously agreed and united voice of all the authorities of the church, declared the intention of the church to send out early in the month of March a company of young, hardy men, properly equipped for their work, to seek out a place "to make a crop in some good valley in the neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains, where they will infringe upon no one, and not be likely to be infringed upon. Here we will make a resting place until we can determine a place for a permanent location." The subject thus introduced, the high council proceeds:

67"In the event of the president's recommendation to build block houses and stockade forts on the route to Oregon, becoming a law, we have encouragement of having that work to do; and under our peculiar circumstances, we can do it with less expense to the government than any other people.

67We also further declare, for the satisfaction of some who have concluded that our grievances have alienated us from our country, that our patriotism has not been overcome by fire—by sword—by daylight, nor by midnight assassinations, which we have endured; neither have they alienated us from the institutions of our country. Should hostilities arise between the government of the United States and any other power, in relation to the right of possessing the territory of Oregon, we are on hand to sustain the claims of the United States government to that country. It is geographically ours; and of right, no foreign power should hold dominion there: and if our services are required to prevent it, those services will be cheerfully rendered according to our ability." [^16]

JESSE C. LITTLE—CHURCH REPRESENTATIVE IN WASHINGTON

Elder Jesse C. Little was appointed president of the Eastern States Mission, his letter of appointment is dated "Temple of God, Nauvoo, Jan. 26th, 1846." In the body of that letter it is suggested:

67"If our government shall offer any facilities for emigrating to the western coast, embrace those facilities, if possible. As a wise and faithful man, take every honorable advantage of the times you can. Be thou a savior and a deliverer of that people, and let virtue, integrity and truth, be your motto—salvation and glory the prize for which you contend." [^17]

"In consonance with my instructions," says Elder Little, later in his report to President Brigham Young, which is recorded in the latter's History, "I felt an anxious desire for the deliverance of the saints, and resolved upon visiting James K. Polk, president of the United States, to lay the situation of my persecuted brethren before him, and ask him, as the representative of our country, to stretch forth the federal arm in their behalf." [^18]

68In pursuance of this design Elder Little obtained a letter of introduction from John H. Steel, governor of New Hampshire (in which state Elder Little was reared), who declared that he had known Elder Little from childhood, and believed him honest in his views and intentions, and added:

68"Mr. Little visits Washington, if I understand him correctly, for the purpose of procuring, or endeavoring to procure, the freight of any provisions or naval stores which the government may be desirous of sending to Oregon, or to any portion of the Pacific. He is thus desirous of obtaining freight for the purpose of lessening the expense of chartering vessels to convey him and his followers to California, where they intend going and making a permanent settlement the present summer." [^19]

68From Luke Milber, also of Peterboro, N. H., Elder Little secured a letter to Hon. Mace Moulton in Washington, which in addition to vouching for his high character, based upon personal knowledge of him for twelve years, he announced to Mr. Moulton that Elder Little was "soliciting some aid from the general government, to assist himself and brethren throughout the United States in emigrating to California." [^20]

68In New York Elder Little met A. G. Benson, of "Brannan-A. G. Benson & Co." fame, mentioned in a previous chapter, [^21] and from him carried a letter of introduction to Amos Kendall, former United States postmaster-general, and also connected with the "Brannan-A. G. Benson & Co." affair. Mr. Benson asks Kendall to "aid Mr. Little in the object of his visit to Washington" as far as Mr. Kendall's "many engagements would permit." [^22]

On the 13th of May, Elder Little held a conference of the Latter-day Saints in Philadelphia, and here met Colonel Thomas L. Kane, son of Judge John K. Kane of Philadelphia. The Kanes were an old, and honorable Pennsylvania family. The colonel's father was Judge John K. Kane, who had been attorney-general of the state of Pennsylvania, and was now (1846) United States judge for the district of Pennsylvania; also president of the American Philosophical Society. Dr. Elisha Kent Kane, the famous artic explorer and scientist, was Colonel Kane's brother. [^23] The introduction to Elder Little, which the colonel solicited, opened the home of the Kanes to Elder Little and was the beginning of that interest and friendship for the Latter-day Saints ever afterwards manifested by Thomas L. Kane; and which led to very valuable service on his part to the Latter-day Saints, as we shall see later, in one of the most critical periods of their history.

69On Elder Little's departure from Philadelphia for Washington, Colonel Kane gave him a letter of introduction to Hon. Geo. M. Dallas, vice-president of the United States, in the body of which he said:

69"This gentleman [Elder Little] besides being very highly valued by the members of his own sect, is, I learn, esteemed honest and sincere in his professions by many of our friends in this city. He visits Washington, too, I believe, with no other object than the laudable one of desiring aid of government for his people, who forced by persecution to found a new commonwealth in the Sacramento valley, still retain American hearts, and would not willingly sell themselves to the foreigner, or forget the old commonwealth they leave behind them." [^24]

CONFERENCES IN WASHINGTON: PROPOSITION TO THE GOVERNMENT

Arriving in Washington on the 21st of May, Elder Little called upon Mr. Kendall, but found him sick; and in the evening, in company with Mr. Dame of Massachusetts and Mr. King, representative from that state, he called upon President Polk and received an introduction. Sam Houston of Texas, and other distinguished gentlemen were present. The arrival of Elder Little was most opportune for the business he had in hand. News of the capture of an American reconnoitering troop of dragoons under command of Captain Thornton, on the east side of the Rio Grande, sixteen of whom were killed, had reached Washington early in May, and enabled the president in his message to congress on the 11th of that month to say, that "Mexico had invaded our territory and shed the blood of our citizens on our own soil;" which led congress two days later to declare war and vote the funds necessary to its vigorous prosecution. By the time Elder Little called upon the president the news had reached Washington of the victory of the American forces under General Taylor at the battles of Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma fought on the 8th and 9th of May respectively. News of these victories aroused the war spirit throughout the land, [^25] and hastened all the government schemes for prosecuting the war, including the plan of gathering the "Army of the West" at Fort Leavenworth, under then Colonel S. W. Kearney, to invade New Mexico, and ultimately cooperate with the Pacific fleet which it was designed to sweep round Cape Horn and attack the Pacific coast of Mexico. [^26] It was with this Army of the West that the Mormon Battalion was to be connected.

The day following his visit to the president, 23rd, of May, Elder Little called again upon Amos Kendall and submitted to him his letters of introduction. "We talked upon the subject of emigration, and he thought arrangements could be made to assist our emigration by enlisting one thousand of our men, arming, equipping and establishing them in California to defend the country; he said he would be able to inform me on Tuesday morning, what could be done. [^27]

71On the 25th Elder Little called again upon Mr. Kendall; and on the 26th he met him on the street in Washington, "when he informed me," reports the elder, "that he had laid my case before the president, who had determined to take possession of California, and also employ our men, who would receive orders to push through and fortify the country; he also said the president would lay the subject before the cabinet today, and that tomorrow evening probably he could give me a direct answer." [^28]

71On the 27th Elder Little again met Mr. Kendall, "Who informed me the cabinet had not fully decided; the plan offered was for me to go directly to the camp, and have one thousand men fitted out and plunge into California, officered by our own men, the commanding officer to be appointed by President Polk; and to send one thousand more by way of Cape Horn, who will take cannon and everything needed in preparing defense; those by land to receive pay from the time I should see them, and those going by water from September 1st." [^29]

ELDER LITTLE'S DIRECT APPEAL TO PRESIDENT POLK

At this point Elder Little apparently concluded to take up the matter personally and directly with the president, and under date of June 1st addressed an "appeal" to him. In it he expresses confidence in the president, else he would not have left his home and family "to ask favors of you for this people"—(i.e. the Latter-day Saints). He gives an account of himself and his forefathers who fought "in the battles of the Revolution;" of his own character, vouched for by his letters of introduction from men of high standing, and then avers that the people he represents are of as high character as himself. He recites the repeated acts of injustice the Latter-day Saints have suffered in the several persecutions through which they had passed, because of their religion; and adds: "Under these considerations, directed as if by the finger of God, I come to you fully believing that you will not suffer me to depart without rendering me some pecuniary assistance, and be it large or small, you shall not lose your reward." He concluded his "appeal" as follows:

72"Our brethren in the west are compelled to go, and we in the eastern country are determined to go and live, and, if necessary, to suffer and die with them. Our determinations are fixed and cannot be changed. From twelve to fifteen thousand have already left Nauvoo for California, and many others are making ready to go. Some have gone around Cape Horn, and I trust before this time have landed at the Bay of San Francisco.

72We have about forty thousand [members] in the British Isles and hundreds upon the Sandwich Islands, all determined to gather to this place [i.e. California], and thousands will sail this fall. There are yet many thousands scattered through the states, besides the great number in and around Nauvoo, who are determined to go as soon as possible, but many of them are poor, but noble men and women, who are destitute of means to pay their passage either by sea or land.

They, as well as myself, are true-hearted Americans, true to our country, true to its laws, true to its glorious institutions— and we have a desire to go under the outstretched wings of the American eagle; we would disdain to receive assistance from a foreign power, although it should be proffered, unless our government shall turn us off in this great crisis and will not help us, but compel us to be foreigners. * * * But Mr. President, were you to act alone in this matter, I full well know your course. I am not ignorant of your good feelings towards us, receiving my information from my friend Mr. S. Brannan, who has gone to California, and also the Hon. Amos Kendall and others; [^30] believe me, when I say that I have the fullest confidence in you, and we are truly your friends, and if you assist us at this crisis, I hereby pledge my honor, my life, my property and all I possess, as the representative of this people, to stand ready at your call, and that the whole body will act as one man in the land to which we are going, and should our territory be invaded we hold ourselves ready to enter the field of battle, and then like our patriot fathers, with our guns and swords, make the battlefield our grave or gain our liberty. We have not been fighting men, but when we are called into the battlefield in defense of our country, and when the sword and sabre shall have been unsheathed, we declare before heaven and earth that they shall not return to their scabbards, until the enemy of our country, or we, sleep with the pale sheeted nations of the dead, or until we obtain deliverance.

73With great respect I have the honor to subscribe myself your obt. subject,

73[Signed] "J. C. LITTLE,"

73Agent of the Church of Jesus Christ of L. D. S. in the Eastern States.

73Washington, June 1st." [^31]

73On the 2nd of June, "At noon," says Elder Little, "Mr. Kendall, by request of the president, called at my room and said the president had received my communication and desired to have me call tomorrow at noon, and wished Mr. Kendall to be present." [^32]

73On the 3rd of June Elder Little called upon Mr. Kendall—

73"With whom I visited President Polk, who said he had no prejudice against the Mormons, but believed us good citizens; and was willing to do us all the good that was in his power consistently; said our people should be protected—that he had full confidence in me from information he had received—that he had read my letter with interest, and was glad of an opportunity of having an interview—that he had confidence in our people as true American citizens, if he had not, he should not make such proposals; he would do something for me, but did not decide; he wished to talk with the secretary of the navy, and also wished Mr. Kendall to come tomorrow at twelve." [^33]

73Elder Little visited the president again on the 4th of June, agreeably to appointment, but press of business made it necessary to postpone an interview until the 5th. On the 5th, the following occurred:

73"I visited President Polk; he informed me that we should be protected in California, and that five hundred or one thousand of our people should be taken into the service, officered by our own men; said that I should have letters from him, and from the secretary of the navy to the squadron. I waived the president's proposal until evening, when I wrote a letter of acceptance." [^34]

74On the 7th of June, Colonel Kane joined Elder Little and after dinner the colonel "called upon Mr. Kendall, and the secretary of state, Mr. James Buchanan," presumably in the interest of the cause Elder Little represented.

74On the 8th Colonel Kane gave Elder Little a letter of introduction to Geo. Bancroft, secretary of the navy; and the same day visited the president and the secretary of war, Mr. Marcy. "He [Colonel Kane] has concluded," says Elder Little, in his report, "to go with me to the camp, and then to California, bearing dispatches from the government." [^35]

74This same day Elder Little made his final call upon President Polk, of which he gives the following account:

74"I called on the president, he was busy but sent me word to call on the secretary of war. I went to the war department, but as the secretary was busy, I did not see him. The president wished me to call at two p. m., which I did, and had an interview with him; he expressed his good feelings to our people—regarded us as good citizens, said he had received our suffrages, and we should be remembered; he had instructed the secretary of war to make out our papers, and that I could get away tomorrow." [^36]

74Elder Little left Washington in company with Colonel Kane and his father, Judge Kane, who went with them as far as Harrisburgh. The elder Kane, before separating from his son, "proffered," says Elder Little, "to render any assistance in his power to influence the executive in our behalf." At St. Louis Elder Little and Colonel Kane separated, the former to make his way to the Camp of Israel, via Nauvoo, the latter to proceed with his dispatches to Fort Leavenworth.

One thing should be remarked upon with reference to the foregoing account of Little's movements while in Washington—viz., the interest and activity of Amos Kendall. Undoubtedly he was still hopeful that Brigham Young and the other church leaders would act favorably upon the contract drawn up by himself and Brannan, in relation to assigning alternate units of land upon which the saints might settle to "A. G. Benson and Co."—hence his activity. Hence also his suggestion of so large a number of the saints being sent to California by the government, two thousand men! Obviously from the standpoint of a land speculator, the more people that could be sent to the new country under such a contract as he had drawn, and which he evidently hoped would yet be ratified, notwithstanding the, as yet, silence of Brigham Young, the greater the gains to the land speculators, not to say land sharks.

REDUCTION IN THE NUMBER OF SAINTS TO BE TAKEN TO CALIFORNIA

Just what consideration led President Polk and the cabinet to cut down the number from the 2,000 men proposed—one thousand from the camps and one thousand from the eastern branches—to the 500 finally decided upon, does not appear. [^37] Most likely, however, it was thought that it would be inexpedient to have so large a "Mormon" population in California as to possibly create a "Mormon" state, and perhaps at the same time create a national "Mormon" problem. [^38] At any rate we shall see from an official document, to be quoted presently, that it was evidently the policy of the administration and its advisers to keep the "Mormon" population in the minority in California, since the number of men to be enlisted in the Army of the West was not to exceed one-third of the number of the entire force under General Kearney, and instead of sending any "Mormon" forces from the east, via Cape Horn, the administration turned to another source to supply the contingent to go by that route, namely, to New York. A regiment of volunteers numbering 955 officers and men, was raised in that state under one Colonel Jonathan D. Stevenson, [^39] and sent via Cape Horn in three ships chartered by the government at a cost of $65,000, and attended by the United States war sloop, Preble. The little squadron sailed from New York on the 26th of September, and arrived at San Francisco in the early days of March, more than a month after the arrival of the Mormon Battalion at San Diego.

WAR DEPARTMENT'S INSTRUCTIONS TO COLONEL KEARNEY

It was to be expected, of course, that the volunteers from the "Mormon" camps would be raised through agencies of the United States army, and hence "confidential orders" from the war department were entrusted to Colonel Kane, to be delivered by him to the commander of the Army of the West, then Colonel S. W. Kearney, stationed at Fort Leavenworth. In those "confidential" orders, addressed to Kearney, bearing date of June 3rd, 1846, was the following relative to the proposed Mormon Battalion:

"It is known that a large body of Mormon emigrants are en route to California, for the purpose of settling in that country. You are desired to use all proper means to have a good understanding with them, to the end that the United States may have their cooperation in taking possession of, and holding, that country. It has been suggested here that many of these Mormons would willingly enter into the service of the United States, and aid us in our expedition against California. You are hereby authorized to muster into service such as can be induced to volunteer; not, however, to a number exceeding one-third of your entire force. Should they enter the service they will be paid as other volunteers, and you can allow them to designate, so far as it can be properly done, the persons to act as officers thereof." [^40]

77It was upon this order from the war department that Colonel Kearney issued his instructions to Captain Allen to proceed to the "Mormon" camps and raise the several companies of troops that were to form the Mormon Battalion, which instructions have already been quoted in full in this chapter. We now return to the first conference between Captain Allen and the church leaders.

CAPTAIN ALLEN AND THE CHURCH LEADERS

Captain Allen laid before the council of the church leaders [^41] his letter of instructions from General Kearney, also the circular he himself had issued at Mount Pisgah.

The question arose in the minds of the church leaders as to the disposition of the camps which would be materially crippled by the withdrawal of so many young, strong, and able-bodied men. Already the question of wintering the camps and caring for so large an amount of stock as was possessed by them, loomed large among their difficulties. About one hundred and fifty miles to the west, in La Platte river was "Grand Island," [^42] fifty-two miles long, with an average width of a mile and three-quarters, and well timbered; in the neighborhood of which also were immense areas of grass that might be cut for hay, and the rank growth of rushes here and there along the extensive river bottoms, would enable much of the stock to winter on this range, could government permission be obtained for a large contingent of the camp to be stationed there. This country, as well as the one the camp grounds then occupied, were within the Louisiana Purchase, and largely divided into Indian reservations, hence could only be occupied by the whites by permission of the government.

78The question of government permission therefore in the event of the battalion being raised was submitted to Captain Allen, and he assumed the responsibility of saying that the camps might locate on Grand Island until they could prosecute their journey westward. In his speech made to the camp the same day, the captain promised to write President Polk to give leave to the saints to stay, en route to the west, whereever it was necessary. At a council meeting held later in the day, on Brigham Young asking him "if an officer enlisting men in an 'Indian country' had not a right to say to their families, 'You can stay till your husbands return,' Captain Allen replied 'that he was the representative of President Polk and could act till he notified the president, who might ratify his engagements, or indemnify for damages. The president might give permission to travel through the Indian country and stop whenever and wherever circumstances required.'" [^43]

CAPTAIN ALLEN BEFORE A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE CAMP

After the first council meeting between Captain Allen and the church leaders a public meeting was held at noon on the same day. President Young introduced Captain Allen who addressed the people: "He said he was sent by Colonel S. W. Kearney through the benevolence of James K. Polk, president of the United States, to enlist five hundred of our men; that there were hundreds of thousands of volunteers ready in the states. [^44] He read his order from Colonel Kearney and the circular which he issued from Mount Pisgah and explained." [^45]

79Brigham Young followed the captain. His own account of his remarks stands in his History as follows:

79"I addressed the assembly; wished them to make a distinction between this action of the general government and our former oppressions in Missouri and Illinois. I said, the question might be asked, 'Is it prudent for us to enlist to defend our country?' If we answer in the affirmative, all are ready to go.

79Suppose we were admitted into the union as a state and the government did not call on us, we would feel ourselves neglected. Let the 'Mormons' be the first to set their feet on the soil of California. Captain Allen has assumed the responsibility of saying that we may locate on Grand Island, until we can prosecute our journey. This is the first offer we have ever had from the government to benefit us.

79I proposed that the five hundred volunteers be mustered and I would do my best to see all their families brought forward, as far as my influence extended, and feed them when I had anything to eat myself." [^46]

INITIAL MOVEMENTS TO RAISE THE BATTALION

At the close of the public meeting another council meeting was held, with Captain Allen present, when the question of the people having a right to remain on Indian lands during the absence of the soldiers, and indeed along their whole route of travel, was further considered as already stated. Captain Allen withdrew from the council, "and the twelve," says President Young, "continued to converse on the favorable prospect before us. It was voted that President Heber C. Kimball and I should go to Mount Pisgah to raise volunteers. I said I would start soon, and I desired the companies to be organized so that we could ascertain who could go to make a camp on Grand Island and who must remain after raising the troops; the twelve to go on west with their families." [^47]

80Accordingly Elders Young and Kimball started for Mount Pisgah, leaving Elders John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, Geo. A. Smith, et al, to prosecute the work of raising volunteers in the camps about Council Bluffs.

80There was apparently some reluctance among the people to respond to this unexpected call, and it required some persuasion to dispel it. [^48] On the 11th of July, Colonel Kane reached the camp at Council Bluffs, and gave assurance that the general government had "taken our case," says Elder Taylor, "into consideration," [^49] inferentially with benevolent intentions.

80When within eleven miles of Mount Pisgah, Elders Young and Kimball met Elder Jesse C. Little, president of the Eastern States Mission, who reported his labors at Washington. [^50]

80While at Pisgah President Young wrote the brethren at Garden Grove, and sent his letter by special messenger. After describing the terms of enlistment and the terms under which the volunteers would be mustered out of service in California, etc., President Young said:

81"They may stay [i.e. in California], look out the best locations for themselves and their friends, and defend the country. This is no hoax. Elder Little, president of the New England churches is here also, [at Mt. Pisgah], direct from Washington, who has been to see the president on the subject of emigrating the saints to the western coast, and confirms all that Captain Allen has stated to us. The United States want our friendship, the president wants to do us good and secure our confidence. The outfit of this five hundred men costs us nothing and their pay will be sufficient to take their families over the mountains. There is war between Mexico and the United States, to whom California must fall a prey, and if we are the first settlers, the old citizens cannot have a Hancock or Missouri pretext to mob the saints. The thing is from above, for our good, has long been understood between us and the United States government, but the first blow was struck sooner than we anticipated. The church could not help the twelve over the mountains, when they wanted to go, and now we will help the churches." [^51]

81A letter of like spirit bearing the same date was sent to Almon W. Babbitt, Joseph Heywood and John S. Fullmer, trustees of the church at Nauvoo. The opening paragraph ran—"Beloved brethren—we send you another leaf of the gospel, which you know is glad tidings, or that which bringeth salvation." Then is announced the determination to send the five hundred men to California as per Kearney's orders to Allen, and Little's information to them when passing through Nauvoo en route for the camps. "By this time you will probably exclaim, is this the gospel? We answer yes." [^52]

"Now, brethren, it is time for action; and if you succeed in selling all our property in Hancock county, and as unitedly succeed in removing all the poor saints this fall, we shall soon be where we can rejoice in each other's society, and by early spring can move a portion of the camp over the mountains and next spring plant our corn in yonder valley. This is the first time the government has stretched forth its arm to our assistance, and we receive their proffers with joy and thankfulness. We feel confident they [the battalion] will have little or no fighting. The pay of the five hundred men will take their families to them. The 'Mormons' will then be the old settlers and have a chance to choose the best locations. The principle of the thing is not new to us, but we have thought best to say little about it. It is all right, and we will give you particulars the first opportunity." [^53]

ENROLLMENT OF THE BATTALION

Finally, when President Young had returned from Mount Pisgah to Council Bluffs, a great public meeting of the camps in that vicinity was held on the 13th of July, and the final work of enrollment began. On that occasion Brigham Young made several addresses; in the course of one he said:

82"If we want the privilege of going where we can worship God according to the dictates of our conscience, we must raise the battalion. I say it is right, and who cares for sacrificing our comfort for a few years. I would rather have undertaken to raise 2,000 a year ago in 24 hours than 100 in one week now." [^54]

82But they could raise them now, was his plea. It was at this point that the great leader dropped to facetiousness by saying:

82"After we get through talking, we will call out the companies, and if there are not young men enough, we will take old men, and if they are not enough, we will take women!"

82This evidently humorous remark has sometimes been taken seriously. Continuing the leader said:

82"Two gentlemen at Mount Pisgah who had been to Fort Leavenworth and enlisted to go to Mexico, said that Colonel Kearney had discharged some of the Missouri troops, and when they heard we were going they felt exceedingly mortified. There are thousands in the United States who would be glad to be the first settlers in California. [^55]

83* * * We have lived near so many old settlers, who would always say, 'get out' that I am thankful to enjoy the privilege of going to settle a new country. You are going to march to California; suppose that country ultimately comes under the government of the United States, which it ought to, we would be the old settlers; and if any man comes and says 'get out' we will say 'get out.' Now suppose we refuse this privilege, what will we do? If you won't go, I will go and leave you. We told you sometime ago we would fit you out to go, and now we are ready to fit you out with Captain Allen as the agent of the United States to help us. The president of the United States has now stretched out his hand to help us, and I thank God and him too. It is for us to go, and I know you will go." [^56]

CLOTHING EQUIPMENT OF THE BATTALION

Respecting equipment Captain Allen said:

83"In regard to what is necessary to take, a soldier receives money instead of clothing, and he could not tell exactly what it would cost. The cost of clothing is greater the first year than any year after; the probable price would be $2.50 per month, but he had learned that Mr. Benton (United States senator from Missouri) had made a motion to have it raised to $3.50 per month." [^57]

83On this subject President Young remarked, "It is not necessary to change your clothing," and added: "You could not ask for anything more acceptable than this mission." [^58]

83The work of enrolling and organizing the companies continued through three days, and therefore was completed on the 16th of July, on which day Captain Allen took the battalion under his command. [^59] Of this event Elder Wilford Woodruff writes:

84"This was an interesting day in the Camp of Israel. Four companies of the volunteers were brought together in a hollow square by their captains, and interestingly addressed by several of the quorum of the twelve. At the close of the meeting they marched in double file from Redemption Hill across the Missouri river bottom to the ferry, seven miles.

84The battalion have thus stepped forth promptly and responded to the call of the government, notwithstanding the persecutions endured in the United States, and that too in the midst of a long journey, leaving families, teams and wagons standing by the wayside, not expecting to meet or see them again for one or two years." [^60]

84Before their final departure from the camps in the vicinity of Council Bluffs, a "ball" was given in their honor; [^61] and on the 20th they took up their march for Fort Leavenworth, where they arrived on the 1st of August, and began their preparations for the great western march.

NOTES

The evidence presented in the foregoing pages of the regular text, proving that the destination of the Latter-day Saints, even before leaving Nauvoo, was clearly understood by Brigham Young, at least as to the general region in which the saints would settle, disposes of a question recently raised in a book of some excellence, under the title, The Catholic Church in Utah, published by The Knights of Columbus of the state. [^62] The question referred to is: Was it a certain conversation, or a series of conversations which Brigham Young had with a Roman Catholic missionary at Winter Quarters that led him to fix upon Salt Lake valley as a place of settlement? The Catholic missionary in question was Father De Smet, who claims to have traversed much of the Salt Lake valley in his rambles among the Rocky Mountains in 1841. [^63] It is claimed also in Father De Smet's Life and Travels Among the North American Indians, that "he became well acquainted with [Brigham] Young, and it is possible the information he gave him may have influenced that leader in choosing Salt Lake valley as the future home of his people." [^64] Father De Smet himself puts forth the same suggestion, though modestly and with much charm of manner, in a letter to his nephew, written in March, 1851. He says:

85"In the fall of 1846, as I drew near to the frontiers of the state of Missouri, I found the advance guard of the Mormons, numbering about 10,000, camped on the territory of the Omaha, not far from the old Council Bluffs. They had just been driven out for the second time from a state of the Union (Illinois had received them after their war with the people of Missouri). They had resolved to winter on the threshold of the great desert, and then to move onward into it, to put distance between themselves and their persecutors, without even knowing at that time the end of their long wanderings, nor the place where they should once more erect for themselves permanent dwellings. They asked me a thousand questions about the regions I had explored, and the valley which I have just described to you pleased them greatly from the account I gave them of it. Was that what determined them? I would not dare to assert it. They are there! In the last three years Utah has changed its aspect, and from a desert has become a flourishing territory, which will soon become one of the states of the Union." [^65]

85Commenting upon this, the author of The Catholic Church in Utah, says:

"To the Mormons, living in a temporary camp on the edge of the desert, unable, or at least unwilling, to retrace the road leading back to the land of their persecutors, ignorant of the region which lay before them, De Smet's glowing description of the beautiful and fertile valley which lay beyond the mountains, brought the solution of their most perplexing problem, for it indicated a place wherein they could establish their homes and their religion, free from the troubles and persecutions which had so far beset them. His close acquaintance with Brigham Young, and his many conversations with him on the Rocky Mountain regions, and on Salt Lake valley, probably determined the choice of the Mormon prophet, and led to the decision which ultimately settled the Latter-day Saints in the fertile lands they now occupy in Utah." [^66]

86All this probability disappears, however, in the presence of the repeated assertions of Brigham Young and others that the destination of the people he was leading was the "Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains," or the "Bear River Valley," long before the arrival of Father De Smet at the "Mormon" camps on the Missouri.

CIRCULAR TO THE MORMONS

"I have come among you, instructed by Colonel S. F. Kearney of the United States army, now commanding the army of the west, to visit the Mormon camp, and to accept the service for twelve months of four or five companies of Mormon men who may be willing to serve their country for that period in our present war with Mexico; this force to unite with the army of the west at Santa Fe, and be marched thence to California, where they will be discharged.

86They will receive pay and rations, and other allowances, such as other volunteers or regular soldiers receive, from the day they shall be mustered into the service, and will be entitled to all comforts and benefits of regular soldiers of the army, and when discharged, as contemplated, at California, they will be given gratis their arms and accoutrements, with which they will be fully equipped at Fort Leavenworth. This is offered to the Mormon people now. This year an opportunity of sending a portion of their young and intelligent men to the ultimate destination of their whole people, and entirely at the expense of the United States, and this advanced party can thus pave the way and look out the land for their brethren to come after them.

86Those of the Mormons who are desirous of serving their country, on the conditions here enumerated, are requested to meet me without delay at their principal camp at the Council Bluffs, whither I am going to consult with their principal men, and to receive and organize the force contemplated to be raised.

86I will receive all healthy, able-bodied men of from eighteen to forty-five years of age.

86[Signed] "J. Allen, Captain 1st Dragoons."

87Camp of the Mormons, at Mount Pisgah, one hundred and thirty-eight miles east of Council Bluffs, June 26th, 1846.

87Note.—I hope to complete the organization of this battalion in six days after my reaching Council Bluffs, or within nine days from this time." [^67]

Elder Taylor first refers to Captain Allen's remarks. "He [Allen] stated his object for coming here was a good one, and that it was from a feeling of benevolence that he had been sent to us and to benefit us. * * * Brother Brigham then arose and said that he was glad to hear this thing; it was the thing they had been wishing to bring about a good while. He wanted to clear their minds of all prejudice and not blame the general government for acts that had been perpetrated by mobbers. He said it was what we had been trying to effect for several years, and this move had been made a little too quick for us. If we could have been apprised of this thing we could have had the men ready to march tomorrow with Captain Allen. He said, supposing we were to refuse this offer; we would have to go to California and have to depend upon our own resources to fight, when if we embrace this offer we will have the United States to back us and have an opportunity of showing our loyalty and fight for the country that we expect to have for our homes. If we did not go and help take it, what would be said when we got there and settled down? It would be as it always had been, 'get out of the way 'Mormons,' get out of the way. Our fathers and ourselves fought for the liberties of this country and we are the only citizens.' Whereas if we go and help take the country we will at least have that equal right, and I do not want anybody to be in those wildernesses and undiscovered before we are. I think the president has done us a great favor by calling upon us. It is the first call that has been made upon us that ever seemed likely to benefit us. Now I want you men to go and all that can go, young or married. I will see that their families are taken care of; they shall go on as far as mine, and fare the same, and if they wish it they shall go to Grand Island first." [^68]

The following is an excerpt from the Journal of Elder John Taylor, one of the twelve apostles: "Thursday, July 2, 1846. I attended meeting at 10 o'clock according to previous appointment. Brother Parley P. Pratt and myself made speeches and encouraged the people to come forward and volunteer. We made an appointment for a meeting to be held at Brother George A. Smith's camp to collect volunteers, as there were a great many that were not able to attend meeting in the forenoon. I rose and made a few remarks about the subject of volunteering. I said many have felt something like rebellion against the United States. I have myself felt swearing mad at the government for the treatment we have received at the hands of those in authority, although I don't know that I have sworn much. We have had cause to feel as we have, and any man having a spark of liberty in him would have felt likewise. We are now something like Abraham was, wandering not knowing whither we wander; fleeing from a land of tyranny and oppression we are calculating to settle in some part of California. This according to the laws of nations belongs to Mexico. Oregon is disputed by the United States and Great Britain, and we have either to go under the Mexican, British or American dominion, or else hide ourselves up and not go where we can have commerce; and be looked upon as interlopers. If you go to California you must have a legal pretense for going there. If we come under Britain we have to be subject to their provisions, if under the federal [i.e. United States] we have to be subject to them. The United States are at war with Mexico, and the United States have a perfect right to march into California according to the laws of nations. The United States calling upon us then gives us a perfect right to go there according to the requisition made that we should be disbanded at California. * * * A great many seem to distrust the government and are afraid they will not be carried to California, but be sent to Texas or somewhere else. They will not be, they need not fear, who cannot trust the United States? Her flag floats over every ocean and her ministry is in every nation. I know it is a great journey for a man to leave his family and go on; but Captain Allen says he will give absolute permission for the families to remain here. Captain Allen has also obtained a writing from the Pottawattomie subagency signed by the chiefs and braves to that effect, so that everything is straightforward. I then made a motion that we raise a body of 500 men and make Captain Allen lieutenant-colonel."

"The following letter to President Polk was read by Dr. Richards and unanimously sanctioned:

88'To James K. Polk, President of the United States.

88Sir: A large portion of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, having passed from the nation of our nativity, and the republic over which you have the honor to preside, and finding ourselves on the western shore of the great Missouri, while others of our friends are following close in our rear, beg your excellency's indulgence for a moment while we pour out the pure feelings of our souls before you.

The cause of our exile we need not repeat, it is already with you, suffice it to say that a combination of fortuitous, illegal and unconstitutional circumstances have placed us in our present situation, on a journey which we design shall end in a location west of the Rocky Mountains, and within the basin of the Great Salt Lake or Bear river valley, as soon as circumstance shall permit, believing that to be a point where a good living will require hard labor, and consequently will be coveted by no other people, while it is surrounded by so unpopulous but fertile country.

89While on our way thither and beyond the borders of the states, we were met by Captain J. Allen of your Army of the West, proffering us the enrollment of five hundred men to be marched into California, via Santa Fe, there to be discharged at the expiration of one year, receiving the pay of regular soldiers and other valuable and unusual emoluments; to this offer we promptly responded, though it has left five hundred of our loaded teams standing on the prairies of the Pottawattomie and Omaha nations, and nearly as many families destitute of their head and guardians, only as they are counseled and nourished by their friends who were already overborne with cares and worn out with anxiety and fatigue; but in the midst of this we were cheered with the presence of our friend, Mr. Little of New Hampshire, who assured us of the personal friendship of the president, in the act before us, and this assurance though not doubted by us in the least, was soon made doubly sure by the testimony of Colonel Kane of Philadelphia, whose presence in our midst, and the ardor with which he has espoused the cause of a persecuted and suffering people, and the testimony he has borne of your excellency's kind feelings, have kindled up a spark in our hearts, which had been well nigh extinguished, not a spark of love of liberty or democracy, that cannot be, but love of a country or rulers, from whom previously we had received but little save neglect or persecution.

89We also received assurance from Lieutenant Colonel Allen of the Mormon Battalion, that we should be safe and that it would be proper for us to stop on any Indian lands, while it was necessary, considering our hindrance in filling his command, and during the pleasure of the president, which we fully anticipate will be during all necessary time, and in view of all things here referred to and many more which the hurrying duties of the camp will not permit us to mention at this time.

90Having received the strongest assurances of assistance and protection from President Polk through our highly esteemed friend Colonel Kane, and that he will continue to use all constitutional powers at his disposal, for our good, regardless of popular clamor and cabinet intrigues, to establish us in a land where we can sustain our wives and children, to help us to a territorial government, so that we may dwell in peace under our own vine, and eat the fruit of our own labor, and that he will defend us against every aggression by the strong arm of twenty millions of freemen, and all their immense resources. And that he will ward off the scourge of oppression, the rod of tyranny, and the sword of death by all the means that God and his country have placed at his disposal.

90Done on the west bank of the Missouri river near Council Bluffs, Omaha nation, Aug. 9, 1846, in general council of the church aforesaid.

90'Willard Richards, Clerk.' 'Brigham Young, President.'

90P. S. Please give us your views of Colonel Allen's permit for us to stop on Indian lands, as soon as your convenience will permit. Direct to N. K. Whitney, Jon. H. Hale, and Daniel Spencer, Mormon camp near Council Bluffs, Fort Leavenworth, P. O.'"

Footnotes

"The Upper California, O that's the land for me,

It lies between the mountains and the great Pacific sea," etc.

L. D. S. Hymn Book, p. 352. Also Millennial Star, vols. vi to x, passim. "I frequently find California and Utah confounded," says Bancroft, "by writers of this early period. The limits of California on the east were not then defined, and it was not uncommon, nor indeed incorrect to apply that term to territory east of the not Sierra." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 238).

July 14: I said I would prophesy that the time would come when some one of the twelve or a high priest would come up and ask: 'Can we not build a temple at Van Couver's Island, or in California?' It is now wisdom to unite all our forces to build one house in the mountains." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 53).

---
Notas:
[^1] Kane's The Mormons, pp. 79-80. To this President Young bears witness on the 9th of August in the letter to President Polk, quoted in the preceding chapter, Note 5.
[^2] Recording a conversation upon this subject between himself and Colonel Kane, President Young said: "I informed the colonel we intended settling in the great Basin or Bear river valley, and those who went round by water would settle at San Francisco. We would be glad to raise the American flag; we love the Constitution of our country, but are opposed to mobocracy; and will not live under such oppression as we have done. We are willing to have the banner of the United States Constitution float over us. If the government of the United States are disposed to do us good, we can do them as much good as they can us." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 133-4).
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, Introduction, p. xvii. It is known that they paid the United States government, for land alone, $318,000, which at the rate of the minimum price of $1.25 per acre, would give them land holdings of over 250,000 acres.
[^4] Reference to the chapters xxxiv and xxxv, this History, with the evidence of Generals Atchison and Doniphan, will convince the reader that "mob-militia" is not too strong a term.
[^5] This was Brigham Young whom the colonel is quoting. See a personal letter of Colonel Kane's to President Millard Fillmore, dated July 11th, 1851, in which he avows it. (Millennial Star, vol. xiii, p. 344.)
[^6] Kane's The Mormons, p. 29. The passage is apt to be a little misleading as to the time in which the battalion was raised. The "three days" which served for its enrollment and organization were preceded by about two weeks of earnest work among the camps gathering up men who could be induced to go.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Aug. 14, 1846, bk. 2, pp. 151-2.
[^8] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 143-4, where he says expressly that clothing money "was paid to them at the rate of $3.50 per month." Hence the Benton amendment of raising the amount from $2.50 to $3.50 referred to in the preceding chapter, prevailed. A letter from the war department under date of December 11th, 1911, through the courtesy of Hon. Joseph Howell, representative from Utah, states: "Each enlisted man of this (the Mormon) battalion was, on August 6, 1846, paid $42.00, being the allowance for one year paid in advance. These volunteers were paid the same rates of pay and emoluments as were other volunteers for service during the Mexican war and no bounty was paid to the members of said battalion nor to any other volunteers who served during the Mexican War. The payment of the value of one year's clothing allowance in advance was in accordance with the law and regulations in force at that time, and was not a special allowance to the Mormon Battalion.
[^9] Chapter lxxvi.
[^10] "August 11th, * * * Elder Parley P. Pratt arrived from Fort Leavenworth, with a special message from the battalion to Newel K. Whitney for the council, signed by Orson Hyde, and a package of $5,860, being a portion of the allowance for clothing of the battalion which was paid them at the rate of $3.50 per month." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 1846, pp. 143-4.)
[^11] Ibid, pp. 188-191. A list of the donors to the twelve and the poor are recorded, and the amounts donated.
[^12] This committee was Bishop Newel K. Whitney, Jonathan H. Hale and Daniel Spencer. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 1846, p. 149; also pp. 157-8.)
[^13] Under date of December 13, 1846, and December 15th, same year. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 508-9, and p. 526.)
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 483, and pp. 508-9; also Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 99.
[^15] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 1846, pp. 157-8. The suggested procedure was put to vote before a meeting and carried unanimously; but afterwards some dissatisfaction arose owing to the fact that prices were not as low in St. Louis as it was thought they would be, and freight up the Missouri to Fort Leavenworth jumped from 75 cents to $2.50 per hundred weight. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 513.)
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 185.
[^17] Ibid, bk. 2, pp. 185-6.
[^18] See ante, Kearney's order to Captain Allen.
[^19] "The pay rolls on file in this office show that three months' extra pay was paid in February and March, 1849, to members of said organization." Excerpt of a letter from the auditor of the war department, E. A. Gongue under date of November 3rd, 1911, per kindness of Representative Joseph Howell. From the same source of information it is stated that the payment of officers and privates was as follows:
[^20] Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 117.
[^21] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 137-8, note 5.
[^22] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 133-4.
[^23] The resolution stands as follows: "4. Resolved, That (as) we have heard from various sources and have the same confirmed by Colonel Kane, that the friends of ex-Governor Boggs, are endeavoring to make him governor of California, and that we as a people are bound to oppose said Boggs in every point and particular that shall tend to exalt him in any country where our lot may be cast, and that peace and 'Mormonism,' which are always undivided, and Lilburn W. Boggs, cannot dwell together, and we solicit the attention of President Polk to this important item in the future prosperity and welfare of the newly acquired territory of our glorious republic." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846. bk. 2, p. 138).
[^24] See the remarks of Brigham Young on the 1st of October, 1848, History of Brigham Young, Ms., for that date; also speeches of J. M. Grant and Brigham Young at the first general festival of the Mormon Battalion, Tyler's Mormon Battalion, ch. xlv; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 4th of Feb., 1855.
[^25] See chapter liii, this History, note 8; also Times and Seasons, vol. v, p. 440.
[^26] History of Illinois, p. 413, and chapter lxix, this History. It was Governor Ford himself who wrote the letter to President Young, et al, to make the church leaders believe that regiments of the United States Army would be sent to Nauvoo in the spring to arrest the leaders and possibly prevent the migration of the people to the west. The letter of the governor is copied into the History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 1 for 1846, pp. 4-6. It is followed by this comment by Brigham Young: "Should Governor Ford's speculations and suppositions in relation to United States troops prove correct, and the government should send a regular force to arrest us, we will run no risk of being murdered by them as our leaders have been; and as to fearing a trial before the courts—it is all gammon; for our danger consists only in being held still by the authorities, while mobs massacre us, as Governor Ford held Joseph and Hyrum Smith while they were butchered." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 1, 6th Jan., 1846, pp. 4-6). Ford's letter referred to above bears date of Dec. 20th, 1845.
[^27] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, entry for 26th of June, 1846; also Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, pp. 258-9.
[^28] Ibid, p. 16.
[^29] Ibid, p. 16-17.
[^30] Was Elder Little at this point presuming upon the alleged "silent partnership" of President Polk with "Messrs. Kendall, A. G. Benson & Co., et al?"
[^31] Little's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 20-22. It will be observed that Elder Little's letter takes on the hue of the war times.
[^32] Ibid, p. 22.
[^33] Ibid, p. 22.
[^34] Ibid, p. 23.
[^35] Ibid.
[^36] Ibid, p. 25.
[^37] It is alleged by some writers that the president's plan of "possessing California, by the aid of the Mormons"—involving this call for the large number of that people to engage in the enterprise—"was afterward changed through the influence of Senator Benton." (Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, p. 52). But if calling the battalion was not only a hardship on the Camp of Israel, but an intended, and artfully planned injustice—to which view the writer just quoted wrongfully inclines—then whoever influenced the administration to cut down the call from one thousand from the camps to five hundred, reduced both the hardship and the injustice by one-half.
[^38] "Possibly the elder in his enthusiasm was disposed to exaggerate the president's promises; while on the other hand we may readily imagine that Polk, on further consideration, either with or without the promptings of enemies to the church, or of promoters of other military and colonization schemes, concluded that he had promised too much, that it was not altogether desirable or necessary to allow the Mormons too much power in California; that it would be as well to use rather than be used by them; and that there would be no difficulty in obtaining other volunteer colonist soldiers. Churchmen believe that Thomas Benton did more than any other to turn the president against them, which is not at all unlikely." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v. pp. 472-3).
[^39] Stevenson was a colonel of militia in New York, a ward politician and an ex-member of the legislature, who "had done some service for the administration that seemed to call for reward, and be was reputed to be a man of some energy and executive ability." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 500.) Bancroft also declares that it was a conversation with Amos Kendall about the "Mormons" that first suggested the idea of sending a New York regiment to California. (History of California, vol. v, pp. 472 note, and 501 and note). Stevenson's authorization to raise the regiment bears date of 26th of June, which was about two weeks after Little and Kane's departure for the west. A full account of the New York regiment will be found in Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, ch. xix.
[^40] Executive Document, No. 60, letter of the secretary of war to General Kearney, marked "confidential," 1846. In addition to the above instruction relative to raising a military force among the "Mormons," General Kearney was notified that the governor of Missouri had been instructed to raise an additional force of a thousand mounted men for the "Army of the West:" Kearney was ordered to invade New Mexico, take possession of Santa Fe, garrison it with sufficient force to hold it, and then push on to California to cooperate with the naval forces in taking possession of that land, leaving the Missouri and "Mormon" troops to follow him. It also contains the announcement of his elevation to the rank of brevet brigadier general and instruction as to his procedure in California.
[^41] There was present at this council meeting, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, John Taylor, "Uncle" John Smith, Levi Richards, Captain Allen and two others, (presumably the two dragoons who accompanied the captain on his mission). The council meeting was held at Elder John Taylor's tent on Mosquito Creek. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 1).
[^42] "Grand Island" is described by Captain Burton in his City of the Saints and Across the Rocky Mountains to California, 1862. Referring to the immediate valley of La Platte, about "Grand Island," he says: "The valley here is two miles broad, resembles the ocean deltas of great streams; it is level as a carpet, all short, green grass without sage brush. It can hardly be called a bottom, the rise from the water's edge being, it is calculated, about 4 feet per 1,000. Under a bank, from half a yard to a yard high, through its two lawns of verdure, flowed the stream straight toward the slanting rays of the rising sun, which glittered upon its broad bosom, and shed rosy light over half the heavens. In places it shows a sea horizon, but here it was narrowed by Grand Island, which is fifty-two miles long, with an average breadth of one mile and three-quarters, and sufficiently elevated above the annual flood to be well timbered." (p. 39).
[^43] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 4, 5.
[^44] The statement is supported by standard United States Histories; see also note 13, this chapter.
[^45] 45. History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 3-4.
[^46] 46. History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 4. An account of President Young's speech is also given in Elder John Taylor's Journal. See Note 3, end of this chapter.
[^47] 47. History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 4, 5.
[^48] 48. For the nature of the arguments employed with the people see excerpt of a speech by John Taylor taken from his Journal under date of July 2nd, 1846, Note 4, end of chapter.
[^49] 49. Taylor's Journal, entry for July 11th, 1846. "We had some conversation with him [Kane] during which he manifested a spirit of sympathy for us."
[^50] 50. The Report of Elder Little is elaborate and signed. It is recorded under the date of July 6th in Brigham Young's History, Ms., and occupies pages from 10 to 26, bk. 2. I have already quoted from it copiously in this chapter.
[^51] 51. History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2., 1846, pp. 26-30. Letter bears date of July 7th, 1846.
[^52] 52. In the answer sent to this letter the brethren from Nauvoo said: "Your favor, with the letter of Colonel Kearney and the circular letter of Captain Allen, we were truly delighted to receive, with 'the new leaf of the gospel.'" The hearts of the saints seemed to be greatly cheered by the request that had been made for them to send on older men and boys to take the place of many teamsters who would of necessity have to go in the battalion, "but we have but few left in this place (Nauvoo)," said the trustees.
[^53] 53. This letter is signed by Brigham Young, "for the council," Willard Richards Clerk. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 30-34).
[^54] 54. History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 44.
[^55] 55. A statement which is supported by the promptness with which the regiment under Jonathan D. Stevenson in New York was raised, and taken round Cape Horn to California, practically with the understanding that the calling of the regiment was "a colonizing scheme." "No volunteer," says Bancroft, "dreamed of conflict with any foe: all regarded themselves as immigrant adventurers bound for a distant land of many charms under the protection of the government." (History of California, vol. v, p. 502). The regiment of nearly 1,000 men was quickly raised. The authorization to enlist the men bears date of June 26th; and by the end of July the ranks of all the companies were filled. (Ibid). It is supported also by the fact that whereas the act of congress declaring war authorized the president to "accept the service of 50,000 men, 300,000 responded. (See note 13). President Polk called for four regiments from Illinois, nine answered the call, numbering 8,370; "only four of them, numbering 3,720 men, could be taken." (Gregg's History of Illinois, in History of Hancock County, p. 118).
[^56] 56. History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 46.
[^57] 57. The Benton motion prevailed. That was the sum allowed for clothing and was paid to the battalion one year in advance at Fort Leavenworth, soon after the enlistment, August 4th, 5th and 6th. The entry in President Young's Journal stands as follows: "Aug. 5th, * * * Yesterday and today the battalion received their first payment, which was their allowance for clothing. [This would mean that the battalion received $21,000.00]. The paymaster remarked that every one in the Mormon Battalion could write his own name, but only about one-third of the volunteers he had paid previously could sign their names." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 130-1, also footnotes 8 and 19, chapter lxxiv).
[^58] 58. History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 48.
[^59] 59. Tyler's Mormon Battalion, p. 127.
[^60] 60. Woodruff's note is quoted in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 55.
[^61] 61. Colonel Kane thus describes this event: "There was no sentimental affectation at their leave-taking. The afternoon before was appropriated to a farewell ball; and a more merry dancing rout I have never seen, though the company went without refreshments, and their ballroom was of the most primitive. It was the custom, whenever the larger camps rested for a few days together, to make great arbors, or boweries, as they called them, of poles, and brush, and wattling, as places of shelter for their meetings of devotion or conference. In one of these, where the ground has been trodden firm and hard by the wotshippers of the popular Father Taylor's precinct, was gathered now the mirth and beauty of the Mormon Israel. * * * With the rest attended the elders of the church within call, including nearly all the chiefs of the high council, with their wives and children. They, the gravest and most trouble worn, seemed the most anxious of any to be first to throw off the burden of heavy thoughts. Their leading off the dancing in a great double cotillion, was the signal bade the festivity commence. To the canto of debonnair violins, the cheer of horns, the jingle of sleigh bells, and the jovial snoring of the tambourine, they did dance! None of your minuets or other mortuary processions of gentles in etiquette, tight shoes, and pinching gloves, but the spirited and scientific displays of our venerated and merry grandparents, who were not above following the fiddle to the Foxchase Inn, or Gardens of Gray's Ferry. French Fours, Copenhagen Jigs, Virginia Reels, and the like forgotten figures executed with the spirit of people too happy to be slow, or bashful, or constrained. Light hearts, lithe figures, and light feet, had it their own way from an early hour till after the sun had dipped behind the sharp sky line of the Omaha hills." (The Mormons, pp. 30-31, King and Baird, publishers, Philadelphia, 1850).
[^62] 62. The author is Very Reverend W. R. Harris, D. D., L. L. D., 1909.
[^63] 63. See Letter of De Smet to Precis Historiques Bruxelles, Jan. 19, 1858.
[^64] 64. Catholic Church in Utah, p. 271.
[^65] 65. We may help out our Catholic friends by corroborating the fact of the meeting of Father De Smet and Brigham Young. In the latter's History, Ms., is the following entry: "Nov. 19, 1846: Mr. Smith, a Catholic priest and missionary to the Black Feet Indians, called on me. I procured for him a newspaper containing a report of a trader concerning the Munchie or White Indians." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 478). I think President Young or his amanuensis mistook "Smet" for "Smith"; but the "Smith" of the Young Journal is doubtless "De Smet" of our Catholic authors.
[^66] 66. The Catholic Church in Utah, pp. 270-1.
[^67] 67. History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 1, pp. 213-4.
[^68] 68. Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry for July 1st, 1846.
