B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

91CHAPTER LXXIV

91SACRIFICES AND ADVANTAGES IN THE CALL OF THE BATTALION

91THE facts presented in the preceding chapter show that the call for the Mormon Battalion was not an unfriendly act on the part of the United States government against the Church of the Latter-day Saints. The representative of the church appealed most earnestly to the executive of the nation for aid in the western emigration of the saints, and there was an expressed willingness on the part of the church to assist the administration in its determination to take possession of California, which necessarily involved such service as that called for by the enlistment of the battalion. Moreover, when it was proposed by the administration to "accept" the service of such a force of volunteers, the proposition was received with alacrity by the church leaders—as is abundantly proven in the preceding chapter—as an answer to their appeal for aid in the western movement of their people. True, it involved both personal and community sacrifice to raise this force of volunteers. "The call," as explained afterwards by Colonel Kane, could hardly have been more inconveniently timed. The young, and those who could best have been spared, were then away from the main body, either with Pioneer companies in the van, or, their faith unannounced, seeking work and food about the northwestern settlements, to support them till the return of the season for commencing emigration. The force was therefore to be recruited [in many cases] from among the fathers of families, and others whose presence it was most desirable to retain." [^1]

MIND ATTITUDE OF THE SAINTS TOWARD THE UNITED STATES

Practically five hundred wagons were left without teamsters, and in the same manner five hundred families were left without their natural protectors, and providers. A call to war always involves sacrifice, but under the physical circumstances in which the Latter-day Saints were placed—exiled from their homes—nay, even worse, under enforced expatriation from their homes. Enforced expatriation, I say, except for the love of their country, which still glowed brightly in their hearts and knew no such thing as alienation from the country with which their destiny was inseparably interwoven. [^2]

The families of the proposed battalion, with the families of their friends, in whose care they must leave their loved ones, and upon whom they must depend for succor in their absence, would be scattered in a string of camps for some hundreds of miles between Nauvoo and Council Bluffs, with no certain abiding place designated, and no immediate prospect of being permanently settled. To respond to a call for a "war-march" of two thousand miles, much of which was desert, under such circumstances, was trebly hard. Moreover, from their then point of view, they had little to be grateful for to the government of the United States. Their appeals from the injustice of Missouri and Illinois had met with but cold reception at Washington. They did not and could not be expected to understand, much less sympathize with, the refinements employed by the executive and national legislators in drawing nice distinctions about the division of sovereignty between the states and the general government. They were conscious of the great wrongs inflicted upon their community in the two states in which they had settled. In Missouri they had made extensive land purchases of the general government—estimated at over two hundred and fifty thousand acres [^3]—from which they were ruthlessly driven under an exterminating order issued by the governor of that state to a mob-militia. [^4] They had appealed to the general government for a redress of grievances without avail; and now, from the standpoint of the men enlisting and the people generally, they were asked to respond to a call from that government for service, the highest service that can be asked or given; and under the circumstances then existing among the Latter-day Saints, a service involving much greater sacrifice than when conditions are normal; both on the part of the volunteers themselves, and on the part of the encamped community whose cares and anxieties and burdens must be increased by having thrown upon them the protection and support of many of the families of the enlisting men. To respond under these circumstances to such a call from their country, however brought about, would be responding to a test of loyalty to which no other community in these United States had ever been subjected. And the encamped saints responded promptly if not cheerfully.

"The feeling of country triumphed," says Colonel Kane, who was present in the camps during the enrollment of the volunteers: "The Union had never wronged them. 'You shall have your battalion at once, if it has to be a class of our elders,' said one, himself a ruling elder. [^5] A central mass meeting for council, some harangues at the more remotely scattered camps, an American flag, brought out from the storehouse of things rescued, and hoisted to a tree mast—and in three days, the force was reported mustered, organized and ready to march." [^6]

94

94

PER CONTRA: CUMULATIVE ADVANTAGES OF ENLISTMENT

On the other hand, and notwithstanding all the sacrifices involved, Brigham Young and those associated with him in the presiding council of the church, were too astute as leaders not to appreciate the advantages of this opportunity for a considerable number of their community to enter the service of the United States. The charge of disloyalty to the American government, had often been made against the saints, which not all their protests and denials could overcome. But to accept service of the government in a time of war, involving such sacrifices as must be theirs would be an evidence of loyalty that would stand forever, both unimpeached and unimpeachable. That such was the understanding of Brigham Young is specifically expressed by him about a month after the departure of the battalion. "Let every one," said he, distinctly understand, that the Mormon Battalion was organized from our camp to allay the prejudices of the people, prove our loyalty to the government of the United States, and for the present and temporal salvation of Israel; that this act left near five hundred teams destitute of drivers and provisions for the winter, and nearly as many families without protection and help." [^7] This statement, however, must be modified by remembrance of the fact that many of the enlisted men were young and unmarried.

Another advantage appealed to the leaders. It had become evident before the call was made for the battalion, that while it might be possible for a specially organized Pioneer company to go over the mountains that season—preparations for which, as we have seen, were being rapidly made—the very great majority of the camps would be under the necessity of spending a year or more in southern Iowa, principally on Indian lands. The prospects of remaining upon such lands in peace would be much enhanced if it could be pleaded that five hundred of their men were in the service of the government of the United States; and subsequent events demonstrated the validity of such a plea; also it was the advantage sought to be secured by Brigham Young in his first conference with Captain Allen on the subject of the enlistment of the battalion.

95Another consideration of importance was the remuneration of these soldiers. A year's pay for their clothing in advance at the rate of $3.50 per man, would amount to $42.00 each; and to $21,000 for the battalion. [^8]

Both Captain Allen and Colonel Kane made use of this plea that husbands, fathers and sons of a large number of the exiled "Mormon" people as a reason why they should be given government permission to occupy Indian lands about Council Bluffs, and also be secure in passing through and encamping on Indian lands in their contemplated westward journey; this "during the pleasure of the president of the United States." Also he persuaded the several chiefs of the Pottawattomie tribe to sign a permission for the "Mormon" encampments to occupy "for a time" their lands on the Missouri. Colonel Kane obtained from the war department a like permission to occupy Omaha Indian lands on the west side of the Missouri. These concessions were highly valuable to the Camp of Israel; and it would have been doubtful if any of them could have been obtained but for the reasonable plea that husbands, fathers and sons from the encampments of the saints were in the war service of the federal government. Moreover many cases of temporary occupancy of these Indian lands became permanent possessions of the saints through settlement and government purchase. The official correspondence with the war department and Captain Allen and Colonel Kane is given in a subsequent and a more appropriate place than this for the discussion of the subject. [^9]

Part of this money, viz., $5,860, was sent back to the families, [^10] of the battalion, of which, however, $566.00 [^11] was donated to the poor; and the whole sum sent to a committee of their own choosing to receive and distribute the same. [^12] Evidently President Young was disappointed with the amount which the battalion sent back to their families and the church, since at least on two occasions he intimates that they should have sent $16,000 to their families, [^13] instead of $5,000. At the request of some companies of the battalion, while yet at Fort Leavenworth, agents were later sent by President Young to Santa Fe, to bring back the pay of the soldiers to their families. These agents, John D. Lee and Howard Egan, returned to the encampments at Council Bluffs November 21st, bringing with them a mail of 282 letters, and, according to President Young, with an additional sum of four thousand dollars of battalion money. [^14] And notwithstanding the amount sent to the camp was somewhat disappointing, it nevertheless was accepted as a very great blessing at the time. In a letter to the battalion under date of August 19th, Elder Willard Richards wrote, in behalf of the council, informing them that the brethren had suggested the appointment of Bishop Newel K. Whitney as agent to go and purchase goods at St. Louis at wholesale rates for the families of the battalion and ship to some point where teams from the camp could reach them, and thus increase the purchasing power of the funds by considerable. [^15] Also "counciling them to be prudent and economical that they might be made a blessing to their families and to the poor, as they were placed in circumstances which enabled them to control more means than all the rest of the saints in the wilderness." [^16]

97On the 21st of August President Brigham Young also wrote to the battalion:

"We consider the money you have received, as compensation for your clothing, a peculiar manifestation of the kind providence of our Heavenly Father at this particular time, which is just the time for the purchasing of provisions and goods for the winter supply of the camp. After hearing your views concerning remittance of your future payments from Brother Mathews, and from Brother Dykes' letter of the 15th inst., we consider it wisdom for you to retain the funds which you may hereafter receive, until you can bring them yourselves or deliver them to our agent. * * * Those brethren who remembered the council in the distribution of their mites, shall receive the blessing of the council." [^17]

RECOGNITION BY CHURCH LEADERS OF ACCRUED BENEFITS BY ENLISTMENT OF THE BATTALION

In addition to this monetary return for clothing and their pay of seven dollars per month there was the five hundred stand of arms and camp equipment which was to be theirs when discharged in California; [^18] and in February and March, 1849, three months' extra pay was allowed to members of this organization. [^19] These several considerations, but not counting the last, led Elder John Taylor in an address to the saints in Great Britain, November, 1846, to say:

98"Although we have been inhumanly and barbarously dealt with by the surrounding country where we dwelt, yet the president of the United States is favorably disposed to us. He has sent out orders to have five hundred of our brethren employed in an expedition that was fitting out against California, with orders for them to be employed for one year, and then to be discharged in California, and to have their arms and implements of war given to them at the expiration of the term, and as there is no prospect of any opposition, it amounts to the same as paying them for going to the place where they were destined to go without." [^20]

98In a communication under date of August 9th, 1846, signed by Brigham Young, President James K. Polk is reminded of the disadvantages the camp experienced in raising the battalion, and then—

99"But in the midst of this we were cheered with the presence of our friend, Mr. Little, of New Hampshire, who assures us of the personal friendship of the president, in the act before us; and this assurance, though not doubted by us in the least, was soon made doubly sure by the testimony of Colonel Kane, of Philadelphia, whose presence in our midst, and the ardor with which he has espoused the cause of a persecuted and suffering people, and the testimony he has borne of your excellency's kind feelings, have kindled up a spark in our hearts which had been well-nigh extinguished— * * * love of a country, or ruler, from whom previously we had received but little save neglect or persecution."

99Then in the 1st and 2nd of a series of resolutions in the same communication, addressed to President Polk, it was—

99"1. Resolved, That as children of the United States we have not been disappointed in our anticipations of a brighter day and a more righteous administration in our endeavors for the canvas of his Excellency, James K. Polk, to the presidency.

CONSCIOUSNESS OF THESE BENEFITS LATER OBSCURED

Such were the views entertained at the time as to the benevolent intentions of the government, in proffering to take into its service this body of men; such the advantages accruing to the people of God through their enlistment, notwithstanding the sacrifices and hardships entailed upon all by reason of that action. In later years, when repetition of very great injustice threatened the Latter-day Saints in their mountain homes; when a still mightier exodus and a wider devastation of their homes than they had experienced either in Missouri or Illinois was supposed to threaten; when a sense of outrage and pursuing injustice stirred all emotions that minister to resentment—then was obscured the spirit in which this opportunity for service under the government was sought for, and tendered, and accepted; and only its hardships, and sacrifices remembered. Nor is this matter for much wonderment, as will be seen by consideration of the following circumstances:—

ATTEMPTED VILLAINY OF "A. G. BENSON AND CO."

"A. G. Benson and Co.," together with ex-Postmaster-General, Amos Kendall, and the coterie of Washington politicians said to be in their conspiracy to prey upon the saints were, doubtless, greatly disappointed and outrageously angered by the cool silence of Brigham Young, who refused to walk under the yoke of bondage they had proposed for him and his people. Hence their enmity, leading to denunciations and threats as to what ought to be done, and doubtless what they would do with the "Mormons." Robbers are ever angered with the escape of an intended victim; and the saints, through the inspired wisdom of their leaders, had clean escaped from the schemes of robbery plotted against them by "A. G. Benson, Kendall and Co."

100PERSONAL ACTIVITY OF OLD ENEMIES—BOGGS et al.

Ex-Governor Boggs, of Missouri, was also still a factor in "Mormon" affairs at the national capital. Before his departure for California he was much in evidence at Washington, and was known there as a bitter enemy of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. Colonel Kane, while in conversation with Brigham Young, on the 7th of August, 1846, informed the church leader that Governor Boggs had been working against the "Mormons" in Washington. [^22] Also the church leaders heard of the efforts of ex-Governor Boggs' friends to have him appointed governor of California, and this formed the subject of the 5th resolution in the series contained in the letter to President Polk, in which the church leaders voiced their unalterable determination to oppose his appointment, and solicited the attention of President Polk to this matter which might concern the future prosperity and welfare of the newly acquired territory. [^23]

101It is alleged also that Thomas H. Benton, senator from Missouri, was a determined enemy of the church, and one who planned for its utter destruction. [^24] It will be remembered that as far back as February, 1844, the church authorities at Nauvoo had been informed from what they regarded as "a respectable source," that "an understanding" existed between Senator Benton and Martin Van Buren—the latter still thought of as an available presidential candidate in some quarters—that amounted to "a conditional compact entered into; that if Mr. Benton will use his influence to get Mr. Van Buren elected, that Mr. Van Buren when elected shall use his executive influence to wipe away the stain from Missouri, by a further persecution of the "Mormons," and wreaking out vengeance on their heads, either by extermination, or by some other summary process." [^25]

It is therefore not surprising that the exiled saints should believe in a combination between their enemies and those high in authority in the government. The opposition of these men to the church can readily be accounted for on the ground that the vindication of the Latter-day Saints as a loyal and patriotic people, an honest and virtuous community, meant the condemnation of Missouri before the bar of public opinion and of history, for the course she had pursued in issuing her "orders of extermination," by which fifteen thousand of the saints after being robbed of their possessions were driven forth from the state into exile. Moreover, as we have seen, Governor Ford in his History of Illinois declares that with a view to hasten the departure of the church leaders from Illinois, as he himself confesses, they were made to believe that the president of the United States "would order the regular army to Nauvoo as soon as the navigation opened in the spring," in order—according to Ford's pretending—"to make arrests for alleged cases of counterfeiting the money of the United States, [^26] and prevent the saints from going west of the Rocky Mountains."

Also it must be remembered that it was asserted that the only terms upon which the saints would be allowed to depart from the United States in peace, was by signing the contract drawn up by ex-Postmaster-General, Amos Kendall, assigning to a powerful coterie of politicians in Washington, under the name of "A. G. Benson and Co.," one-half the lands on which they should settle; otherwise, it was threatened, they would be disarmed and dispersed by proclamation of the president of the United States; in which condition, of course, they would be a prey to their enemies. All these intrigues and pretensions of politicians, and these false threats combined, led the "Mormon" people, very naturally, to be suspicious of the action of the government of the United States; and it was these several circumstances here detailed, that caused the consternation at Mount Pisgah, and the cry—"The United States troops are upon us!"—when Captain Allen and his three dragoons suddenly rode into the camp to propose the enlistment of volunteers in the service of the United States. [^27]

103It is true—beyond all doubt, it is true—that very wild and reckless threats were made by the fierce and powerful enemies of the saints; and it may be true that they sought to turn this battalion incident to the disadvantage of the church, by representing that the "Mormons" would not respond to a call for volunteers, and in that event would be considered worthy of execration and should be halted, disarmed, and dispersed.

103All this is within probability; and that it was true, became a fixed conviction in the minds of a number of leading men of the church when established in Utah. It may be safely assumed that whatever was said at Washington lost nothing of bitterness as it passed into current, mouth to mouth discussion; but grew, rather, into reckless denunciation and murderous threats. Rumor also confounded in responsibility what was said, by the administration of the government at Washington, with what was said by the individual enemies of the church. It is therefore matter of small wonder, I repeat, if in every case proper distinction was not made between the inveterate, individual enemies of the church, and the responsible members of the government in the administration of James K. Polk.

Footnotes

Respectively,

[Signed] "Elton A. Gongwer, Auditor."

It has often been said that the battalion received a special bounty for enlisting (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 243, also Utah and the Mormons Ferris, 1854, p. 155). It is evident that the year's allowance for clothing, paid in advance, has been mistaken for a bounty.

Captain, $50.00 per month—rations 20 cents per day.

1st Lieutenant, $30.00 per month—rations 20 cents per day.

2nd Lieutenant, $25.00 per month—rations 20 cents per day.

1st Sergeant, $16.00 per month.

Sergeants, $13.00 per month.

Corporals, $9.00 per month.

Musicians $8.00 per month.

Privates, $7.00 per month."

(Letter of Elton A. Gongue, auditor of war department, United States of America, to the Author, January 3rd, 1912.)

The letter of Governor Ford relating to the employment of federal troops to arrest the church leaders will be found complete in chapter lxix, this History. Reference to it will disclose the fact that Governor Ford's invention on that occasion went to the matter of preventing the saints going west of the Rocky Mountains as well as the arrest of their leaders for alleged offenses of counterfeiting.

---
Notas:
[^1] The full title of the book is A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War, 1846-7, Sergeant Daniel Tyler. Bancroft referring to it in his History of Utah, says that in Tyler's History of the Battalion— "We have a most valuable book, and one that forms the leading authority on the subject. * * * And no doubt he [the author] speaks the truth when he says in the preface that neither labor, pains, nor expense has been spared in the effort to make this a just and authentic history." (History of Utah. p. 245, note). Referring again to this book in his History of California, Bancroft quotes Tyler as saying: "The author has not aimed at sensational effect, nor made any attempt at literary embellishment, but rather endeavored to offer a plain statement of facts, and give due credit to all concerned." To which the same writer adds—"and the result shows that no better man could have undertaken the task. Naturally his narrative is marked by that display of faith which is characteristic of all religious writers, but this while it adds a charm, detracts in no respect from the value of the record" (History of California, vol. v. p. 477, note). The book by Sergeant Tyler as a history of the march of the battalion is worthy of all that is here said of it; though in relating the battalion to larger movements connected therewith, it in some respects falls below its general excellence.
[^2] Thus died Lieutenant Colonel Allen, of the first United States dragoons in the midst of a career of usefulness, under the favoring smiles of fortune, beloved while living, regretted after death by all who knew him, both among the volunteers and troops." (Doniphan's Expedition, Hughes, p. 259.) For Allen's testimony as to his treatment among the "Mormon" camps, etc., see Note, end of chapter.
[^3] President Young's letters to General Kearney, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 216-7; also Ibid, p. 387.
[^4] This was Colonel, afterwards General, Sterling Price, of Chariton county, Missouri. He will be remembered as one who was connected with the mob movements against the saints in Missouri, 1838-9. He it was who had charge of the Prophet Joseph Smith and fellow prisoners at Richmond, Mo., and under whose custody they suffered so much abuse. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 208 and note; and Introduction to the same, p. ii).
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 211-12. The movements of the battalion in this compilation, History of Brigham Young, Ms., are recorded by the church historians. See also Tyler's Battalion, pp. 143-4.
[^6] Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 135.
[^7] The church of Christ in the New Dispensation revived the neglected and all but forgotten doctrine of healing by faith—"Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick and God shall raise him up." (St. James, v. 14, 15). And to this it was added, in the modern revelation reinstating the above law—"and whosoever among you are sick and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlii:52). President Young also in a letter to the battalion, under date of August 19, 1846, had given a word of counsel in harmony with the foregoing principles: "If you are sick, live by faith, and let surgeon's medicine alone if you want to live, using only such herbs and mild food as are at your disposal." (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 146). Dr. Sanderson had no sympathy with all this, of course, hence the conflict between the men and the physician.
[^8] Colonel Doniphan had come to Santa Fe with Kearney, commanding the first Missouri regiment; and after the departure of the general for California, he was left in command at Santa Fe until the arrival of Colonel Sterling Price, when he was under orders to march to Chihuahua and report to General Wool; while Price was to take command at Santa Fe, (Doniphan's Expedition, Connelley, 1907, pp. 250-1-3). The historian of the Mormon Battalion notes that the command of Colonel Price, numbering about 1,200 men, received no such marked honor on their arrival in Santa Fe as was accorded to the battalion. (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 164).
[^9] See this History, ante, ch. xxxv.
[^10] The colonel was born in Virginia in 1809. Graduated from West Point in 1827; was in the Black Hawk War in Illinois, 1832, and at the Battle of Bad Ax fought in July of that year. In 1833 he was made a lieutenant; saw service on the plains principally in what is now Kansas before the Mexican War; in this war he took a prominent part in the affairs at Santa Fe and marched the Mormon Battalion to California. "During the fifties in the border troubles in Kansas he saw much service; in the Civil War he was for the Union. He was retired in 1873, having served in the army continuously for forty-six years. He died March 20, 1895." (Doniphan's Expedition, p. 264).
[^11] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 384.
[^12] Letter of Brigham Young and Willard Richards to Elders Hyde, Pratt, and Taylor, Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 99.
[^13] Ibid; also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 424. These agents, John D. Lee and Howard Egan, had been unwarrantably meddlesome in the affairs of the battalion at Santa Fe, just as they were now unwarranted in giving Captain Thompson encouragement to hope that he could displace the commander appointed by General Kearney. The attempted interference of the above named agents with battalion affairs at Santa Fe was sharply resented by Captain Hunt, as appears from two letters to President Brigham Young, signed by Captain Jefferson Hunt, Company A, and J. D. Hunter, captain of Company B, making report of Lee's deportment. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 479-482). Lee himself mentions these matters. (Mormonism Unveiled, Confessions, ch. xvi).
[^14] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 387; Tyler fails to relate this consultation of officers, and these provisions so much to the advantage of the battalion.
[^15] During the inspection to designate the invalids to be marched to Pueblo (October 15th), Dr. Sanderson after naming about thirty "discharged them without pay or means to procure conveyance to the states" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 389); whereupon the matter being reported to Colonel Doniphan, that officer "went to Colonel Cooke and countermanded the order, saying that General Kearney would never discharge a man under such circumstances, and ordered the men to be sent to Pueblo with the laundresses and others ordered there, and to draw pay for the time of their enlistment. He said it the president of the United States wished to discharge them he might when he learned their situation. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 391-2).
[^16] Cooke's Conquest of New Mexico and California, pp. 91-2; also Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 174.
[^17] Later, Colonel Cooke again complains of his teams, in the following passage: "I have brought road tools and have determined to take through my wagons; but the experiment is not a fair one, as the mules are broken down at the outset. The only good ones, about twenty, which I bought near Albuquerque, were taken for the express for Fremont's mail—the general's order requiring the twenty-one best in Santa Fe." (Cooke's Conquest, p. 93). To this Sergeant Tyler adds: "It is but justice to the colonel [Cooke] to state here that with few exceptions, the mule and ox teams used from Santa Fe to California were the same worn-out and broken-down animals that we had driven all the way from Council Bluffs and Fort Leavenworth: indeed, some of them had been driven all the way from Nauvoo, the same season." (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 175).
[^18] Conquest of New Mexico and California, an historical and personal narrative by P. St. George Cooke, G. P. Putnam and Sons, N. Y., 1878, pp. 91-2.
[^19] Lieutenants Smith and Stoneman were both graduates of West Point and afterwards distinguished themselves in the war between the states. Cooke states that A. J. Smith afterwards "became a very distinguished major general." (Conquest of New Mexico and California, p. 90, and note).
[^20] Gully had taken sides with the men in their controversies with the commanding officer, Lieutenant Smith, with Dr. Sanderson, and Adjutant Geo. P. Dykes; and as he had incurred the displeasure of the non-"Mormon" officers, it was thought best that he resign. He returned to Council Bluffs this same fall, and started for Salt Lake valley the next year, but died en route. (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 175).
[^22] Tyler's Battalion, p. 206.
[^23] Tyler's Battalion, pp. 206-7.
[^24] Tyler speaks of one fight between Dr. William Spencer and a bull which was shot five times, twice through the lungs, twice through the heart, and once through the head, and yet would alternately rise and fall and rush upon the Doctor until a sixth ball between the eyes, and near the curl of the pate, proved fatal. (Tyler's Battalion, pp. 219, 220). "Twice through the heart!" Colonel Cooke confirms Tyler's narrative and adds: "I have seen the heart" (Cooke's Conquest, pp. 145-6). Cooke also relates the feat of Corporal Frost in bringing down one of these ferocious animals: "I was very near Corporal Frost, when an immense coal-black bull came charging upon us, a hundred yards distant. Frost aimed his musket, a flintlock, very deliberately, and only fired when the beast was within six paces; it fell headlong, almost at our feet." (Cooke's Conquest, pp. 145-6). Tyler adds: "The corporal was on foot, while, of course, the colonel and staff were mounted. On the first appearance of the bull, the colonel, with his usual firm manner of speech, ordered the corporal to load his gun supposing, of course, that he had observed the previous order of prohibition. To this command he (the corporal) paid no attention. Thinking him either stupefied or dumbfounded, with much warmth and a foul epithet he next ordered him to run, but this mandate was as little heeded as the other. Doubtless Cooke thought one man's 'ignorance with some stubbornness' was about to receive a terrible retribution, but when he saw the monster [bull] lifeless at his feet, through well-directed aim of the brave and fearless corporal, how changed must have been his feelings!" (Tyler's Battalion, p. 219).
[^25] Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, pp. 224-5.
[^26] Cooke's Conquest, p. 149.
[^27] Cooke's Conquest, p. 151; also Tyler's Battalion, pp. 228-330.
