B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

104CHAPTER LXXV

104THE MARCH OF THE MORMON BATTALION

104IT is not intended here to give a history of the march of the Mormon Battalion, except in a very general outline. The history of that march has been very worthily written by one of its members, Sergeant Daniel Tyler of Company C, who in addition to being a member of the battalion, also had full access to every source of information to be found in the journals of his comrades and the compilation of data on the subject made by the historians of the church. [^1] Also Colonel Cooke's account of the march, as published in The Conquest of Mexico, since he often refers to it.

THE BATTALION AT FORT LEAVENWORTH

At Fort Leavenworth the battalion received its equipment of 100 tents, one for every 6 privates; also their arms and camp accoutrements. When drawing the checks for clothing, paid one year in advance, the paymaster expressed great surprise to find that every man was able to sign his own name to the pay roll, whereas of the Missouri volunteers, who drew their pay but a short time previously, not more than one in three could sign his name to the roll.

105At Fort Leavenworth Lieutenant Colonel Allen (he became lieutenant colonel on raising the battalion) was taken ill, and on the 12th of August ordered the battalion to start on its western march, while he would remain a few days, recuperate and overtake it. He died on the 23rd, much lamented by the battalion, which had become warmly attached to him. [^2]

A QUESTION OF COMMAND

On Allen's death the question of succession in command was considered. It appears that this subject was mooted at the time the companies of the battalion were enlisted; and "Colonel Allen repeatedly stated to us," says Brigham Young, "that there would be no officer in the battalion, except himself, only from among our people; that if he fell in battle, or was sick, or disabled by any means, the command would devolve on the ranking officer, which would be the captain of Company A and B, and so on according to letter." [^3] The battalion appears to have had the same understanding, for at a council meeting of the officers it was agreed by them that Captain Jefferson Hunt, of Company A, should assume command, which decision was afterwards sustained by the unanimous vote of the men. Meantime, however, Major Horton, in command at Fort Leavenworth, sent Lieutenant A. J. Smith, of the regular army, to take command of the battalion. This led to a threatened complication; for an appeal to such written military authorities as were available to the officers of the battalion, left them hopelessly divided in their conclusions. On the arrival of Lieutenant Smith a council was held in which the battalion officers demanded to know what reasons existed for their acceptance of him as commander rather than Captain Hunt, commander of Company A. To which it was answered that the government property in possession of the battalion was not yet receipted for, but that Lieutenant Smith could receipt for it, and being a commissioned officer of the regular army, he would be known at Washington, and his actions and orders recognized; whereas the officers of the battalion had not yet received their commissions, and it would be doubtful if their selection of a commander would be approved. Moreover, the battalion would be in part dependent upon the supplies carried by the command of Colonel Sterling Price, [^4] who was a few days' march ahead of them with the mounted volunteers of Missouri. Enemy as he was known to be of the "Mormons," might not the provisions fall into other hands? Captain Hunt called the attention of Lieutenant Smith to the fact that they had about twelve or fifteen families along and that certain promises had been made by Colonel Allen with reference to them, that they should be protected, and have the privilege of traveling with the battalion to California. The lieutenant replied that all the promises which Colonel Allen had made would be faithfully carried out, and that he would do all in his power for their comfort.

106After this discussion Captain Hunt submitted the matter to the officers, and all but three voted in favor of accepting Lieutenant Smith as the commander of the battalion. [^5]

LIEUTENANT SMITH AND DR. SANDERSON

With Lieutenant Smith had come Dr. George B. Sanderson, whom Colonel Allen, at Leavenworth, had appointed a surgeon in the United States army, to serve with the Mormon Battalion. [^6] According to the historian of the battalion, the volunteers suffered much because of the "arrogance, inefficiency, and petty oppressions" of these two officers, much of which, however, is to be accounted for by the volunteers being suddenly brought under the enforced discipline of the United States army regulations. The heat of the season was excessive, the men were much exhausted by the strenuous labors and exposure during the journey through Iowa, earlier in the season, and as a result many of them fell a prey to the malaria prevalent at this season of the year in the country through which they passed. For this Dr. Sanderson prescribed calomel and arsenic, and as the men were averse to taking medicines, pleading even religious scruples against the drugs, [^7] the matter gave rise to much unpleasantness between the battalion physician and the command, involving therein Lieutenant Smith, who in the interest of what he no doubt regarded as discipline sided with the physician.

ROUTE OF THE MARCH

The battalion's line of march, after crossing the Kaw or Kansas river, followed that of the first Missouri Dragoons, led by Colonel A. W. Doniphan, via Council Grove, thence some distance up the Arkansas river to a little beyond Fort Mann, where they crossed it in order to take what was known as the "Cimarron Route"—because it crossed Cimarron river and followed some distance up the south branch of that stream, called Cimarron Creek. The last crossing of the Arkansas they reached on the 16th of September, and here the commanding officer insisted that the families not specifically enrolled as part of the battalion but which had so far accompanied it should be detached and sent under a guard of ten men up the Arkansas to Pueblo, which nestles at the east base of the Rocky Mountain range. There were stout protests against this "division of the battalion;" as it was held to be a violation of the "promise" that the battalion would not be divided, also that these families should be permitted to travel with the battalion to California. Unquestionably, however, the arrangement was in the best interests both of the families and of the battalion, and accordingly the detachment was made up as proposed and marched to Pueblo under command of Captain Nelson Higgins.

108The main body of the command continued its march southwesterly to San Miguel, thence turning the point of a mountain range marched northwesterly to Santa Fe, where they arrived in two detachments on the 9th and 12th of October, respectively. Upon its arrival the first detachment of the battalion was received by a salute of one hundred guns by order of Colonel Doniphan, [^8] then in command both as civil and military head of the department of New Mexico; but making ready for what was to be his great and historic march upon Chihuahua. Colonel Doniphan will be remembered as the steadfast friend of Joseph Smith and the "Mormon" people during their troubles in Missouri. [^9]

THE BATTALION AT SANTA FE

On the arrival of the battalion at Sante Fe it was learned that General Kearney, previous to his departure for California, had designated Lieutenant Colonel P. St. George Cooke [^10] to take command of the battalion and to follow on his trail with wagons to California. The appointment of Colonel Cooke to the command of the battalion was another disappointment to the "Mormon" volunteers, who hoped that they would have marched from Santa Fe under command of one of their own number, which would have been in harmony with the promise of Colonel Allen when discussing the succession in command of the battalion in the event of his own death. It is questionable, however, if Allen had any right to make such a promise. President Young had written a very courteous letter to General Kearney, at Santa Fe, acquainting him with the promises made by Colonel Allen at the time of the enlistment of the "Mormon" volunteers; [^11] but Kearney had left Santa Fe before it arrived; and hence Cooke was appointed to the command; and in all likelihood Kearney would not have held himself bound by Allen's promises, even had he been informed of them. It appears also that the officers of the battalion wrote President Polk in relation to the appointment of a successor to Colonel Allen. "The president informed them that was not his privilege," says Brigham Young, "that the command devolved on the rank [i. e. on the ranking officer in the battalion]; but inasmuch as they had made the request he dispatched Captain Thompson from the Jefferson barracks to take command if the battalion wished it." [^12] Captain Thompson was met en route to Santa Fe by the agents of the Camp of Israel returning from that place to Council Bluffs with the checks paid to the battalion at Santa Fe. Captain Thompson informed them of his appointment and they encouraged him to go on as they were favorably impressed with the captain, and were of the opinion that the battalion would be benefited by the change, "and the choice," said the agents, "would be with the battalion and not with the officers alone." [^13] Evidently Captain Thompson did not reach Santa Fe until after the departure of the battalion, and nothing came of his appointment.

110At a council of officers of the battalion with Colonels Doniphan and Cooke, these two officers "proffered to send all the sick, together with the remaining women and children belonging to the battalion, to Pueblo to winter, with an escort, and with the privilege in the spring of intersecting the main body of the church, and going westward with them at government expense, which was considered a fair and liberal proposal, as neither the sick, nor the women and children could stand the fatigue and exposures of the prospective journey." [^14]

Accordingly eighty-six men were invalided, [^15] and under two officers (Captain Brown and Lieutenant Luddington) were detached from the main body of the command, and together with all the laundresses and all the wives of members of the battalion (except the wives of five of the officers, who were reluctantly allowed to accompany the march—but with the understanding that they would furnish their own transportation) [^16] were conducted to Pueblo, a distance of nearly two hundred miles, where they arrived on the 17th of November and went into winter quarters near the encampment of Captain Higgins, who had preceded them to that point.

111Speaking of the battalion in general, and particularly of its unfitness to undertake a march from Santa Fe to California, Colonel Cooke says:

111"Everything conspired to discourage the extraordinary undertaking of marching this battalion eleven hundred miles, for the much greater part through an unknown wilderness, without road or trail, and with a wagon train.

111It was enlisted too much by families; some were too old and feeble, and some too young; it was embarrassed by many women; it was undisciplined; it was much worn by traveling on foot, and marching from Nauvoo, Illinois; their clothing was very scant; there was no money to pay them, or clothing to issue; their mules were utterly broken down; the quartermaster's department was without funds, and its credit bad; and animals were scarce. Those procured were very inferior, and were deteriorating every hour for lack of forage or grazing. [^17] * * * By special arrangement and consent, the battalion was paid in checks—not very available at Santa Fe.

With every effort, the quartermaster could only undertake to furnish rations for sixty days; and, in fact, full rations, of only flour, sugar, coffee and salt; salt pork only for thirty days, and soap for twenty. To venture without packsaddles would be grossly imprudent, and so that burden was added." [^18]

112

BATTALION'S DEPARTURE FROM SANTA FE

The battalion began its march from Santa Fe on the 19th of October, Colonel Cooke in command. Lieutenant A. J. Smith, who had led the battalion to Santa Fe, became the acting commissary of subsistence, and Lieutenant George Stoneman, [^19] acting quartermaster, instead of Lieutenant Samuel E. Gully, who had resigned. [^20] Both Smith and Stoneman were of the regular army. Dr. Sanderson was continued as physician-surgeon to the command. The guides to the expedition were Weaver, Charboneaux, and Leroux, and Stephen C. Foster, called "Doctor" in all the narratives, was employed as interpreter.

The course of march for some time was southward down the valley of the Rio Grande. On the 10th of November, fifty-five more men were declared physically unable through sickness to continue the march, and accordingly were detached, and under Lieutenant W. W. Willis were ordered back to Pueblo to join the other detachments that had been sent there. After much suffering from the hardships of the journey—weak teams, scant supplies of food, illy clad, general sickness among the men, the fall of December snows in the mountain ranges north of Sante Fe, excessive cold, and several deaths occurring, this detachment finally arrived at Pueblo between the 20th and 24th of December, in a most pitiable condition; but they were warmly received by members of the battalion already quartered there, [^21] numbering, now, all told, about one hundred and fifty.

113"BLOW THE RIGHT"—"GOD BLESS THE COLONEL!"

113As the command in its southward movement down the Rio Grande reached the point where General Kearney left the valley for a direct march westward—228 miles south of Santa Fe—and where, too, Kearney had abandoned his wagons, the guides declared it impossible to follow the Gila route proper with the wagons; and hence a circuit to the south through Sonora via Janos and Fronteras was proposed and determined upon at a council of officers.

113In the first stages of this changed course, however, the road bore to the southeast, and this was not to the liking of either the battalion or its commander. It was not to the liking of the latter, because it possibly would carry his command within hailing distance of General Wool, who might incorporate it in the Army of the Center,—as that general's division of the invading forces against Mexico was called—to operate against Chihuahua. In that event, as the colonel himself expressed it, he would lose his trip to California. To bear to the southeast was not to the liking of the battalion, as that was not in the direction of California, but away from it, and they would find themselves discharged in Old Mexico instead of California, at the end of their term of enlistment. The entire command was thrown into gloom by this change in the line of march: "All of our hopes, conversation and songs," says the historian of the battalion, "were centered on California. Somewhere on that broad domain we expected to join our families and friends." [^22]

In this crisis of the battalion's experience, giving the date as the 20th of November, Sergeant Tyler records the following:

114"In this critical moment, Brother David Pettegrew, better known as 'Father Pettegrew,' owing to his silver locks and fatherly counsels, and Brother Levi W. Hancock, went from tent to tent, and in a low tone of voice counseled the men to pray to the Lord to change the colonel's mind. Then they invited a few to accompany them to a secret place where they could offer up their petitions and not be seen by those in camp. That night over three hundred fervent prayers ascended to the throne of grace for that one favor. * * *

114On the morning of the 21st, the command resumed its journey, marching in a southern direction for about two miles, when it was found that the road began to bear southeast instead of southwest, as stated by the guides. The colonel looked in the direction of the road, then to the southwest, saying: 'I don't want to get under General Wool, and lose my trip to California.' He arose in his saddle and ordered a halt. He then said with firmness: 'This is not my course. I was ordered to California, and,' he added with an oath, 'I will go there or die in the attempt!' Then turning to the bugler, he said, 'Blow the right.'

114At this juncture 'Father Pettegrew' involuntarily exclaimed, 'God bless the colonel!' The colonel's head turned and his keen, penetrating eyes glanced around to discern whence the voice came, and then his grave, stern face, for once, softened and showed signs of satisfaction." [^23]

THE FIGHT WITH WILD BULLS

Turning westward at this point, 32 41' north latitude, and but a short distance north of the present city of El Paso, the course of march was westward to San Bernadino rancho, thence to Yanos and so to the San Pedro river where the command arrived on the 9th of December. Here occurred the only fighting the battalion engaged in on its expedition, a battle with wild bulls. This section of the country seemed to abound with herds of wild cattle, and the males among them were much more bold and ferocious than among the buffalos. Attracted by curiosity these herds gathered along the line of march, alternately scampering away and approaching; and some of the bolder ones, as if in resentment of the battalion's invasion, attacked the column. Several mules were gored to death by them, both in the teams and among the pack animals; and Colonel Cooke records how some of the wagons were thrown about by the mad charge of these furious beasts. The troops had been ordered to march with guns unloaded, but in the presence of such a danger the men loaded their muskets without waiting for an order to that effect, and when attacked would fire upon the charging beasts, so that the rattle of musketry was for once heard all along the line. The bulls were very tenacious of life, however, and more desperate and dangerous when wounded than before. [^24] The number of the wild bovine enemy killed in the engagement is variously reported as from twenty to sixty, and by one writer as high as eighty-one.

Leaving the San Pedro the command marched north-easterly to Tucson, a Mexican town of between four and five hundred inhabitants. It was garrisoned at the time by a Mexican force two hundred strong, according to Cooke, commanded by Captain Comaduran, who was under order from the Governor of Sonora, Don Manuel Gandara, not to allow an armed force to pass through the town without resistance. The guides furnished the battalion by General Kearney, however, declared it was for the command either to march through Tucson, or make a detour which would mean a hundred miles out of the way over a trackless wilderness and mountains.

BEFORE TUCSON

Colonel Cooke determined to march through Tucson, and issued the following characteristic order:

116"Head Quarters Mormon Battalion,

116Camp on the San Pedro,

116December 13th, 1846.

116Thus far on our course we have followed the guides furnished us by the general (Kearney). These guides now point to Tucson, a garrison town, as our road, and assert that any other course is a hundred miles out of the way and over a trackless wilderness of mountains, rivers and hills. We will march, then, to Tucson. We came not to make war on Sonora, and less still to destroy an important outpost of defense against Indians; but we will take the straight road before us, and overcome all resistance. But shall I remind you that the American soldier ever shows justice and kindness to the unarmed and unresisting? The property of individuals you will hold sacred. The people of Sonora are not our enemies.

116By order of

116Lieutenant Colonel Cooke,

116[Signed] "P. C. Merrill,"

116Adjutant." [^25]

Foster, the interpreter, went into the town in advance and was put under guard; a corporal, the son of the Mexican commander, with three Mexican soldiers was met by the command and questioned about Foster, and on admitting that he was under guard, the corporal and his escort were immediately placed under arrest by Colonel Cooke, to be held as hostages for the safety of the interpreter. One Mexican, however, was released, who with two of the battalion guides carried a note demanding Foster's release. This was complied with, and about midnight Foster was brought into camp, attended by two officers authorized "to make a special armistice." Colonel Cooke proposed that the Mexican command deliver up a few arms as a guarantee of surrender, and a token that the inhabitants of Tucson would not fight against the United States unless they were exchanged as prisoners of war; the Mexican prisoners were also released. [^26] These events occurred while the battalion was about sixteen miles from Tucson.

117The next day, when on the march, Cooke received a message from Captain Comaduran declining the proposition to surrender. The battalion were ordered to load their guns with ball. Before reaching the town, however, another message was received saying that the garrison had retreated taking two brass cannons and forcing most of the inhabitants to accompany them. About a dozen armed Mexicans met the American force to escort them into the town. Before passing through the gates, the commander of the battalion addressed the soldiers, saying, in effect, that the garrison and citizens had fled leaving their property behind; but they had not come to make war upon Sonora, and there must be no interference with the private property of the citizens. The battalion marched through Tucson and went into camp about half a mile beyond the town on a small stream.

117Before leaving the vicinity Cooke, with a party of fifty, reconnoitered the country above the town towards a village and church, where, it was supposed, the garrison and main body of the people had taken refuge. As the nature of the country, however, afforded excellent opportunities for ambush, if the Mexicans should choose to make resistance, the company of fifty returned. However, the movement was not without its value since, according to Colonel Cooke, and as was afterwards ascertained, it caused the Mexicans who had fled to the aforesaid village to still further retreat, and the reinforcements which had come from the presidios of Fronteras, Santa Cruz and Tubac, to return to their posts. [^27]

ARRIVAL AT THE GILA

Renewing its journey the command in the course of three days, by hard marching, reached the Gila river and intersected the route followed by General Kearney, 474 miles from the point at which they left it in the valley of the Rio Grande. [^28]

118The battalion was now among the Pima and Maricopa Indian villages, and found them a rather superior people, inhabiting a fertile country. While passing through their settlements Colonel Cooke took occasion to suggest to Captain Jefferson Hunt that this might be a good place for the settlement of the exiled "Mormons," to which Hunt assented and asked permission to talk to the Pima chief on the subject, and the colonel approved of his doing so. [^29] Tyler says that "a proposition for the settlement of the saints among them was favorably received by the Indians. [^30] This fertile region, however, was not destined to receive the exiled saints, but strangely enough, both in the valley of the San Pedro and of the Gila, and upon lands formerly occupied by the Pima and Maricopa Indians, through which lands the battalion marched, many and populous and prosperous settlements have been founded by the Church of the Latter-day Saints, grouped now into two flourishing stakes of Zion—the outcome, doubtless, of this march of the battalion through that region, and the knowledge they then obtained of the desirability of that country for habitation. [^31]

119Following more or less the windings of the Gila, the way made difficult from alternating stretches of deep sand and miry clay, the command arrived at the mouth of that river on the 8th of January, and on the 9th crossed the Colorado, into which it empties, and continued the march under great difficulties—teams weak and worn out, men on very scant rations and constantly being reduced, and all but naked withal, suffering alternately from heat and cold, "from a tropical sun in the day time to a December cold atmosphere at night— * * * very hurtful and weakening both to man and beast." [^32] At last, however, the coast range of mountains was crossed and the battalion descended the Pacific slope to the town of San Diego, and went into encampment on 29th of January, 1847. "Our camp," says Sergeant Tyler, "was located a mile below the Catholic Mission and some four or five miles from the seaport town of San Diego, where General Kearney was quartered. The colonel [Cooke] rode down in the evening and reported to the general. [^33]

119On the 30th of January the following Bulletin was written by the lieutenant colonel commanding, though not read to the battalion until the 4th of February. It tells in studied, military brevity the achievements and faithfulness of the battalion; its service to the country and is an imperishable monument in the literature of the nation and of the church, which this battalion represented in the splendid march from the Missouri to the Pacific Ocean—a march of infantry of more than two thousand miles. Read the epitome of the history of the march of the battalion in the Bulletin of its commander:

OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE BATTALION'S ARRIVAL ON THE PACIFIC COAST

"Head Quarters Mormon Battalion,

119Mission of San Diego,

119January 30, 1847.

119(Orders No. 1).

The lieutenant colonel commanding, congratulates the battalion on their safe arrival on the shore of the Pacific Ocean, and the conclusion of their march of over two thousand miles.

120History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry. Half of it has been through a wilderness, where nothing but savages and wild beasts are found, or deserts where, for want of water, there is no living creature. There, with almost hopeless labor, we have dug deep wells, which the future traveler will enjoy. Without a guide who had traversed them we have ventured into trackless tablelands where water was not found for several marches. With crowbar and pick and axe in hand, we have worked our way over mountains, which seemed to defy aught save the wild goat, and hewed a pass through a chasm of living rock more narrow than our wagons. To bring these first wagons to the Pacific, we have preserved the strength of our mules by herding them over large tracts, which you have laboriously guarded without loss. The garrison of four presidios of Sonora concentrated within the walls of Tucson, gave us no pause. We drove them out, with their artillery, but our intercourse with the citizens was unmarked by a single act of injustice. Thus, marching half naked and half fed, and living upon wild animals, we have discovered and made a road of great value to our country.

120Arrived at the first settlements of California, after a single day's rest, you cheerfully turned off from the route to this point of promised repose, to enter upon a campaign, and meet, as we supposed, the approach of an enemy; and this too, without even salt to season your sole subsistence of fresh meat.

120Lieutenants A. J. Smith and George Stoneman, of the first dragoons, have shared and given invaluable aid in all these labors.

120Thus volunteers, you have exhibited some high and essential qualities of veterans. But much remains undone. Soon, you will turn your attention to the drill, to system and order, to forms also, which are all necessary to the soldier.

120By order

120[Signed] "Lieutenant Colonel P. St. George Cooke,"

120"P. C. Merrill, Adjutant." [^34]

120Small wonder, though the reading of this Bulletin to the battalion was unaccountably delayed, that the "Mormon" volunteers received this official announcement of their achievements with cheers. [^35]

NOTE

COLONEL ALLEN ON HIS TREATMENT WHILE IN THE CAMPS OF ISRAEL—CHARACTER OF THE "MORMON" PEOPLE

The appreciation of Captain Allen of the Latter-day Saints, and their treatment of him was expressed in the following letter to Colonel Jesse C. Little, then about to depart for the states:

121"Headquarters, Mormon Battalion,

121Council Bluffs, July 20th, 1846.

121Dear Sir—Colonel Kane has informed me of your intended departure for the east, and of your desire that I would express to you my opinion concerning the character of the Mormon people, as derived from my observation among them on my present duties.

121I have been intimately associated with this people since the 26th ult., as my duty required in raising the battalion of volunteers now under my command.

121In the hurry of business connected with my immediate march from this place I have only time to say, that in all of my intercourse with the Mormons I have found them civil, polite and honest as a people. There appears to be much intelligence among them, and particularly with their principal men or leaders, to whom I feel much indebted for their active and zealous exertions to raise the volunteer force that I was authorized to ask for, for the service of the United States.

121The president of the council, Mr. Brigham Young, is entitled to my particular thanks, all of this people are entirely patriotic, and they have come not only with cheerfulness, but under circumstances of great difficulty, to them, to enlist themselves in the services of their country.

121In my official report to the war department, which I shall make on my arrival at Fort Leavenworth, I will speak more fully of the community of the Mormon people or Mormon church, and will here say to you that I think them as a community, and in their circumstances, deserving of a high consideration from our government.

121Very respectively, your obedient servant,

121[Signed] "J. Allen,"

121To J. C. Little, Esq., Lieutenant Colonel Commanding Mormon Battalion." [^36]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The circular letter issued by Elders Hyde and Taylor immediately upon their arrival in England stated that they had been "appointed on a mission to visit the church in England by a special manifestation of the Spirit of God, through the council of the twelve apostles." (Millennial Star. vol. viii, p. 92). The editorial of the Star for October 15th, 1846, announcing this mission and signed by Orson Hyde, opens as follows: "During last winter, the council of the church in America under guidance of the Holy Spirit, deemed it necessary to send to you a number of fellow laborers in the gospel. * * * Since the above arrangements were made, and in some measure carried into effect, it hath pleased the Lord to direct the council by his Spirit to send unto you, in addition, a deputation of three of their own number, with instructions to regulate and set in order the various departments of the church."
[^2] When Elder Woodruff arrived in England in January, 1845, he took the two brethren who had been presiding in the mission, Reuben Hedlock and Thomas Ward, as his counselors (Millennial Star, vol. v, p. 142). And when he departed for America, as stated in the text, he reinstated these two in the presidency, and added Elder Banks as a counselor. With the interval of Woodruff's brief presidency, Hedlock had presided in the British Isles since 1843 (see Millennial Star for Feb. 1st, 1846, vol. vii, communication of Wilford Woodruff to the saints in the British Isles; also Elder Hedlock's statement, same number. See also ante this History, ch. lxvi). The reappointment of Hedlock seems not to have been satisfactory to the council of apostles in America (Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 120).
[^3] Letter of Brigham Young and Willard Richards to Hedlock, May 3rd, 1844, History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 351-4.
[^4] Letter of Thomas Ward to Brigham Young and the council of apostles, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 405-6.
[^5] "The deed of the company secures to us the privilege of trading as merchants between Great Britain and America, of hiring or purchasing ships, and of raising buildings wherein to manufacture the produce of those countries or either of them." (Editorial, Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 72).
[^6] "In partaking of the responsibilities of the presidency of the churches in the British Islands, we are desirous to discharge our duty faithfully, and we are equally so in the connection with the 'Joint Stock Company;' indeed, so far as we are concerned, we do not separate the two, for if we had not been fully persuaded that such an association would be of incalculable advantage to the church of God, we would never have incurred the responsibility of our connection with it." (Editorial in Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 72). Later, in an address over his own signature, Elder Hedlock declared the object in organizing the company to be "to promote the interests of the whole church, and at the same time repay the shareholders." (Ibid, p. 126).
[^7] The whole paragraph containing these instructions is admirable: "We would advise the saints, of whose rights and interests Providence has, to a certain extent, made us the guardians, to patronize 'Joint Stock Company' no more for the present. That is an institution wholly independent of the church, and we do not wish to see a religious influence enforced upon the saints to draw money from them, with the ostensible design of conveying them to another country, when indeed that money is applied to purposes other than those for which it was subscribed. There are two ways of transacting business—one is with prudence and economy, and another is with wasteful prodigality. At our conference, proper instructions will be given to the saints upon all these matters."
[^8] The fact of his leaving his station in the church in August was stated by Thomas Ward at a conference held in Clithero, August 30th. (Millennial Star, vol. viii, pp. 52-3.)
[^9] Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, p. 386. Life of John Taylor, p. 177; also minutes of a general conference of the church in England at Manchester, Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 120.
[^10] So satisfied were the twelve at the Camp of Israel in the wilderness of the irregularities of both Hedlock and Ward that they disfellowshipped both of them "until they shall appear before the council and make satisfaction for their repeated disregard of counsel." The official act bears date of July 16th, 1846. (See Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 103).
[^11] Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 111—notice.
[^12] March 4th, 1847. Dropsy and an affection of the liver is assigned as the cause of death. The notice of his demise is most sympathetic; and his one desire seems to have been to render full satisfaction to the presidency of the church in America. (Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 96.)
[^13] Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 22. For complete list of officers, Ibid, p. 11.
[^14] Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 11 and 22.
[^15] Elders Pratt and Taylor left for America on the 19th of January with a company of saints, but met contrary winds in the English channel against which they struggled for nine days without making more than fifty miles headway. The ship returned to port, and made a second start on the 7th of February, the date of the text.
[^16] After calling attention to the "unexampled amount of abject, helpless, and unmerited misery" prevailing among the laboring classes, the memorial then states:
[^17] See Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 74-5. An interesting correspondence appears in the same number of the Star, No. 5, between Hon. John Browning, M. P., for the burrough of Liverpool, and Elder Thomas D. Brown, upon the subject of the memorial. The signed memorial measured 168 feet in length and contained nearly 1,300 names. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 50).
[^18] Hero Worship, The Hero as King, Lecture vi.
[^19] Council Bluffs' population, July 1, 1928, was 42,300; Omaha's, 222,800. (World Almanac, 1929).
[^20] Reverend Dr. Morton, of Philadelphia.
[^21] From Kane's Lecture before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, The Mormons, 26th March, 1850, pp. 25-27.
[^22] The certificate is dated Aug. 19, 1846, Omaha country above Council Bluffs and signed by H. I. W. Edes, M. D., from Weston, Mo. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 172-3).
[^23] In his History Ms., bk. 2, p. 173, Brigham Young writes: "The certificate of Dr. Edes was procured from him by Colonel Kane in consequence of an apprehension on his part that if his sickness proved fatal, the 'Mormons' would be wrongfully charged by their enemies; and he subsequently stated that that was his only reason for sending to Leavenworth for a physician."
[^24] Colonel Kane, as previously stated (chapter lxx) called at this encampment, after he had visited Nauvoo while that city was still in the hands of the mob forces who had taken possession of it and thus described conditions as he found them: "Here, among the docks and rushes, sheltered only by the darkness, without roof between them and the sky, I came upon a crowd of several hundred human creatures, whom my movements roused from uneasy slumber upon the ground. * * * Dreadful indeed, was the suffering of these forsaken beings; bowed and cramped by cold and sunburn, alternating as each weary day and night dragged on, they were, almost all of them, the crippled victims of disease. They were there because they had no homes, nor hospitals, nor poor house, not friends to offer them any. They could not satisfy the feeble cravings of their sick; they had not bread to quiet the fractious hunger-cries of their children. Mothers and babes, daughters and grandparents, all of them alike, were bivouacked in tatters, wanting even covering to comfort those whom the sick shivers of fever were searching to the marrow. These were Mormons, famishing in Lee county, Iowa, in the fourth week of the month of September, in the year of our Lord 1846. * * * They were, all told, not more than six hundred and forty persons who were thus lying on the river flats. But the Mormons in Nauvoo and its dependencies had been numbered the year before at over twenty thousand." (Kane's lecture, The Mormons, pp. 8-10).
[^25] The quail incident occurred upon the 9th of October and is thus recorded in the History of Brigham Young, Ms.: "On the 9th of October, while our teams were waiting on the banks of the Mississippi for the poor saints, * * * left without any of the necessaries of life, * * * and nothing to start their journey with, the Lord sent flocks of quail, which lit upon their wagons and their empty tables, and upon the ground within their reach, which the saints, and even the sick caught with their hands until they were satisfied." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 382-3). This phenomenon extended some 30 or 40 miles along the river, and was generally observed. The quail in immense quantities had attempted to cross the river, but it being beyond their strength, had dropped into the river boats or on the bank. (Wells, in Utah Notes, Ms., 7. History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xviii, p. 107. Also letter of Brigham Young to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor, of Jan. 6th, 1847; Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 99).
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 98-9.
[^27] See Note (b), end of chapter for this document.
[^28] Kane's lecture The Mormons, p. 99.
[^29] See Kane's letter to Brigham Young, Note (e), end of chapter.
[^30] For the several documents in question see Note end of chapter.
[^31] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 231-233. In a letter to Major. Harvey somewhat later President Young said of this communication: "If the principles advanced by the war department in said communication are carried out, we shall be satisfied;" and quotes the part of the above letter which virtually amounts to a permission from the government to remain a reasonable length of time upon the Indian lands, and which was intended, doubtless, to be so interpreted by the president and the war department. (See letter of Medill of the Indian office to Judge J. K. Kane, Note (f), end of chapter).
[^32] See Medill's letter to Judge J. K. Kane in Note (f) end of this chapter.
[^33] "The whole Omaha nation are a poor, miserable, degraded race of beings, so far as we have any knowledge, and it would seem that they must soon come to an end, if they don't alter their course." (Letter of Brigham Young to Hyde, Pratt and Taylor, Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 98).
[^34] See copy of agreement, Note (g) end of chapter. The saints were much annoyed by the thievery practiced by the Omahas, however, and it was a matter of much complaint and of several formal conferences between the chiefs and the church leaders. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., for winter of 1846-7, passim.)
[^35] Kane's lecture The Mormons, p. 101.
[^36] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 238-240. The communication also calls attention to the fact that a small division of the "Mormon" people are camped some two or three hundred miles west of the Omaha villages on the north bottoms among the Puncas, "where similar feelings are manifested towards our people. Should your excellency consider the requests of the Indians for instruction reasonable, and signifying the same to us, we will give them all the information in mechanism and farming the nature of the case will admit, which will give us the opportunity of getting the assistance of their men to help us herd and labor, which we have much needed since the organization of the battalion." The communication bears date of September 7th, 1846.
