B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

122CHAPTER LXXVI

122AN APOSTOLIC MISSION SENT TO ENGLAND—"MORMON" CAMP LIFE ON THE MISSOURI—SAINTS' OCCUPANCY OF INDIAN LANDS

122THE Camp of Israel at Council Bluffs and vicinity again becomes the initial point of events to be chronicled.

122No sooner had the battalion taken its departure than an apostolic mission was designated and sent to England. Elders Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, and John Taylor constituted the mission, and left Council Bluffs on the 31st of July. A party of Presbyterian missionaries with their families were returning to St. Joseph from the Loupe Fork of the Platte river, where they had been laboring among the Pawnee Indians; and with these the three apostles took a working passage down the Missouri. This method of travel was quite common in those days on the western rivers. The flat boat was kept in the main channel of the stream by guide oars, and the speed increased beyond the movement of the current by rowing. At night the boat was tied up, an encampment made on the bank, and the journey renewed usually with the dawn of the next day.

THE ENGLISH MISSION AND THE BATTALION MEET

At St. Joseph the three apostles purchased the flat boat and continued their journey to Fort Leavenworth where they arrived about the time the Mormon Battalion was drawing the years' allowance for clothing. The battalion brethren generously contributed several hundred dollars to aid the apostles on their journey, and Elder Pratt volunteered to carry to the Camp of Israel at Council Bluffs the money the battalion desired to send to their families and to the church. Accordingly Elder Pratt returned through Missouri and Iowa on that business; while Elders Hyde and Taylor continued their journey eastward. They arrived in England on the 3rd of October, and Elder Pratt about ten days later.

REASONS FOR THE APOSTOLIC MISSION TO ENGLAND

The reason for sending this special mission to England grew out of certain impressions experienced by President Young and the council of apostles that all was not well with the church in that land, and that its affairs required the counsel and regulating hand of members of the apostles' quorum. [^1]

123When Elder Woodruff left England in the latter part of January, 1846, that he might participate with his fellow apostles in the exodus from the United States, Elder Reuben Hedlock was again appointed president of the church in the British Isles with Elder Thomas Ward and John Banks as his counselors. [^2]

For some years the supervision of the emigration of the saints from the British Isles to the body of the church in America had been an important duty of the presidency of the British Mission. In 1844 President Hedlock had been instructed to enlarge this business into a general emigration agency, opening "a general shipping office;" and was urged to "show the world" that he could "do a better and more honorable business than anybody else, and more of it." [^3] The British presidency enlarged their shipping agency accordingly, to include not only Latter-day Saints but all who were disposed to emigrate from the British Isles to America. At that time much encouragement was being given by the English government to emigration as a relief from trade and labor depression, and also from the famine that prevailed in Ireland. Elder Hedlock in this connection formed a partnership with a Mr. Hiram Shaw who had large interests in Ireland, and who, it was believed, would be able to give an impetus to the emigration business since it was chiefly from Ireland that emigration was encouraged as a means of relief from the famine. Elder Hedlock also formed business connections in the same line with what are called, in the correspondence upon the subject, "the rascally brokers of Liverpool;" and to this his associate, Thomas Ward, attributes his downfall. [^4]

THE BRITISH AND AMERICAN JOINT STOCK COMPANY

Soon after the departure of Elder Woodruff for America there was organized under the direction of Elders Hedlock and Ward a joint stock society for general trading and even manufacturing purposes, [^5] based upon British law, but its enterprises to be prosecuted in both England and America under the title of "The British and American Joint Stock Company." While necessarily a separate and independent concern, under English law, the company, nevertheless, was improperly represented as an adjunct to the church, and primarily organized to aid the church in the accomplishment of some of her great purposes—the gathering of the saints to the land of Zion (America), and the betterment of the condition of her membership by affording them opportunity for cooperative participation in the profits of trade. This sympathetic connection between the church and the "Stock Company" was constantly urged through the columns of the Millennial Star, as also in public meetings and conferences of the church. [^6] The gathering of the poor and the deliverance of the saints from "the grip of poverty," were the catch phrases of the concern. Considerable stock was purchased, a provisional registration, and then a final one, as required by the law, was obtained. High class offices were taken in the Stanely Buildings, Liverpool, but little business was ever done other than soliciting the purchase of stock and the paying of salaries and the traveling expenses of the officers of the company, although there was much talk of chartering and even of buying ships for trade and emigration purposes, also about starting a general merchandise store in Liverpool, etc., etc.

125Elder Thomas Ward was made president of the company, Samuel Downes, treasurer, and Thomas Wilson, secretary; but President Hedlock was earnest and active in the promotion of the company, and considerable of the company's capital was "loaned" to him without security, to assist in his emigration schemes.

The first act of the apostolic delegation from America was to declare that the "Joint Stock Company" was "an institution wholly independent of the church;" and advised that the saints "patronize the 'Joint Stock Company' no more for the present." [^7] An accounting was demanded of the company; and the balance sheet finally worked out by the committee appointed by the apostles disclosed the fact that —shillings and pence omitted—one thousand six hundred and forty-four pounds ($8,220) had been received from the over sanguine shareholders; that out of this sum, representing the capital of the company, one thousand four hundred and eighteen pounds ($7,090) had been expended in payment of traveling expenses, for legal counsel in effecting the organization, and office rent, leaving but two hundred and twenty-six pounds ($1,130) of the capital for investment, and much of this was due to creditors! In their report the committee after presenting a detailed statement of the conditions said:

126"The officers are blameable before God and the authorities of this church, because, when they knew that this company was not answering the purposes intended, they did not rise up like honest men and stop the growing evils, but were content to continue till nearly all the funds were devoured; and have thus rendered themselves unworthy of the future confidence of the saints, and of any responsible trust hereafter in this kingdom."

126The amount of loss, of course, is trivial in comparison of defalcations common in the world; but this one was peculiarly distressing because the money was taken from the hard earnings of many poor people, struggling in the midst of depressed industrial conditions, and was obtained by the pressure of religious influence upon them.

Elder Hedlock foreseeing the approaching calamity deserted his post as president of the British mission, as early as August, 1846, [^8] before the advent of the apostolic delegation, and went to London where he lived in seclusion. [^9] At the general conference of the British Mission that was held in Manchester, on October 17th, under the presidency of the apostolic delegation from America, President Hedlock was excommunicated. Elder Ward, whatever had been his errors in judgment, at least faced the situation manfully, and while he stood disfellowshipped by act of the council of the twelve in America, [^10] and hence under requirement to report himself to that council, the delegation of apostles in England testified that he had "manifested a good feeling and a good spirit since their arrival," and had followed their counsel "in every particular since that time." [^11] He did not long survive the shock his errors brought upon him, however, as he died in England five months later. [^12]

127The fate of Hedlock is unknown. Other officers of the company, Samuel Downes, the treasurer, and Thomas Wilson, secretary, made all the satisfaction to the committee that acted as receivers for the company within their power; as also all the restitution that was possible under the circumstances. "This is all we can ask," said the editor of the Millennial Star (temporarily Orson Hyde); "and we say, let the yoke be taken off their necks, and let them go free, with the fellowship of the church, and let them make their calling and election sure, if they will." [^13]

The "Joint Stock Company" at meetings of the stockholders during the conference at Manchester—on the 17th and 19th of October, respectively—by resolution dissolved, forthwith, that company, "the members present, and votes taken, being superabundant to warrant its dissolution. [^14] Ultimately it was found that the company's receivers could pay "one shilling and three pence on the pound of monies actually paid in." Thus ended the "Joint Stock Company" scheme for the temporal and rapid enrichment of the saints; which, however good the intentions that prompted its inception, became a means of robbing the worthy poor, to minister to the folly and vanity of men, some unwise, and some wicked.

128Aside from this unpleasant episode of the "Joint Stock Company" the visit of the apostolic delegation to England was of a most pleasant character. The British saints were blessed by it: the church strengthened and a new impetus given to the work in that land for the future. Elder Hyde was recognized as the president of the delegation, and became for the time, president of the mission, and editor of the Millennial Star, leaving Elders Pratt and Taylor free to visit all the conferences and most of the branches of the church. Finally, the object of their mission being accomplished, the delegation made arrangements for returning to the body of the church in the frontier wilderness of America. Elders Taylor and Pratt departed on the 7th of February, [^15] and Elder Hyde on the 23rd of the same month, having duly installed Elder Orson Spencer, sent by the council of apostles from the Camp of Israel in the wilderness to preside over the British Mission.

ELDER TAYLOR AND THE EARL OF DARTMOUTH—CANADIAN IMMIGRATION

Elder Taylor in the course of his many activities while on this mission, obtained an interview with the Earl of Dartmouth, with a view of interesting him, and through him the British government, in some plan of emigration to the British possessions on the Pacific coast of America—Vancouver's Island being especially mentioned—of which the saints in England might take advantage. To this end also a memorial was drawn up to the queen asking "relief by emigration for a portion of her subjects." The memorial was admirable both in form and spirit, and moderate in its suggestions withal; and had the statesmen of England in that day possessed the practical knowledge of the possibilities in a people for self-support, even in a wilderness, when that wilderness would be either Vancouver's Island or British Oregon, as the men had who were promulgating that memorial—the apostolic delegation from the Church of the Latter-day Saints —they would have seen in the plan no such insurmountable obstacles as led them to be indifferent to it. [^16] But England at the time was sore distraught, almost in a state of revolution. Midsummer had witnessed a complete change in the kingdom's fiscal system; Lord John Russell's government was but newly installed, and the memorable famine in Ireland —1845-6, which reduced the population of that land by starvation and emigration from eight millions to six—in its effects still lingered to perplex the government; trade depression was general, political conditions were much complicated, and hence little heed was paid to the saints' memorial, though it was sent to every member of parliament, and Lord John Russell politely acknowledged receipt of it. [^17]

GOVERNMENT IN THE CAMP OF ISRAEL

The Camp of Israel, rapidly spreading out on both sides of, as well as up and down the Missouri river in the vicinity of Council Bluffs, during the summer of 1846, was doubtless a remarkable sight. The life of the people was full of interest and romance, the like of which was never seen before, and in all probability never will be possible again; and therefore we may be justified in contemplating it somewhat in detail. The community had no laws save such as were self-imposed; no officers save those provided in the church organization, and their special appointees to exercise functions of a semicivic nature such as a marshal of a camp and his aids to enforce order and prevent people from trespassing upon each other in regard to stock running at large, destroying gardens, or intruding into camp grounds; also to hold in check the thoughtless buoyancy of youth which had not yet learned the lessons of self-restraint, and ever grows somewhat impatient of discipline; also to guard the camps from the intrusion of strangers who would spy out their liberties and impose upon the unwary, and likewise to check by punishing promptly, the thieving propensities of the Indians by whom they were surrounded. Their laws were edicts or regulations issued from the councils of their wisest men. It was literally the rule of Carlyle's "can-ning, or able-men," voluntarily submitted to by the people with right willing loyalty and nothing doubting, because they recognized in the edicts promulgated "precisely the wisest, fittest" thing which in all ways it behooved them to do. [^18]

131INTER-COMMUNICATION OF THE CAMPS

131The necessity of frequent communication with the remnant of the community left at Nauvoo, and with the trustees there in charge of both such public and private property as could not be disposed of before the departure of the main body of the people; as also the necessity of communication with all the camps and traveling companies between Nauvoo and Council Bluffs, led them to establish an independent mail service since, of course, there was none established by the government between those two points. Occasional mails also were carried between the Camp of Israel and the battalion until the latter marched from Santa Fe. By this means the presiding council of the church kept in touch with practically the whole people whose movements they were directing. It afforded also to separated families and friends the means of keeping informed of each other's movements—of knowing each other's good or evil fortunes, of the need of help on the one hand, and of ability to give succor on the other, and thus bound them together in mutual sympathies and ability to be helpful. No other circumstances contributed so much to the unity of the saints, or ministered so much to their mental peace as this postal service, except always, of course, that spiritual bond of their mutual faith and trust in God, constantly kept alive by frequent religious instructions, admonitions and prayer—prompted by the felt need in their peculiar circumstances of the sustaining hand of Divine Providence.

131The land they occupied was beautiful, consisting of alternating stretches of prairie and woodlands, the latter following streams which are numerous in that region, for among other natural advantages it was a well watered country. The great Missouri, in its meandering course hemmed in by sharp, irregular bluffs, along its bottom lands afforded stretches of scenery unsurpassed in beauty.

The fact that the old "Mormon" encampments are now the site of such populous and prosperous commercial and manufacturing cities as Council Bluffs and Omaha, [^19] is evidence that the "Mormon" leaders had halted at a point where natural advantages and resources had so converged as to sustain a large population; all which their industrious energy and enterprise would have developed long before those cities rose to any importance if only they could have felt free to remain and apply labor force under intelligent leadership. But it is this region as it existed under the "Mormon" encampments with which I am here concerned, the environment and atmosphere that goes with the events I am chronicling, that I would preserve; and perhaps the happiest and most detailed description of those encampments is the one given by Colonel Thomas L. Kane when he came upon them en route from Fort Leavenworth to the east. He was seeking the "Mormon" camps when suddenly he came in view of them:

132

COLONEL KANE'S DESCRIPTION OF THE CAMPS OF ISRAEL

"They were collected a little distance above the Pottawattomie agency. The hills of the 'high prairie' crowding in upon the river at this point, and overhanging it; appear of an unusual and commanding elevation. They are called the 'Council Bluffs'; a name given them with another meaning, but well illustrated by the picturesque congress of their high and mighty summits. To the south of them, a rich alluvial flat of considerable width follows down the Missouri, some eight miles, to where it is lost from view at a turn, which forms the site of an Indian town of Point aux Poules. Across the river from this spot the hills recur again, but are skirted at their base by as much low ground as suffices for a landing.

This landing, and the large flat or bottom on the east side of the river, were crowded with covered carts and wagons; and each one of the Council Bluff hills opposite, was crowned with its own great camp gay with bright white canvas, and alive with busy stir of swarming occupants. In the clear blue morning air the smoke steamed up from more than a thousand cooking fires. Countless roads and bypaths checkered all manner of geometric figures on the hillsides. Herd boys were dozing upon the slopes; sheep and horses, cows and oxen, were feeding around them, and other herds in the luxuriant meadow of the then swollen river. From a single point I counted four thousand head of cattle in view at one time. As I approached it seemed to me the children there were to prove still more numerous. Along a little creek I had to cross were women in greater force than blanchisseuses upon the Seine, washing and rinsing all manner of white muslins, red flannels, and particolored calicoes, and hanging them to bleach upon a greater area of grass and bushes than we can display in all our Washington Square.

133Hastening by these, I saluted a group of noisy boys, whose purely vernacular cries had for me an invincible home-savoring attraction. It was one of them, a bright-faced lad, who, hurrying on his jacket and trousers, fresh from bathing in the creek, first assured me I was at my right destination. He was a mere child; but he told me of his own accord where I had best go and seek my welcome, and took my horse's bridle to help me pass a morass, the bridge over which he alleged to be unsafe.

133There was something joyous for me in my rambles about this vast body of pilgrims. I could range the wild country wherever I listed, under safeguard of their moving host. Not only in the main camps was all stir and life, but in every direction, it seemed to me I could follow 'Mormon roads,' and find them beaten hard, and even dusty, by the tread and wear of the cattle and vehicles of emigrants laboring over them. By day, I would overtake and pass, one after another, what amounted to an army train of them; and at night, if I encamped at the places where the timber and running water were found together, I was almost sure to be within call of some camp or other, or at least within sight of its watchfires. Wherever I was compelled to tarry, I was certain to find shelter and hospitality, scant, indeed, but never stinted, and always honest and kind. After a recent unavoidable association with the border inhabitants of western Missouri and Iowa, the vile scum which our own society, to apply the words of an admirable gentleman and eminent divine, [^20] 'like the great ocean washes its frontier shores,' I can scarcely describe the gratification I felt in associating again with persons who were almost all of eastern American origin—persons of refined and cleanly habits and decent language, and every day seemed to bring with it its own special incident, fruitful in the illustration of habits and character." [^21]

COLONEL KANE'S ILLNESS IN THE CAMP

It was while Colonel Kane was still in the "Mormon" camps that he was stricken by an illness which held him bound at President Young's headquarters throughout the greater part of the summer. At one time it was feared his illness would prove fatal. The colonel's solicitude for the welfare of his new-found friends—the apprehension that his death might be charged to their account through design or neglect—led him to send to Fort Leavenworth for medical aid, to which a Dr. H. I. W. Edes responded. He visited the colonel, and certified over his signature the nature of his illness, "The violent bilious fever of this region, connecting itself seriously with the nervous system;" and, "after the disappearance of this malady, an intermittent fever has supervened." Relative to the colonel's treatment by the "Mormons" the doctor certified: "From Colonel Kane's unmeasured assurances to me, and from what I myself have observed during my visit to this place, I have no hesitation in testifying to the devoted care and kindness with which he has been treated by his friends, the Mormon people. Throughout this entire camp, where I observe a spirit of harmony and a habit of good order, wonderful in so large an assemblage of people, I find that there prevails towards him the warmest and most cordial benevolence and feeling." [^22] Such was the precaution thought necessary by Colonel Kane in order to preserve the Latter-day Saints from a possible false charge of conniving at his death in the event of death befalling him in the "Mormon" camps, so viciously were they subjected to misrepresentation at the time. [^23]

134But the colonel recovered, and in September returned to the east via Nauvoo, arriving there just after the mob had expelled the remnant of the Latter-day Saint population from the city; which "victory," and the "battle" which preceded it, were detailed in chapter lxx of this History.

THE EXPELLED REMNANT OF THE CHURCH FROM NAUVOO

The remnant expelled from Nauvoo under circumstances of such great cruelty, was made up of those who were either too poor to purchase an outfit with which to leave the city, or else of those who could not dispose of property to buy teams with which to remove. When driven from their homes by the mob they took refuge on the Iowa side of the Mississippi, where they bivouacked as best they could on the river bottoms. They numbered about six hundred and forty, all told. An encampment was improvised of such materials as were at hand. There were a few old wagons with covers: tents were constructed by stretching quilts and blankets over frames made of small poles; other shelters still were made by weaving brush between stakes driven into the ground; and here were huddled women and children destitute of both food and adequate clothing. It was the latter part of September, and the cold fall rains frequently drenched them. It was the sickly season of the year and most of the camp suffered from alternating chills and fever. Such as were able to leave camp went into neighboring towns up and down the river and applied to farmers and settlers about them for work and relief from starvation. Their camp from the general destitution that prevailed is called in the church annals "the poor camp." [^24] In the midst of their greatest distress for want of food, a most remarkable circumstance, yet well attested, happened. This was no other than the falling into their camp—and for several miles up and down the river—of immense numbers of quails. The birds are quite common in that country, but these flocks were so exhausted, evidently from a long flight, that the women and children and even the sick, since they came tumbling into the tents or bowers, could take them up with their hands. Thousands were so caught, and the sick and the destitute were fed upon daintiest food. [^25]

No sooner was the news of the results of the Battle of Nauvoo carried to the headquarters of Brigham Young, on the Missouri, and the destitute condition of the expelled saints made known, than a relief company was organized consisting of teams with tents and provisions to make the journey back to the Mississippi, to gather up the victims of the mob's hate and violence. This relief company started eastward under the direction of O. M. Allen. In due time the saints of "the poor camp"—as these helpless refugees were called—were brought away from the scenes of their afflictions, and found refuge among their friends in the camps on the Missouri.

THE CAMPS OF ISRAEL ON INDIAN LANDS

Some difficulty arose between the local Indian agents and the saints concerning the occupancy of the Indian lands on both sides of the Missouri, but more especially in regard to the lands of the Omahas on the west side. Before departing from Council Bluffs with the enlisted battalion, Colonel Allen gave to Brigham Young the following permit of passage through and permission to temporarily occupy Indian lands:

137"HEADQUARTERS, MORMON BATTALION,

U. S. VOLUNTEERS,

July 16th, 1846.

137The Mormon people, now en route to California, are hereby authorized to pass through the Indian country on that route, and they may make stopping places at such points in the Indian country as may be necessary to facilitate the emigration of their whole people to California, and for such time as may be reasonably required for this purpose.

137At such stopping points they may entrench themselves with such stockade works or other fortification as may be necessary for their protection and defense against the Indians. This during the pleasure of the president of the United States.

137[Signed] "J. ALLEN,"

137Lt. Col. U. S. A. Commanding Mormon Battalion of U. S. Volunteers." [^26]

137Colonel Allen obtained a written and duly signed permission from representative chiefs of the Pottawattomie tribe for the "Mormon" people then upon their lands and as many more as might come, in their western movement, to settle on their lands, to occupy the same, cultivate and improve them so long as the "Mormons" should not give positive annoyance to these Indians. [^27] Subsequently, with much flourish of Indian ceremony and a speech by the chief Pied Riche—surnamed Le Clerc, on account, it is said, of his scholarship [^28]—the same privileges of occupancy of land was again pledged to the saints; which, however, loses much of its effectiveness when it is known that the Indian title had been extinguished, and they were merely granting what really they neither had the power to give or withhold, and they themselves were to remove from these lands in the ensuing spring. [^29]

Of much more importance was the permit granted by Colonel Allen for a portion of the "Mormon" people to occupy the Pottawattomie lands, during the pleasure of the president of the United States, in view of the "Mormons" having, "on due application, raised and furnished for the service of the United States a battalion of volunteers to serve with the Army of the West," in the war with Mexico.

138The colonel also secured from R. B. Mitchell, Indian subagent at Pottawattomie agency, a statement to the effect that the permission of the Pottawattomie Indians was given of their own free will and consent, and apparently was for the good of both parties, "with no prospect of evil arising therefrom." [^30] Copies of these documents Colonel Allen placed in the hands of both Brigham Young and Colonel Kane; and it was the understanding that Allen would make this matter of passage through and temporary occupancy of Indian lands an item in his report to Washington. But evidently his sudden illness and death occurred before his report was drafted; and as Colonel Kane about the same time was taken ill and rendered incapable of taking the matter up directly with the Washington authorities, the absolute necessity for the saints remaining at their present encampment on the Indian lands was not clearly presented for some time to the government, and some unpleasantness, arising from officiousness on the part of local Indian agents, was the result. Willingness on the part of the general government to do the right thing in the premises is manifest from the following communication on the subject issued from the office of Indian Affairs, War Department, to Major Thomas H. Harvey, superintendent of Indian Affairs at St. Louis:

LETTER FROM THE WAR DEPARTMENT ON SAINTS OCCUPANCY OF INDIAN LANDS

"WAR DEPARTMENT,

OFF. INDIAN AFFAIRS,

Sept. 2, 1846.

SIR:—Since my letter to you of the 27th July and the 22nd ult., in relation to the Mormons and the desire expressed by them to remain for a time on the lands recently purchased by the United States from the Pottawattomie Indians, and which lie within the limits of Iowa, the subject has been brought to the immediate notice of the president and secretary of war.

139The object and intention of the Mormons in desiring to locate upon the lands in question, are not very satisfactorily set forth, either in the application to the president or in the letter transmitted to this office, which contained the assent of the Indian chiefs. If their continuance is really to be temporary and for such length of time only as will enable them to supply their wants and procure the necessary means for proceeding on their journey, the government will interpose no objections.

139The want of provisions and the near approach of winter, which will have set in before they can reach their proposed destination, would necessarily expose them to much suffering, if not to starvation and death; while on the other hand, a location and continuance for any very considerable length of time near Council Bluffs, would interfere with the removal of the Indians, an object of much interest to the people of that region of country, delay the survey and sales of the lands in question, and thus in all probability bring about a difficulty between Iowa, now about to come into the union as a state, and the general government. Both these extremes, in the opinion of the president, should be avoided. The rights and interests of Iowa, now that the Indian title has been extinguished, may not be jeopardized, while the laws of humanity and the rights of hospitality should not be disregarded.

139You will ascertain, if possible, the real intention of these people in desiring to remain, and if you are satisfied that they will leave and resume their journey in the spring, or at such period as the season for traveling will justify, and that no positive injury is likely to arise to the Indians from their stay among them, you will instruct the subagent, and give notice to any other officers of the general government in that quarter, to interpose no objection to the Mormon people remaining on the lands referred to, during the suspension of their journey, or to their making such improvements and raising such crops as their convenience and wants may require; taking care, however, at the same time, to impress upon them the necessity of leaving at the earliest moment their necessities and convenience will justify, and of observing all laws and regulations in force upon the territory for the time being.

139Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

139[Signed] "W. MEDILL." [^31]

MAJOR THOMAS H. HARVEY,

Supt., etc., St. Louis, Mo."

Colonel Kane not being able on account of his illness to present the matter of the saints' occupancy of Indian lands to the authorities at Washington requested his father, Judge Kane, to do so, which he did with the result that the president after full consideration of the subject in all its bearings deemed it best to "give the permission in the form and on the condition contained in a letter to Major Harvey, the efficient superintendent of Indian Affairs at St. Louis." [^32]

THE CARING FOR STOCK PROBLEM

In order to preserve their stock through the winter—and it should be remembered they had some 30,000 head of cattle besides horses, mules and sheep—the saints needed a wider range than the Pottawattomie lands afforded, and hence had formed encampments on the west side of the Missouri as well as on the east side. These lands were occupied by the Omaha Indians, now but a wretched remnant of a once powerful tribe. The ravages of small-pox had greatly reduced their number, and the Sioux, their war-like and powerful neighbors, had made successful war upon them until their spirits were broken. [^33] They welcomed the saints among them and gave them written permission to remain on their lands two years or as long as might suit their convenience, and to use all the wood and timber they might require, all, however, subject to the approval of their "great father, the president of the United States." The Omahas furthermore agreed not to molest or steal stock or other property. [^34] On their part the saints agreed to help the Indians gather their crop of maize, which they were afraid to harvest because of the likelihood of being ambushed and murdered by the Sioux; also to assist them in building some houses, enclosing fields, teaching their young men husbandry, doing some blacksmithing for them, and trading with them. By making their chief encampment north of the Omaha villages the "Mormon" camp would also act as "a breakwater between the Omahas and the destroying rush of the Sioux." [^35]

Notice of these measures of mutual helpfulness between the saints and the Omaha Indians was sent direct to Washington by Brigham Young, asking the president of the United States to ratify the same. [^36] But, as in the case of securing permission to settle on the Pottawattomie lands, the matter moved slowly at Washington, and meantime there were petty acts of officiousness on the part of local Indian agents, and especially concerning the use of firewood and timber for building purposes. Having secured a copy of the instructions issued from the war department to Major Harvey, by which both he and the subagents were to be governed in the matter of the Pottawattomie lands, and having confidence that the attitude of the government would not be different with reference to the Omaha lands, and backed as they were by the powerful influence of the Kanes, and following especially the advice of Colonel Kane, [^37] President Young and his brethren refused to be disturbed in the matter of settling on Omaha lands, using such wood and timber as they needed, and in preparing for putting in crops in the spring. On their part the agents and subagents continued from time to time to grumble about the use of wood and timber from the Indian lands; and Major Harvey informed the Pottawattomie chiefs that none of the "Mormons" in their tribe—some of the half breeds in the tribe had accepted the "Mormon" faith—would receive any of the annuities, a thing which the chiefs resented but whether successfully or not cannot be ascertained. Major Harvey also discharged a Mr. Case, government Indian farmer for twenty years among the Pawnees, apparently for no other reason than that he had a short time before accepted the "Mormon" faith. A farmer had for some time been promised to the Ottoe Indians, and when they expressed a preference for Mr. Case, whom they had long known, Harvey refused to appoint him, for no other reason, so far as known, than the one for which he had discharged him from the position of farmer among the Pottawattomie Indians, viz., he was a "Mormon." [^38] Such were the acts of prejudiced petty officials.

142Finally, however, Colonel Kane recovering from his illness visited Washington in the interests of his friends, the Latter-day Saints, and obtained permission for them to occupy Omaha lands upon the same terms as his father had procured for their occupancy of Pottawattomie lands; and their troubles on that score were practically ended. [^39]

NOTE

LETTERS AND DOCUMENTS RELATIVE TO "MORMON" OCCUPANCY OF INDIAN LANDS

(a) LETTER OF COLONEL JAMES ALLEN

142"HEADQUARTERS, MORMON BATTALION,

142COUNCIL BLUFFS, July 16th, 1846.

The Mormon people having on due application raised and furnished for the service of the United States a battalion of volunteers to serve with the Army of the West in our present war with Mexico, and many of the men composing this battalion having to leave their families in the Pottawattomie country, the within permission to a portion of the Mormon people to reside for a time on the Pottawattomie lands, obtained from the Indians on my request, is fully approved by me, and such of the Mormon people as may desire to avail themselves of this privilege are hereby fully authorized to do so, during the pleasure of the President of the United States.

143J. ALLEN,

143Lieut. Col. U. S. A., Commanding Mormon Battalion."

143(b) THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF THE POTTAWATTOMIES FOR THE "MORMONS" TO OCCUPY THEIR LANDS, SECURED BY COLONEL J. ALLEN

143"Subagency of Pottawattomie at Council Bluffs, July 2, 1846. We the undersigned chiefs and braves representing the Pottawattomie tribe of Indians near this subagency do voluntarily consent that as many of the Mormon people now in or to come into our country as may wish from cause or necessity or convenience to make our lands a stopping place on their present emigration to California may so stop, remain and make cultivation and improvement upon any part of our lands not now cultivated or appropriated by ourselves, so long as we remain in the possession of our present country, or so long as they shall not give positive annoyance to our people.

143Oh-be-te-ke-shick. X His mark.

143Joseph La Trombois. X His mark.

143Wash-e-ash-kak. X His mark.

143Mack-e-etow-shuck. X His mark.

143Lee-ko. X His mark.

143Myn-co. X His mark.

143Ton-a-bois. X His mark.

143Nau-Kee. X His mark.

143Pat-e-go-shuck. X His mark.

143Wau-ve-nu-me. X His mark.

143Signed in the presence of

143J. ALLEN,

143Capt. First Dragoons."

143(The foregoing is copied from the Journal of Elder John Taylor, subsequently president of the church, and stands in the entry for July 2nd, 1846).

143(c) INDIAN SUBAGENT MITCHELL'S INDORSEMENT OF POTTAWATTOMIE PERMISSION FOR "MORMONS" TO SETTLE ON THEIR LANDS

143"SUBAGENCY OF POTTAWATTOMIES,

143NEAR COUNCIL BLUFFS, July 20, 1846.

143With regard to the foregoing permission of the Pottawattomie Indians near my subagency given of their own free will and accord to the Mormon people. I willingly certify that it is for the apparent good of both parties, and that there is no prospect of evil arising therefrom.

143R. B. MITCHELL,

143Indian Subagent."

144(d) COLONEL KANE'S LETTER TO PRESIDENT POLK INDORSING ABOVE DOCUMENTS

144"CAMP OF ISRAEL, NEAR COUNCIL BLUFFS,

144MISSOURI RIVER, July 20, 1846.

144DEAR SIR:—Annexed is a copy of a permission of the chief men of the Pottawattomies to the Mormon people to remain in their country as long as suits their convenience, together with a full approbation of the same given by Captain James Allen of the first dragoons detailed to the special service in this region by Colonel Kearney, and a paper of similar purport from Mitchell, subagent for the tribe in question.

144Being requested to approve these documents I have no hesitation in at the same time saying that while I can see no reason why the Mormon people should not winter in the valleys of this neighborhood, I consider it exceedingly important to them to be allowed the privilege of so doing. My own advice to them has been opposed to the crossing of too large a body of them over the Missouri during the present year.

144Very respectfully,

144Your obedient servant,

144THOMAS L. KANE.

144The President of the United States." [^40]

144(e) LETTER OF COLONEL THOMAS L. KANE TO GENERAL (BRIGHAM) YOUNG, WRITTEN FROM POINT A POULES—AFTER HE HAD LEFT THE CAMP OF ISRAEL TO RETURN TO THE EAST

144"DEAR SIR:—Mr. Subagent Mitchell has requested me to communicate to you orders he has received from Major Harvey, superintendent of Indian affairs at St. Louis, to enjoin your people to be careful not to commit any waste of timber upon the lands of the Pottawattomies during your passage through their country, as they have no right to give you the permission you have received from them, the treaty being already ratified by which they have conveyed said lands to the United States; and, he says, your passage through the country should occupy no longer time than is altogether necessary.

I have just informed him that I think it would be more in order for him to write to you in person; and, at the same time offering him the services of Mr. Rockwell, to convey to you his message, have declined the office, which my present weak and low state makes exceedingly difficult to me; yet I must not, in spite of my wavering hand, abstain from saying in comment upon his notification to you, which you may not understand, that it need not give you uneasiness. The Pottawattomies, it is true, have no right to convey to you their timber, etc., title to it being already fully vested in the United States; but there is no reason, in my opinion, wherefore your people should not be justified ex post facto, so to speak, by the government in using all that is necessary for their perfect comfort and convenience. My papers will be arranged in a day or two, I trust, in such a manner as to represent themselves, in case my present drawback continues to be of moment, and thus, whether I reach Washington in safety or not, I feel justified in saying to you to stop where befits you, and cut all needful wood and to continue in your present course unchanged.

145The letter from Major H. and that from Mr. Medill (head of bureau of Washington) upon which it is founded, which have been shown me, are, it is true, quite in rule, but matters shall all be arranged, believe me, as is proper in a few weeks, and you will hear as little of your using timber as of the 'necessity' that your passage through the country should occupy any shorter time than such as suits you best.

145Farewell. I am constrained to be brief, very much against my will. Dr. Richards will understand why this stands as my only answer to his kind letter. I did not credit myself with force to write so much when I began. Farewell. Say to my friends for me that which I would say, and yourself and your own, remember me as

145Yours sincerely,

145THOMAS L. KANE.

145GENERAL YOUNG.

145Point a Poules, Sept. 11, 1846." [^41]

145(f) LETTER OF W. MEDILL, HEAD OF OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., TO JUDGE J. K. KANE, ANNOUNCING PERMISSION TO OCCUPY POTTAWATTOMIE LANDS

145"WAR DEPARTMENT, OFFICE INDIAN AFFAIRS,

145Sept. 3, 1846.

145SIR:—The president has handed me your letter of the 29th ult., and its enclosures, on the subject of giving permission to a party of Mormons, who are emigrating to the west of the Rocky Mountains, to remain for a while and winter in the country recently purchased from the Pottawattomie Indians, near Council Bluffs where they now are.

145After a full consideration of the subject in all its bearings, the president has deemed it best to give the permission in the form and upon the conditions contained in a letter to Major Harvey, [^42] the efficient superintendent of Indian affairs at St. Louis, who has already given his special attention to the subject and corresponded with the department in relation to it, and who can communicate rapidly with the Mormons through the subagent for the Pottawattomies, or through Colonel Kane, should he remain in that country.

145By the president's direction, a copy of the letter to Major Harvey is herewith enclosed with the request that you will be good enough to transmit it to Colonel Kane.

145Very respectfully,

145Your most obedient servant,

145W. MEDILL,

145JUDGE J. K. KANE,

145Philadelphia, Penn." [^43]

146(g) WRITTEN PERMISSION OF THE OMAHA'S FOR THE MORMONS TO TEMPORARILY OCCUPY THEIR LANDS

146"WEST SIDE OF THE MISSOURI RIVER,

146NEAR COUNCIL BLUFFS, August 31, 1846.

146We, the undersigned chiefs and braves, representatives of the Omaha nation of Indians, do hereby grant to the Mormon people the privilege of tarrying upon our lands for two years or more, or as long as may suit their convenience, for the purpose of making the necessary preparations to prosecute their journey west of the Rocky Mountains, provided that our great father, the president of the United States, shall not counsel us to the contrary.

146And we also do grant unto them the privilege of using all the wood and timber that they shall require.

146And furthermore agree that we will not molest or take from them their cattle, horses, sheep or any other property.

146Big Elk, his X mark.

146Standing Elk, his X mark.

146Little Chief, his X mark."

146(h) EXCERPT OF LETTER FROM ORSON SPENCER, ANNOUNCING COLONEL KANE'S SUCCESS IN OBTAINING PERMISSION FOR THE MORMONS TO OCCUPY OMAHA LANDS

146"PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 26, 1846.

146President B. Young,

146I arrived here well on the 23rd inst. in company with Brother Cahoon, twenty-six days from camp; called upon Colonel Kane the next day and was most agreeably welcomed and entertained for several hours. He said he had notified you of the permission of government to remain on the Omaha lands. Had also made an unsuccessful effort to create subagencies to be filled by yourself and others, among several Indian tribes. Did not certainly know what names to nominate to agencies among the Puncas, Creeks, Choctaws, etc. I mention this, that if you think best you may furnish them in case that he should renew the attempt and succeed. He informed me that Lyman Wight had been with the Creeks, but owing to nominal or real intermeddling (he thought the former) had been driven away by them. He wished that your influence might be felt in setting him in order if possible, as his conduct was the occasion of prejudice to the body of saints. * * * The cabinet instructed the Indian agents to disabuse the Mormons and allay prejudice." [^44]

Footnotes

"Your memorialists, without attempting to enumerate the many alleged causes of the present national distress and suffering, feel convinced that emigration to some portion of your majesty's vacant territories is the only permanent means of relief left to a rapidly increasing population, which, if retained here, must swell the aggregate amount of misery, wretchedness, and want.

Your memorialists believe that, if a part of the poor and destitute portion of your majesty's loyal subjects were sent to the island of Vancouver, or to the great territory of Oregon, through your majesty's gracious interference and Royal aid, they might there find a field of labor and industry, in which, after a short period, they could not only benefit themselves, but open an effectual door for the interchange of commodities with the home country, having brought into cultivation the soil that now lies untenanted, and thus indirectly raise a revenue that would more than balance the expenditure of the present emigration."

This proposition was supplemented by the suggestion that the government survey its American Pacific Coast possession, to which prospective emigrants might go, into townships to be subdivided into sections, on the even numbers of which the emigrants might settle, the government retaining the odd numbers until such time as the improvements of the settlers would give such advanced values to the retained government section as would more than repay the government for present expenditure in giving free passage by government aid to emigrants desirous of going to those lands.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 129-30.
[^2] "The buildings [at Winter Quarters] were generally of logs from 12 to 18 feet long, a few were split, and made from lynn and cottonwood timber; many roofs were made by splitting oak timber into boards, called shakes, about 3 ft. long and 6 in. wide, and kept in place by weights and poles; others were made of willows, straw and earth, about a foot thick; some of puncheon. Many cabins had no floors; there were a few dugouts on the sidehills—the fireplace was cut out at the upper end. The ridge-pole roof was supported by two uprights in the center and roofed with straw and earth, with chimneys of prairie sod. The doors were made of shakes, with wooden hinges and string latches; the inside of the log houses was daubed with clay; a few had stoves." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, 1846, p. 534).
[^3] "The city was laid off into 41 blocks; and there were 820 lots" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, p. 61). "Upward of 1,000 houses were built—700 of them in about 3 months, upon a pretty plateau overlooking the river and neatly laid out with highways and byways and fortified with breastwork and stockade." (Liverpool Route, published by F. D. Richards, 1855, p. 83. Letter of Brigham Young to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor. Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 96-100. Also Kane's The Mormons, p. 101).
[^4] Kane's The Mormons, p. 101.
[^5] Following is a list of the bishops of these wards: First ward, Levi E. Riter; second, William Fossett; third and fourth, Benjamin Brown; fifth and sixth, John Vance; seventh, Edward Hunter; eighth, David Fairbanks; ninth, Daniel Spencer; tenth, Joseph Mathews; eleventh, Abraham Hoagland; twelfth, David D. Yearsley; thirteenth, Joseph B. Noble.
[^6] Letter of Brigham Young to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor: "Our great city sprang up in a night, as it were, like Jonah's gourd; it is divided into 22 wards over which 22 bishops with their counselors preside, and no one suffers for food or raiment unless it be through their own fault, that is, in not asking for it, or being well and too lazy to work; but the fact of so many houses having been built in so short a time, is a proof of the general industry of the people, which will bear comparison with the history of all the nations of the earth, and in all periods of time." (Millennial Star, vol. ix, pp. 96-100).
[^7] For a description of the organization and functions of a high council see ante, chapter lxii, this History.
[^8] Of the extent of the "Mormon" camps at this time on the United States Missouri frontier, Colonel Kane says: "They had no camp or settlement of equal size [to Winter Quarters] in the Pottawattomie country. There was less to apprehend here from Indian invasion and the people scattered themselves, therefore, along the rivers and streams, and in the timber groves, wherever they found inviting localities for farming operations. In this way many of them acquired what have since proved to be valuable preemption rights. [This in 1850 when the lecture was delivered]. Upon the Pottawattomie lands, scattered through the border regions of Missouri and Iowa, in the Sac and Fox country, a few among the Iowas, among the Poncas in a great company upon the banks of the L'Eau qui Coule, or Running Water river, and at Omaha, Winter Quarters—the Mormons sustained themselves through the heavy winter of 1846-1847." (Kane's The Mormons, p. 101).
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846-1847, bk. 2, p. 91. The italics are mine. This instruction is emphasized for the reason that the church has been grievously slandered as to its attitude on education. It will be remembered in this connection that at the last conference of the church held at Nauvoo, W. W. Phelps "was appointed to make provision for the writing of books for the education of the youth in the new location"—i. e. in the western wilderness into which the church was then about to remove. (Ante, ch. lxix, this History). "December 31st: * * * Several schools for children have been started in camp [i. e., Winter Quarters] within the last ten days." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 534).
[^10] History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xviii, p. 237.
[^11] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 534, 6th of Jan., 1847. "Hundreds of dollars worth have already been completed and there is a prospect of quite an income from this source in the spring." (Letter to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor, 6th Jan., 1847, Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 100).
[^12] Letter of Brigham Young to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor, Jan. 6th, 1847, Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 98. Notwithstanding these annoyances, Brigham Young doubtless here formed his Indian Policy, practiced both now and later in Utah—"It is cheaper to feed the Indians than to fight them."
[^13] Kane's The Mormons, in Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p. 94, note.
[^14] It was also called "blackleg," according to George Q. Cannon who thus describes it: "Among other difficulties with which the saints at Winter Quarters had to contend there was sickness of a serious character. The want of vegetables, and the poor diet to which they were confined, had the effect to produce scurvy, or 'blackleg,' as it was called there. The limbs would swell, become black and the flesh be very sore. There was much suffering and many deaths from this disease. Potatoes, brought from Missouri, had an excellent effect in checking and curing the disease. Above Winter Quarters some miles there had been an old fort, which had been abandoned some time. There horse-radish was discovered growing. It proved a very great boon to the sick at Winter Quarters, as it was a most excellent antidote for the scurvy." (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xviii, p. 237).
[^15] Kane's The Mormons, p. 50.
[^16] "The Mormons took the young and hopeful side [i. e., of their hardships]. They could make sport and frolic of their trials, and often turn right sharp suffering into right round laughter against themselves. I certainly heard more jests and 'Joe Millers' while in this Papillion camp than I am likely to hear again in all the remainder of my days." (Kane's The Mormons, p. 48).
[^17] Ante, chapter lxxii.
[^18] Ante, chapter lxxiii, note 61.
[^19] cf. Heb. ix:16, 17.
[^20] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxvi. This is the only formal and written revelation which Brigham Young issued during his long leadership of the church, 1844-1877, thirty-three years; it must not be supposed, however, that because no other revelation was written that none was received. It is matter of certainty, with the immediate official associates of Brigham Young, and of the saints, that a divine spirit attended upon him during his administration as president of the church, giving divine guidance to him both in his words and in his administrative actions; and the inspiration of God bourn in upon his soul was not less real because he did not see proper to commit it to writing. For President Young's views upon this subject and a further discussion, (see ante, ch. lxvi. this History). This revelation, as is proper in relation to all revelations designed to become a law unto the church, was presented to the several quorums of the priesthood, and enthusiastically accepted by them in a general assembly of quorums met for that purpose in the "tabernacle" at Winter Quarters. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Jan., 1847, pp. 19-21).
[^21] Bishop Miller's camp among the Ponca Indians, at the junction of the Running Water river and the Missouri consisted of 62 wagons. When he left the main encampment at Council Bluffs his camp numbered 52 wagons; but at the Pawnee villages on the Loupe Fork, Miller's camp was overtaken by ten wagons under the leadership of Anson Call, which from that time became part of Miller's camp. Previous to the coming of Captain James Allen to raise the battalion, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball had each organized a company of 75 wagons to make a forced march for the mountains that season and Anson Call was made captain of the first of President Young's division. His ten wagons had crossed the Missouri shortly after Miller's camp had crossed, and went as far as the Elkhorn river, nearly fifty miles west of Winter Quarters. From this point on the 22nd of July, Call, under instructions from President Young, continued his westward march until he overtook Miller at the Pawnee villages, as already stated. When the united Miller and Call camps were resting on the west side of the Loupe, a tributary of La Platte, an express arrived from President Young instructing them to move no further westward that season, but to go into winter encampment on Grand Island; also appointing twelve men, with Bishop Miller as president, to direct the affairs of the camp, as in other camps that were being settled for the winter. About the same time eight chiefs of the Ponca tribe arrived at Miller's camp, and proposed that he move to their villages on the Running Water. This invitation Miller accepted instead of following President Young's instructions to winter at Grand Island, and dragged his company eleven days' drive almost due north from the general course of the western march of the church. (Biography of William C. Staines, in Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iv. p. 118, and Biography of Anson Call, Ibid, p. 144).
[^22] They also carried with them a long letter from the council of the twelve (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, pp. 30-39), outlining the general plan of the intended movement westward and giving all the news that had come to them from the missions and the battalion.
[^23] Biography of Anson Call, Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iv, p. 144.
[^24] This action of the council of the twelve was upon the motion of Elder Geo. A. Smith, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 72.
[^25] The following is from the History of Brigham Young: "April 2nd, [1847] * * * I met with the brethren of the twelve apostles, Bishop Whitney, and Miller and others. Bishop Geo. Miller gave his views relative to the church moving to Texas to the country lying between the Neuces and the Rio Grande rivers. I informed Bishop Miller that his views were wild and visionary, that when we moved hence it would be to the Great Basin where the saints would soon form a nucleus of strength and power sufficient to cope with mobs." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 79).
[^26] For an account of Strang, see ante, this History, chapter lxv.
[^27] See Note (b), end of chapter for this document.
[^28] Kane's lecture The Mormons, p. 99.
[^29] See Kane's letter to Brigham Young, Note (e), end of chapter.
[^30] For the several documents in question see Note end of chapter.
[^31] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 231-233. In a letter to Major. Harvey somewhat later President Young said of this communication: "If the principles advanced by the war department in said communication are carried out, we shall be satisfied;" and quotes the part of the above letter which virtually amounts to a permission from the government to remain a reasonable length of time upon the Indian lands, and which was intended, doubtless, to be so interpreted by the president and the war department. (See letter of Medill of the Indian office to Judge J. K. Kane, Note (f), end of chapter).
[^32] See Medill's letter to Judge J. K. Kane in Note (f) end of this chapter.
[^33] "The whole Omaha nation are a poor, miserable, degraded race of beings, so far as we have any knowledge, and it would seem that they must soon come to an end, if they don't alter their course." (Letter of Brigham Young to Hyde, Pratt and Taylor, Millennial Star, vol. ix, p. 98).
[^34] See copy of agreement, Note (g) end of chapter. The saints were much annoyed by the thievery practiced by the Omahas, however, and it was a matter of much complaint and of several formal conferences between the chiefs and the church leaders. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., for winter of 1846-7, passim.)
[^35] Kane's lecture The Mormons, p. 101.
[^36] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 238-240. The communication also calls attention to the fact that a small division of the "Mormon" people are camped some two or three hundred miles west of the Omaha villages on the north bottoms among the Puncas, "where similar feelings are manifested towards our people. Should your excellency consider the requests of the Indians for instruction reasonable, and signifying the same to us, we will give them all the information in mechanism and farming the nature of the case will admit, which will give us the opportunity of getting the assistance of their men to help us herd and labor, which we have much needed since the organization of the battalion." The communication bears date of September 7th, 1846.
[^37] For the nature of that advice, see letter of Colonel Kane, bearing date of Sept. 11, Note (e) end of chapter.
[^38] Report of Wm. Clayton to the council of the twelve, Nov. 6, 1846, History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, p. 446. Also letter of Willard Richards to Colonel Kane. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 2, pp. 470-4).
[^39] See excerpt of letters of Orson Spencer to President Brigham Young, dated at Philadelphia, Nov. 26, 1846, Note (h) end of chapter.
[^40] History of Brigham Young, Ms. 1846, bk. 2, pages 99, 100, 101.
[^41] History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 249-250.
[^42] This letter is given on a previous page of this chapter, which see.
[^43] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 460-1.
[^44] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 535-539
