B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

147CHAPTER LXXVII

147THE FOUNDING OF "WINTER QUARTERS"—PREPARATIONS FOR COMPLETING THE MARCH WESTWARD

147THE lateness of the arrival of the Camp of Israel upon the Missouri had rendered impossible any attempt that season to lead more than a small and an especially equipped company of Pioneers into the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. The time employed in raising the battalion for the United States army, together with the reduction of efficient men in the camp by reason of so large an enlistment, made it impractical now even to send an efficient company of Pioneers across the plains and into the mountains. Accordingly word was sent to Bishop George Miller's advance encampment not to attempt a journey into the mountains the present season, even countermanding previous recommendations that he move his camp to Fort Laramie or its vicinity; [^1] and suggesting that an encampment be made at Grand Island, where his stock could be wintered, and communication be maintained with the principal camp.

A TEMPORARY ENCAMPMENT—"WINTER QUARTERS"

Meantime a place for winter encampment to which most of the saints on the Missouri could be gathered was sought. The design of moving the camps on the Missouri to Grand Island was abandoned. Up and down the Missouri river was a rich growth of wild pea vines on which stock could feed through the winter, and it was finally determined to select winter quarters in the vicinity the camps then occupied. Some twelve miles north of the main camp's first ferry on the Missouri was a "high plateau overlooking the river," and this was the site selected for temporary abode, and given the name of "Winter Quarters," the present Florence, Nebraska, some five or six miles above the city of Omaha.

148No sooner was this designated as the temporary gathering place of the saints than the greatest activity prevailed among nearly all the camps to secure a place at what was to be headquarters as well as "winter quarters." As the subdivisions of the camps moved to the designated place the labor forces were organized much as they had been in the founding of Pisgah and Garden Grove. They were divided and subdivided into groups; and soon the "miracle" of a city regularly laid off with streets and byways appeared in the wilderness. It was enclosed by a stockade, chiefly to keep out the thieving Omahas; some rude fortifications were also erected and a blockhouse, a precaution against a possible incursion of war bands of Sioux. A meeting house for council and public worship was built. Workshops of various kinds were erected, and a water power gristmill installed on the river, which relieved the people from the inconvenience, long endured, en march, of grinding their grain in coffee mills and between hand stones. The houses were chiefly of logs covered with clapboards or with willows laid across poles and covered with dirt. In some instances open cuts were made in the hillside and then covered with willows and dirt, that made comfortable dwelling places, called "dugouts." [^2] By January the 6th there were, of all classes of houses, but chiefly of logs, more than seven hundred, and these by spring were increased to about one thousand. [^3]

149While this "city" was building, others of the organized industrial forces were breaking up lands and putting in the next year's crop; others were herding the great droves of cattle on the rush bottoms of the river, constructing stock shelters, or gathering hay to eke out the range when winter in all its severity should close in upon them. "The miles of rich prairies enclosed and sowed with the grain they could spare," says Colonel Kane, "and the houses, stacks, and cattle shelters, had the seeming of an entire county, with its people and improvements transplanted there unbroken." [^4]

At first the city was divided into thirteen wards with a bishopric appointed to preside over each, [^5] with instructions to look after both the spiritual and temporal welfare of the people, to suggest industrial activities, and look to the maintenance of the sanitary conditions so needful to the health of the community. Before the winter set in, the number of wards increased to twenty-two. [^6] A high council was also selected for Winter Quarters which was in this case authorized to exercise the functions both of an ecclesiastical high council, [^7] and also a municipal council. Such a council was given also to the camps at Pisgah, Garden Grove, Kanesville (Council Bluffs), Council Point, and also at Bishop Miller's camp L' Eau qui Coule, or Running Water River, about one hundred and fifty miles northwest of Winter Quarters. [^8] The nature of the duties of these high councils may be learned from the instructions to Father Morley, the president of the one when installed at Kanesville: "The council was instructed to oversee and guard the conduct of the saints, and counsel them that the laws of God and good order are not infringed. * * * It will be wisdom and necessary to establish schools for the education of children during the coming winter in this region, and we wish you to see that this is done." [^9]

It was the policy of President Young to keep everybody employed. It was in pursuance of this policy that he built a gristmill—more to give employment to the men at Winter Quarters than hope of any good his community would get of it, since to them Winter Quarters was but an abode of a few months, two years at the most. "And then," as Brigham Young remarked, "if the saints did not reap any material benefits from it, the Indians whose lands they then occupied, probably would." [^10] Besides the building of the mill many engaged in the making of willow baskets, wash boards, half bushel measures, to be sold to the Iowa and Missouri settlers in the spring. [^11] These chiefly the occupations of the men. On their part the women, in addition to their household duties, engaged in spinning, knitting, making leggings from deer hides, and family clothing.

INDIAN TROUBLES

In the midst of these industrial activities there were occasional annoyances, chiefly occasioned by the thieving propensities of the Indians surrounding them, and the intermittent assaults made upon the Omahas by the Iowas and the Sioux. Early in December, Big Head, second chief of the Omahas, his family and a few friends were camped near Winter Quarters when they were attacked in the night by a band of Iowas. The Omaha chief was severely wounded, as were a number of others of his party. They were received into the stockade of Winter Quarters and cared for until another party of their tribe passed through the city on their way south, when Big Head and his party went with them to an encampment a little above the old ferry over the Missouri. This second party had been as roughly treated by the Sioux, as Big Head's party had been by the Iowas. Sixty miles north of Winter Quarters they had been attacked, while asleep, and seventy-three of their number killed. Most of the Omaha warriors at the time of these assaults were off on a hunting expedition; "and those who were killed, or remained here," says Brigham Young, "have lived mostly on our cattle, either by gift or theft." [^12]

THE GREAT SICKNESS AT WINTER QUARTERS

During the fall and winter there was considerable sickness and many deaths in the camps. Colonel Kane in his lecture, The Mormons, from furnished data, reports six hundred burials at Winter Quarters before cold weather brought the camp relief. [^13] In one of the camps on the west of the river, as early as the 31st of July, he reports 37 per cent of its members down with fever and a sort of "scorbutic disease, frequently fatal, which they (the saints) named the 'black canker'." [^14] The camps on the east side of the river fared worse than those on the west, due, it is supposed, to the prevailing southwest winds which carried to them the miasmata of the river bottoms. The Missouri Bottom—punned into "Misery Bottom" by the saints, in memory of what they suffered there—with its marshes made by the overflow of the stream in early summer, and fed by sluggish streams that empty into it from both sides—these, in the late summer months, together with the main shrunken stream, become "impure as open sewers," and under the blazing sun give off miasmata that render the air heavy of disease germs. The Indians living in the river bottom, the previous year—which was not more unhealthful than 1846—are said to have lost one-ninth of their number. Sure it is that mortality among the saints was heavy, due no doubt as Colonel Kane suggested, "to the low state to which their systems had been brought by long continued endurance of want and hardship." "It must be remembered also," he continues, "that they were the first turners-up of the prairie sod, and that this of itself made them liable to the sickness of new countries. It was where their agricultural operations had been most considerable, and in situations on the left bank of the river, where the prevalent southwest winds wafted to them the miasmata of its shores, that disease was most rife.

153"In some of these [districts] the fever prevailed to such an extent that hardly any escaped it. They let their cows go unmilked, they wanted for voices to raise the psalm of Sundays. The few who were able to keep their feet, went about among the tents and wagons with food and water, like nurses through the wards of an infirmary. Here at one time the digging [of graves] got behind hand: burials were slow; and you might see women sit in the open tents keeping the flies off their dead children, sometimes after decomposition had set in." [^15]

FIRES ON THE ALTARS OF FAITH

In the midst of these physical afflictions of the saints every effort was made to keep the fires burning upon the altars of their faith. Religious gatherings were frequent, at which spiritual instruction and admonition were given, and accepted as injunctions to duty. Fortunately the saints passed through the trying experiences of fall and winter of 1846 without being hardened in their spirits; and undoubtedly sorrows that do not harden, tend to sanctification of the heart of man, broaden his sympathies, and make him more quickly responsive to the woes of others—prepare him truly for brotherhood with his fellows. Is that the explanation of of these afflictions which visited the saints in their Missouri river camps? I would not venture dogmatically to say so; but the afflictions came, and that upon the eve of the Church of the Latter-day Saints' embarking upon a community effort of colony planting, the greatest of modern times, and in which brotherhood of man, not a pretty sentiment merely, but a working principle, resulting in mutual and unselfish helpfulness, was of first importance—the one thing needful, since it would beget all else.

Also it should be remembered when counting those who may be regarded as martyrs to the work of the Lord in the New Dispensation, that those who here found premature graves through the enforced hardships and privations of this Nauvoo exodus period, ought not to be omitted, for they who prematurely came to death here at Winter Quarters were as truly martyrs as those who were killed outright or who perished in the hardships of the flight from Missouri.

154The saints were also united during this eventful period of their experience by their joys as well as by their sorrows. Their religion, not of their life a thing apart, but more nearly their whole mental and emotional existence, was fortunately, not austere to the point of crowding out of life the joy of living. It did not bar "rose-lipped laughter," sparkling merriment, intellectual playfulness, [^16] the lively strains of the violin, social intercourse, or the dancing party. There were also family gatherings, birthday and wedding day anniversaries were celebrated, music and song nowhere and at no time better served their purpose of cheering the hearts of men than in these wilderness encampments of the Latter-day Saints. Of these things somewhat was said in the chapter describing the march of the Camp of Israel from Nauvoo to Council Bluffs; [^17] in the chapter in which was given the account of the departure of the battalion on its "war march," Colonel Kane has described how the "modern Israel" could dance. [^18] These innocent amusements were indulged in the camps upon the Missouri, and lightened somewhat the gloom of the trying winter months of 1846-7.

154WESTWARD HO!—"THE WORD AND WILL OF THE LORD"

Meantime the serious business of preparing for the continuation of the march into the wilderness, the completion of the exodus from the United States, was not neglected. It was considered in many council meetings of the presiding authorities, it was the chief topic of conversation and of discussion wherever two or three were gathered together. Thought upon it finally so crystallized in the mind of Brigham Young that on the 14th of January, 1847, at Winter Quarters, he was prepared to announce "The Word and Will of the Lord" upon the march of the Camps of Israel to the west. The following are excerpts from the—

REVELATION

"Let all the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and those who journey with them, be organized into companies, with a covenant and promise to keep all the commandments and statutes of the Lord our God.

155Let the companies be organized with captains of hundreds, captains of fifties, and captains of tens, with a president and his two counselors at their head, under the direction of the twelve apostles.

155And this shall be our covenant, that we will walk in all the ordinances of the Lord.

155Let each company provide themselves with all the teams, wagons, provisions, clothing and other necessaries for the journey that they can.

155When the companies are organized, let them go to with their might, to prepare for those who are to tarry.

155Let each company with their captains and presidents decide how many can go next spring; then choose out a sufficient number of ablebodied and expert men, to take teams, seeds, and farming utensils, to go as pioneers to prepare for putting in spring crops.

155Let each company bear an equal proportion, according to the dividend of their property, in taking the poor, the widows, the fatherless, and the families of those who have gone into the army, that the cries of the widow and the fatherless come not up into the ears of the Lord against this people.

155Let each company prepare houses, and fields for raising grain, for those who are to remain behind this season, and this is the will of the Lord concerning his people.

155Let every man use all his influence and property to remove this people to the place where the Lord shall locate a stake of Zion.

155And if ye do this with a pure heart, in all faithfulness, ye shall be blessed; you shall be blessed in your flocks, and in your herds, and in your fields, and in your houses, and in your families. * * *

155And let my servants that have been appointed go and teach this my will to the saints, that they may be ready to go to a land of peace.

155Go thy way and do as I have told you, and fear not thine enemies; for they shall not have power to stop my work.

155Zion shall be redeemed in mine own due time.

155And if any man shall seek to build up himself, and seeketh not my counsel, he shall have no power, and his folly shall be made manifest.

155Seek ye and keep all your pledges one with another, and covet not that which is thy brother's.

155Keep yourselves from evil to take the name of the Lord in vain, for I am the Lord your God, even the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob.

156I am he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, and my arm is stretched out in the last days to save my people Israel.

156Cease to contend one with another, cease to speak evil one of another.

156Cease drunkenness, and let your words tend to edifying one another.

156If thou borrowest of thy neighbor, thou shalt restore that which thou hast borrowed; and if thou canst not repay, then go straightway and tell thy neighbor, lest he condemn thee.

156If thou shalt find that which thy neighbor has lost, thou shalt make diligent search till thou shalt deliver it to him again.

156Thou shalt be diligent in preserving what thou hast, that thou mayest be a wise steward; for it is the free gift of the Lord thy God, and thou art his steward.

156If thou art merry, praise the Lord with singing, with music, with dancing, and with a prayer of praise and thanksgiving.

156If thou art sorrowful, call on the Lord thy God with supplication, that your souls may be joyful.

156Fear not thine enemies, for they are in mine hands, and I will do my pleasure with them.

156My people must be tried in all things that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion, and he that will not bear chastisement, is not worthy of my kingdom.

156Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear.

156For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly.

156Thy brethren have rejected you and your testimony, even the nation that has driven you out;

156And now cometh the day of their calamity, even the days of sorrow, like a woman that is taken in travail; and their sorrow shall be great, unless they speedily repent; yea, very speedily;

156For they killed the prophets, and them that were sent unto them, and they have shed innocent blood, which crieth from the ground against them:

156Therefore marvel not at these things, for ye are not pure; ye can not yet bear my glory; but ye shall behold it if ye are faithful in keeping all my words that I have given you from the days of Adam to Abraham; from Abraham to Moses; from Moses to Jesus and his apostles; and from Jesus and his apostles to Joseph Smith, whom I did call upon by mine angels, my ministering servants; and by mine own voice cut of the heavens to bring forth my work.

156Which foundation he did lay, and was faithful and I took him to myself.

156Many have marveled because of his death, but it was needful that he should seal his testimony with his blood, that he might be honored, and the wicked might be condemned. [^19]

157Have I not delivered you from your enemies, only in that I have left a witness of my name?

157Now, therefore, hearken, O ye people of my church; and ye elders listen together; you have received my kingdom.

157Be diligent in keeping all my commandments, lest judgment come upon you, and your faith fail you, and your enemies triumph over you." [^20] * * *

157After this revelation was received and announced to the saints, preparations were made both for the formation of a Pioneer company and companies to follow immediately on its trail. Word was sent to the various encampments naming the men whom President Young desired to go with him in the first Pioneer company and those who were to take the lead in organizing the other companies to follow.

BISHOP MILLER'S DEFECTION

Bishop Miller's company on the Running Water occasioned some anxiety to the council of the apostles. The bishop had for some time manifested a restless, insubordinate spirit. [^21] Elders Ezra T. Benson, (who had been ordained in July a member of the quorum of apostles to fill the vacancy occasioned by the apostasy of John E. Page) and Erastus Snow, were sent to present to Miller's camp "The Word and Will of the Lord to the Camp of Israel"—the revelation received by President Young; also to take charge of the camp and organize it preparatory to the westward march with a view to its intercepting either the pioneer company or some of the companies immediately following at some point en route. [^22] Also carrying instructions to Bishop Miller to come to Winter Quarters with his family. The camp at Running Water accepted the revelation and proceeded with the organization of the camp by appointing Titus Billings president, with Erastus Bingham and Joseph Holbrook as his counselors. Miller was disposed to resent the action of the twelve through their representatives, for he claimed the right to lead the camp himself "by virtue of a special appointment from the Prophet Joseph Smith." But Anson Call and ten members of the council opposed Miller's claim, insisting that the twelve apostles were the properly constituted leaders of the church, and they persuaded all but the occupants of about ten wagons, the immediate family and special friends of Bishop Miller, to accept that view of the case. [^23] Bishop Miller returned with his family to Winter Quarters, and on the 23rd of March the instructions to the camp on the Running Water were changed, and instead of moving westward, to intercept the pioneers en route they were directed to "come down as quickly as possible to Winter Quarters, to put in a spring crop," [^24] and under this instruction the camp moved to Winter Quarters. A few days later, namely, on the 2nd of April, Bishop, Miller came out in open opposition to President Young and the council of the apostles, and declared that it was his conviction that the church should move to the southern part of Texas, to the country between the Neuces and the Rio Grande. [^25] His views not being accepted, he withdrew from the Camp of Israel with a few followers, and went to Texas where he joined Elder Lyman Wight who had gone to the southern part of that state in 1845. He did not long remain united with Wight, however, but left him to become a follower of James J. Strang. [^26] Of his later movements and death our annals give no information but his career illustrates the truth of President Young's remarkable prophecy, delivered on the 8th of August, 1844:

"All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it, if they can, but they will not prosper."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] ROSTER OF THE PIONEER CAMP History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 81. Wilford Woodruff,
[^2] EMIGRATION TO OREGON AND CALIFORNIA, 1834-1847 Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry of 6th April, 1847. Ezra T. Benson,
[^3] THE PIONEER ODOMETER Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 7th April, 1847. Phineas H. Young,
[^4] Orson Pratt's Journal, published in Millennial Star, vols. xi and xxi. In support of the above statement vol. xii is quoted, p. 18: "During our stay in Winter Quarters we had sent to England and procured the following instruments preparatory to our exploring expedition," which he then enumerates as given in the text. Luke Johnson (formerly of the twelve apostles),
[^5] Orson Pratt's Journal, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 18; Woodruff also says: "One telescope," (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., April 13th, 1847). Stephen H. Goddard,
[^6] In his journal entry for 27th of March, 1847, Brigham Young says: "We heard the news read, and examined a map (Fremont's map undoubtedly) received from General Atchison" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, p. 76). Atchison it will be remembered, was the friend of the saints in Missouri, and their counselor at law during their later troubles in that state. He was now—1847—United States' senator from Missouri (See ante this History, chapter xxxiv, passim). In his journal entry for April 4th, President Young says: "Thomas Bullock made a sketch of Captain Fremont's topographical map of road to Oregon for the use of the Pioneers" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 80). Charles Shunway,
[^7] Fremont's map of the route and especially of the Salt Lake region is excellent. See section of his map extending from Fort Laramie region to the Great Salt Lake which accompanies this chapter. Fremont's reports are dated respectively March 1st. 1843: and March 1st. 1845: and both reports were published with maps by order of the United States senate in 1845. It was in his second expedition—1843—that Fremont visited the Great Salt Lake. Turning from the Oregon route at a point then called "Beer Springs," a name given the springs by "the voyageurs and trappers of the country, on account of the effervescing gas and acid taste" of the water, but now called "Soda Springs,"—Fremont followed down Bear river—through what is now called Cache valley—to its mouth; but finding the approach to the lake over its marshy delta well-nigh impossible, he skirted the mountain bench land southward to the Weber river. Here he made an encampment and spent several days in exploring the lake. James Case,
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, p. 83. Seth Taft,
[^9] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry 16th April; also Erastus Snow's Journal, entry of April 17th. Snow's Journal is published in the Improvement Era (Utah), vols, xiv and xv, 1911, 1912. Howard Egan,
[^10] For names of all the Pioneers as grouped into companies, called tens, see Note 1 end of chapter. Appleton Harmen,
[^11] "Whether this was by design or not is unknown," (See Whitney's History of Utah. vol. i, pp. 301-2. John S. Higbee.
[^12] Ibid, vol. i, p. 302. Norton Jacobs,
[^13] In these statements I follow the Journals of Wilford Woodruff—see entry for April 16th; of John Brown, see entry of same date; also of Erastus Snow, see entry for May 20th. Others give the number at 72 wagons, among them Wm. Clayton—see his Journal published in Juvenile Instructor, vol. xxi, p. 230, and now, 1929, published in book form. On the Pioneer Monument at the head of Main street, Salt Lake City, the number is given: 70 wagons; one boat; one cannon. As the boat was put on the running gears of a wagon and used as a wagon bed; and as the cannon was also mounted, these two vehicles were doubtless numbered as wagons by the other authorities. John Brown,
[^14] Clayton's Journal entry for 16th of April, 1847. Joseph Mathews.
[^15] Ante, ch. lxxvii, this History.
[^16] The captains of fifties were (1) Addison Everett, (2) Tarlton Lewis, (3) James Case, (4) John Pack, (5) Shadrach Roundy. (Clayton's Journal, entry for the 16th of April). Why two captains of hundreds and five captains of fifties were chosen when there were less than one hundred and fifty souls in the camp, does not appear. Perhaps however, the excess of officers was chosen in anticipation of the Pioneer camp being joined by the company of Mississippi saints and members of the Mormon Battalion who had wintered at Pueblo, and whom the Pioneers expected to meet in the vicinity of Fort Laramie.
[^17] The Captains of tens were as follows:
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 83; also Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 16th April.
[^19] See Woodruff's Journal, entry of 21st April; also Clayton's Journal.
[^20] Clayton's Journal, entry for April 17th, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xxi, p. 230.
[^21] The wagons were so placed that the forewheel of one wagon locked with the hind wheel of the next, forming a strong and solid corral, except for a gateway on opposite sides of the camp which were always strongly guarded.
[^22] Clayton's Journal, entry for 18th of April. Also Woodruff's Journal, entry for 18th of April.
[^23] The "Oregon Trail" up to 1846 extended from Independence either via the Kansas river thence down the north fork of the Platte to Fort Laramie, or else up the right bank of the Platte, from near its junction with the Missouri, to the same point; thence continuing up the Platte to the mouth of the Sweetwater, where the north fork of that river was crossed, the route continuing up the Sweetwater to South Pass. Up to 1843, the "Trail" ran from the South Pass westward to Green river, where the American Fur Company had a station, thence veering northwestward to Fort Hall, Fort Boise, Walla Walla, then down the Columbia to the Willammette valley; but in 1843 the very large Oregon emigration of that year, directed by letter from Dr. Marcus Whitman, a Presbyterian missionary to the Indians of Oregon, went via Fort Bridger to Bear river. The route followed down this stream northward to what was then called "Beer Springs," but now "Soda Springs," and so made Fort Hall, whence the "Trail" continued to Oregon as stated above. By this new route the emigrants avoided "the mountains about the western heads of Green river, and saved some distance." (See Fremont's Report of his Second Expedition, pp. 128-134; and Bancroft's Oregon, vol. 1, p. 398).
[^24] Loaded wagons as early as 1829 had been driven to Wind river, north of the South Pass, and at different times to various mountain posts. In 1832, for instance, Captain B. L. E. Bonneville, an army officer on leave, led a company of 110 trappers to the mountains "in search of profit and adventure." They traveled the Platte route with a train of 20 wagons, some drawn by oxen. The wagons were loaded with Indian goods, provisions, ammunition, etc. They went through the South Pass to Green river, "being the first wagons to roll down the western slope of the Rocky Mountains." A fortified camp was made on Green river which for a number of years was the meeting place between white traders and the Indians (See Bancroft's History of Wyoming, pp. 681-2). But notwithstanding such expeditions as this, westward of Fort Laramie, in 1836, there was no beaten track for wagons as there was eastward of that place (See Bancroft's History of Oregon, vol. i, p 129, following Hines' Oregon History, pp. 408-9). That year, however,—1836—the American Fur Company took one of its wagons to its Green River station, and Whitman, the Presbyterian missionary physician to the Indians, took another wagon to the same point and thence to Fort Hall, where it was reduced to a two-wheeled cart and driven to Fort Boise, where Whitman was prevailed upon to abandon it. This was the farthest west, up to that time, a wheeled vehicle had been driven (See Bancroft's History of Oregon, vol. i, p. 133, also Note 2, end of chapter).
[^25] This journey was made by Captain John Bartleson's train of 19 vehicles from Kansas river via South Pass to Soda Springs, where the company divided; thence Bartleson's division of 32 men, one woman and one child, went down Bear river through Cache valley, thence into Salt Lake valley and round the north end of Salt Lake to the Humbolt river where the wagons were abandoned and the remainder of the journey made as a pack train. (See Bancroft's History of California, vol. iv, pp. 268-271; and same author's History of Utah, p. 29).
[^26] As the overland emigration to the great west and northwest is a movement of which the "Mormon" exodus or migration was an important incident, it is thought proper to deal briefly with the general subject. But as a statement even in mere outline would be too extended for a footnote, and would too long suspend the narrative of the regular text, the subject is dealt with in Note 2, at the end of this chapter.
