B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

160CHAPTER LXXVIII

160THE PIONEER JOURNEY: FROM WINTER QUARTERS TO FORT LARAMIE

160THE opening of the spring of 1847 brought due the time for the departure of the Pioneer company for the Rocky Mountains. Under instructions from President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, on the 5th of April, moved with six of his company's wagons to a point about four miles west of Winter Quarters and occupied an abandoned place of former encampment known as Cuttler's Park. This was the beginning of the journey and the neucleus of the Pioneer camp. Other wagons joined Kimball's company as they could get ready, and moved westward to the banks of the Elkhorn, a tributary of the Platte river flowing from the northwest, the road striking it at a point about thirty-five miles from Winter Quarters. The advance divisions of the forming camp here built a ferry boat to cross the entire camp over the river as fast as it should arrive.

INITIAL GATHERINGS AND MOVEMENTS

Meantime, on the 6th of April, the 17th annual conference of the church was held, at which Brigham Young "was sustained as president of the church and (of) the twelve apostles." [^1] Meeting was held only in the forenoon. The day previous had been rainy, but on this sixth of April "the sun shone brightly, the heavens smiled," [^2] and seemed to encourage the redezvousing of the Pioneer encampment, so the conference was cut short—preaching and exhorting must give place to action.

President Young left Winter Quarters on the 7th of April and encamped with twenty-five wagons about ten miles west, [^3] but returned the next day with the members of the apostles' quorum and others to meet with Elder Parley P. Pratt, who, meantime, had returned from his mission to England. Anxiety to learn the conditions prevailing in the British Mission before departing into the wilderness overcame the president's impatient desire to hasten the movements of the Pioneer company. Elder Pratt gave a full account of the labors of the apostolic delegation to England, and the settlement of the difficulties connected with the "Joint Stock Company" affair, and Hedlock's peculations in emigration matters. Elder Pratt also gave the information that Elder John Taylor would arrive within a few days with the scientific instruments that had been "sent for from Winter Quarters" for use by the Pioneers, [^4] and it was resolved to await his arrival. The time was spent by the twelve in directing the movements of the gathering sections of the Pioneer camp rendezvousing at the Elkhorn, which occasioned movements back and forth on their part between that point and Winter Quarters. Elder Taylor arrived on the evening of the 13th, bringing with him the following instruments; "Two sextants, one circle of reflection, two artificial horizons, two barometers, several thermometers, telescopes, etc." [^5] The Pioneers were also furnished with maps of the route to Oregon, [^6] and also the maps of Captain John C. Fremont's route to California via the Great Salt Lake in 1843, and of his return in 1844, via southern California, Mohave river, Las Vegas, Rio Virgin, the Sevier, Utah Lake, Spanish Fork canon, Uintah river, and so to Pueblo and the east. [^7] Possession of these maps and scientific instruments and the use of them by this company dissipates the claim sometimes made for the Pioneers that they made their journey of a thousand miles through a wilderness without charter or compass or that by which they could be guided.

Leaving the two apostles who had returned from England to take charge at Winter Quarters and supervise the preparations to be made by the larger companies of the saints to start later in the season, when the grass would be more abundant for the support of their teams, the apostles of the Pioneer company returned to the Elkhorn to find their advanced companies all ferried over that stream, and encamped about twelve miles beyond on the Platte river, where the twelve and others from Winter Quarters joined them late in the afternoon of the 14th of April. And now the real journey of the camp could begin, for which all were impatiently anxious.

"I called the Pioneer camp together," says President Young, speaking of the events of the 15th of April, "and addressed the brethren on the necessity of being faithful, humble and prayerful on the journey. Exhorted the camp to vigilance in guarding, and informed the brethren that I had intimations that the Pawnee Indians were advised to rob us. Said we should go in such a manner as to claim the blessings of heaven." [^8]

COMPOSITION OF THE PIONEER COMPANY

It was not until the afternoon of the 16th that the Pioneer camp, now complete in its personnel, made its final start on the westward journey. Four miles was the distance traveled that day, and eight the next. [^9] But during those two days the camp was undergoing a thorough organization, and formulating its method of travel. The camp numbered 143 men; 3 women; 2 children. [^10] Originally the number of men was 144—"twelve times twelve men" [^11]—but one of the number, Ellis Eames, taking sick on the 18th, returned to Winter Quarters.

"It was no part of the original plan to include women and children in the Pioneer company," remarks O. F. Whitney, in his History of Utah. [^12] "The hardships and dangers in prospect were foreseen to be such as would test the strength and endurance of the hardiest and healthiest of men;" therefore men of that class only had been chosen. But Harriet Page Wheeler Young, the wife of Lorenzo D. Young, brother of Brigham Young, being in feeble health, and her life imperilled by the malaria atmosphere of the Missouri bottoms, pleaded successfully for the privilege of accompanying her husband to the mountains. The other two women were Clara Decker Young, wife of President Brigham Young, and Ellen Sanders Kimball, wife of Heber C. Kimball. The success of the first of the trio—born of her necessities—made possible the permission for the other two; and it speaks well for the discipline of the people that the rule that men only should constitute the Pioneer company, thus infringed, was not further violated. The children were Isaac Perry Decker, son of Mrs. Lorenzo D. Young, by a former husband, and Lorenzo Sobieski Young, by her present husband.

164There were 73 wagons in the camp; [^13] 93 horses; 52 mules; 66 oxen; 19 cows; 17 dogs, and some chickens. [^14]

164There may be said to have existed in the camp a dual organization, one Israelitish in its character, based upon the revelation received by Brigham Young, and already of record in these pages, [^15] and one military in character. The first consisted of a division of the camp into hundreds, fifties, tens, with a captain over each. Two captains of hundreds were appointed, viz., Stephen Markham and A. P. Rockwood; five captains of fifties; [^16] and fourteen captains of tens. [^17]

THE ORDER OF THE JOURNEY OF THE PIONEERS

In the military organization Brigham Young was elected lieutenant general; Stephen Markham, colonel; John Pack, and Shadrach Roundy, majors; the divisions into tens, with their respective captains of the previously named organization, were brought over and incorporated into this military organization. The camp carried with them one cannon for defensive purposes, and Thomas Tanner was given charge of it as captain, with the privilege of choosing eight men to assist him. The cannon was mounted on wheels, and usually brought up the rear. The captains of tens selected forty-eight men for a constant night guard, "who were divided into four watches to be on duty half the night at a time;" Stephen Markham was made their captain. [^18] In special times of danger the night guard was augmented by volunteers, Brigham Young and other members of the twelve are named among those doing such guard service. [^19] The order of travel is thus described by William Clayton, the order being issued by Brigham Young:

165"After we start from this spot, every man must carry his loaded gun, or else have it in his wagon where he can seize it at a moment's notice. If the gun is cap-lock, he should take off the cap and put on a piece of leather to exclude moisture and dirt; if a flint-lock, he must take out the priming and fill the pan with toe or cotton. The wagons must now keep together while traveling and not separate as heretofore they have separated. Every man is to keep beside his own wagon and is not to leave it except by permission." [^20]

165The next day the following order was issued:

"At five o'clock in the morning the bugle is to be sounded as a signal for every man to arise and attend prayers before he leaves his wagon. Then the people will engage in cooking, eating, feeding teams, etc., until seven o'clock, at which time the train is to move at the sound of the bugle. Each teamster is to keep beside his team with loaded gun in hand or within easy reach, while the extra men, observing the same rule regarding their weapons, are to walk by the side of the particular wagons to which they belong; and no man may leave his post without the permission of his officers. In case of an attack or any hostile demonstration by Indians, the wagons will travel in double file—the order of encampment to be in a circle, with the mouth of each wagon to the outside [^21] and the horses and cattle tied inside the circle. At half past eight each evening the bugles are to be sounded again, upon which signal all will hold prayers in their wagons, and be retired to rest by nine o'clock." [^22]

On the 19th of April the camp for the first time moved under the above regulations. About twenty miles were covered that day, and the "Mormon" Pioneer journey was fairly begun. The line of march was on the north side of the Platte river, which it closely followed to Fort Laramie, although the choice of the route brought some disadvantages. On the south side of the Platte was the plain, broad road of the "Oregon Trail" from Independence, Missouri, to the Willammette valley, Oregon; [^23] and which, by 1847, was a national highway to the great west and northwest, having been opened as a wagon road for many years as far as Fort Laramie; and as far west as the American Fur Company's station on Green river since 1836; [^24] thence to the sinks of the Humbolt river, via Soda Springs, down Bear river and around the north end of Salt Lake since 1841; [^25] and to the Columbia river since 1842. [^26] But notwithstanding the national highway to the west and northwest was so near them, the church leaders were persuaded that the inconvenience of making a new trail over the Platte plains was preferable to contact with the western emigration pressing up the right bank of the stream, a large portion of which was from western Missouri, and among the companies were many of the old enemies of the saints, who less than a decade before had aided in their expulsion from that state.

REASONS FOR MAKING A NEW ROAD ON THE NORTH SIDE OF THE PLATTE

Once only were the Pioneers tempted to abandon the north bank for the Oregon road before reaching Fort Laramie. This was on the 4th of May. On that date a company of nine French fur traders with three heavily loaded wagons were seen moving eastward on the south bank of the Platte. When opposite the Pioneer camp they sent over the river one of their number to ascertain who the north bank travelers were, and their destination. This was Mr. Charles Beaumont,— though the leader of the fur traders was Mr. Papan of the American Fur Company, en route for the east with furs that had been collected at Fort Laramie. Mr. Beaumont reported a good road on the south side of the Platte, with plenty of feed, and their party had encountered no Indians after leaving Fort Laramie, sixteen days before. This was all in such marked contrast with the conditions under which the Pioneers were making the journey—scant feed, burning prairies, troublesome Indians, no trail—that a council of the whole camp was held that night, after Beaumont had departed, to take into consideration the wisdom of crossing the Platte in order to have the advantage reported of the south bank route. In the council it was decided that it would evidently be to the advantage of the present company to cross to the south bank route; but when the welfare of subsequent companies of saints was considered, it was concluded that the advantage of the north bank route preponderated, and a decision was rendered accordingly. The spirit in which the matter was considered was admirable and perhaps is best reflected in the journal entry of Wilford Woodruff dealing with the incident:

168"We were convinced that it would be better for us as a company to cross the river and take the old traveled road to Laramie, as there was good grass all the way on that side, while the Indians were burning it all off on the north of the river where we were traveling. But when we took into consideration the situation of the next company, and the thousands that would follow, and as we were the Pioneers and had not our wives and children with us—we thought it best to keep on the north side of the river and brave the difficulties of burning prairies to make a road that should stand as a permanent route for the saints independent of the then emigrant road, and let the river separate the emigrating companies that they need not quarrel for wood, grass, or water; and when our next company came along the grass would be much better for them than it would be on the south side, as it would grow up by the time they would get along; and the vote was called and it was unanimous to go on the north side of the river; so the camp again moved on." [^27]

The making of a new trial on the north side of the Platte was not a difficult thing, the country was flat, the streams to be crossed between the Loupe Fork and Fort Laramie were few and not difficult; and often the camp moved two and sometimes even four and five wagons abreast for the sake of moving in compact form. [^28] The roads along the route between Loupe Fork and Fort Laramie are spoken of as "good" in various journal entries. [^29] The greatest difficulty that was encountered was the crossing at Loupe Fork, where the company encountered some bars of quick sand in the river bed. A raft was constructed with which to ferry over the goods of the camp, the Pioneers thinking that by doubling their teams they could then take over the empty wagons. After a number of teams were thus crossed over the stream—which at the point of crossing was some eighty rods wide—it was discovered that by following in the same tracks the sand packed and hardened, "so that the teams began to move over with more ease, and finally most of the company forded with their loads by putting about three times the amount of the ordinary team." [^30]

Here also they brought into use what they called the "revenue cutter," a boat made of sole leather, on which they loaded some of their goods and ferried them over the river. This boat in the journey was placed on the running gears of a wagon, like a wagon bed, and filled with the fishing seine the company carried with them, and other fishing tackle and camp paraphernalia. Fish, by the way, at different points en route became an important article of diet, especially as a relief from fresh and dried buffalo meat. [^31]

170

INDIAN PROBLEMS EN MARCH

Before crossing Loupe Fork the camp was visited by the grand chief of the Pawnee tribe, named Shefmolan. Presents of powder, lead, tobacco, salt, flour and some trinkets were given to the chief, but he was not at all satisfied with the bounty of the camp, saying, through an interpreter, that the presents were not enough. The whites from his point of view were rich and had tea, coffee, sugar, and an abundance of everything, and the camp had given him but little. He said the whites would drive away their buffalo, and that the camp should go back, and not go on, "and other talk of the same import." He refused to shake hands with President Young on departing from the camp. "All of which," says Erastus Snow, "showed to us the influence the traders, the Missourians and others were using with the Indians against us, and which bade us be on our watch." [^32] That night the guard was increased to one hundred, fifty on duty each half of the night; including a picket guard of ten in each watch; and here was utilized the well known antipathy of the mule for Indians, by stationing them with the pickets to help them note the approach of Indians if any were prowling about. [^33] The cannon was prepared for action. Indian fires were burning all round the camp through the night, and the Pioneers thought it necessary occasionally to fire a few guns, to serve notice upon their red brethren that the camp was watchful. [^34] The morning came in quietness, however, and the Pioneers heard no more of the wrathful chief—Shefmolan.

Every care was taken to avoid giving offense either to the Indians or the Indian agents in these parts. As an example of this carefulness, attention is called to the fact that on the 22nd of April the Pioneer company arrived at what used to be a government Indian farming station, and also the site of the Presbyterian mission, at which "Father Case,"—now a member of the church of the New Dispensation, and also with the Pioneer company—had been employed by the government as farmer to the Indians. It was at this point also that Bishop Miller's company the year before had halted, and put up some hay and corn fodder for feed, and thence, contrary to the counsel of the apostles, had turned northward to winter at Running Water on the Missouri. A few months before the arrival of the Pioneers at the place the Sioux Indians in one of their raids upon the Pawnees had burned down the government station, blacksmith shop, houses, etc., everything, in fact, but the hay and fodder and the mission station. The result was that the iron work of many plows, wagons, etc., was lying about, many things that emigrants moving into a new country would be glad to take with them. President Young, however, called the camp together and told them "they might use some of the wasting hay and fodder for their teams, but they must not carry anything away, even to the value of a cent." [^35] The next day, however, the president seems to have recalled the fact that "Father Case" had been summarily dismissed from the government services by the Indian agents, and that without paying him his salary which was in arrears, and therefore the president so far modified his first instructions as to say concerning plow irons and the like:

172"As the government is indebted to Father Case in a considerable amount on unsettled accounts, we are at liberty to take such of these materials and implements as we need; [but] we must make satisfactory settlement with Father Case for them, and he must inform the proper governmental authorities of the amount which he thus collects on account." [^36]

Throughout the journey, along the lower Platte,—the home of the four tribes of the Pawnee nation—the Indians were a source of constant anxiety to the Pioneer camp because of their thieving propensities. They made several attempts to creep into the camp, evidently with the intention of stealing horses, and in one instance were successful in getting two of the best in the camp, one belonging to Dr. Willard Richards, and the other to Elder Jesse C. Little. An effort to recover the stolen animals nearly led to an open conflict and bloodshed between the Indians and a party of the camp. The horses were stolen about eight o'clock on the evening of the 26th of April, and several parties went out to search for them, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball with the rest, these two not returning to camp until eleven o'clock at night. On the morning of the 27th a party was sent back on the line of march to see if anything could be learned of the missing animals. They nearly covered the march of two days, when, observing some movement in the tall grass between them and the river at the foot of a knoll, the horse-hunting party approached the place and when within a few rods of the moving object one of the party raised his gun to shoot, about twelve or fifteen Indian sprang from the tall, dry grass, all naked, except for breech-cloths, and armed both with rifles and bows and arrows. The Indians approached the party of white men evidently with hostile intentions, but when the party of Pioneers presented their fire arms and warned the Indians not to come nearer, the latter changed their manner and asked for "bacco," and one sought to shake hands with a brother Mathews, and at the same time clutch the bridle rein of his horse. But Mathews presented a cocked pistol at him and shouted at him to "go," and the Indian hastily retreated. There were further efforts at parleying by these Indians, and they sought to have the white men accompany them to the river, but the invitation was declined lest it might lead to ambush or to a stronger party of Indians. When the white men turned to leave the Indians fired several shots at them, whereupon the camp party turned upon their foe, but the Indians fled. No shots were fired by the camp party. The tracks of the missing horses were seen in this vicinity, and there was no doubt that the Pawnees had stolen them. [^37]

THE DIFFICULTY OF FEED FOR TEAMS

A real difficulty confronted the Pioneers in the matter of providing feed for their teams. In their anxiety to get to their destination in the mountains in time to plant crops that season they had started somewhat earlier than the western emigration usually started, indeed before the grass had begun to grow; and this had entailed upon them the added burden of taking along with them some grain for their teams. Moreover, as the camp advanced into the buffalo country they found the Indians giving the plains their "spring-burning." That is to say, it was the custom of the Indians in the spring to set fire to the dry grass left over from the previous year, in order to give the new growth a better and earlier start, and thus bring the buffalo herds to these new pastures. The desire to have the grass of the plains start to grow as early as possible in the spring had led those interested in traveling along the route on the south side of the Platte to fire the grass in the fall, and thus provided earlier pasturage for immigrant and fur traders' trains. But the Indian "spring-burning" on the north side of the Platte often left the "Mormon" Pioneers only blackened plains in which to camp, [^38] and their teams nothing but the stinted grain feed, supplemented by such isolated patches of dry grass as had escaped the flames, or the browsing of cottonwood trees growing on the streams and cut down to make such browsing possible. As a result of this scant feed supply their teams weakened, and often the day's journey had to be shortened on that account. It was observed in this connection that the ox teams endured the journey better than horses. [^39]

THE BUFFALO HERDS

Later the company encountered another range difficulty, the immense herds of buffalo that thronged their route and ate down the grass. The first buffaloes were sighted on the first day of May, chiefly in two herds of about two hundred each. The hunters of the camp gave chase and during the day secured ten buffalo; which, the inexperience of the hunters with that class of game considered, was a good "bagging." After this buffalo were plentiful and constantly increased in numbers for some days as the camp proceeded up the Platte; and they left the plains as clean swept of grass as did the prairie fires. [^40]

175The march of the Pioneers was so completely under organization that even the killing of game was done by hunters who had been appointed for the camp. [^41] An interesting item in connection with killing game en route was the instruction of President Young not to kill more than could be used, or that the camp needed. [^42] It appears, however, that the instructions, so reasonable, had to be enforced by sharp admonition. [^43]

175

MEASURING THE DISTANCE OF TRAVEL—ODOMETER

The distance of each day's march was recorded by the camp historian. This was ascertained at first by guessing at the distance; [^44] and later by tying a piece of red flannel to one of the spokes near the tire of a wagon wheel beside which a man walked—generally William Clayton—who counted the revolutions of the wheel, which, multiplied by the circumference, gave the distance of each day's march. [^45] About the 10th or 12th of May an "odometer" was installed, by which the distance traveled was automatically measured. The odometer was the joint product of William Clayton and Appleton M. Harmon, the latter a skillful mechanic. According to Orson Pratt it was constructed upon "the principle of the endless screw." [^46] This machine is now in the Deseret Museum at Salt Lake City, and a cut of it accompanies this chapter, though evidently some parts of it are missing. [^47]

176INTER-CAMP COMMUNICATION—TRAVELING POST SYSTEM

176Whenever an opportunity presented itself to communicate with the camps of the saints on the Missouri, the Pioneers availed themselves of it. Thus on the 4th of May when Beaumont crossed the Platte to meet the Pioneers, to which incident reference has already been made in this chapter, the camp halted long enough to write fifty-two letters to their friends and families at Winter Quarters, and the twelve wrote an epistle to the church encamped on the Missouri. These communications were entrusted to Mr. Beaumont who engaged to deliver "the mail" at Sarpee's agency, near Winter Quarters, whence it would be forwarded to the "Mormon" encampments. Quite a supply of provisions was given Mr. Beaumont as compensation for his trouble. [^48] Again on arriving at Fort Laramie letters were written some to be sent to Sarpee's agency, thence to the camps of the saints; and others to be held by one of the storekeepers at the Fort,—who kindly consented to act as "postmaster" in the case, until the arrival of other "Mormon" camps, when they would be delivered to the leaders of said companies. [^49]

176Another means of communicating with the camps that would follow was the erection of posts at striking points of the journey with a message written upon it. For example: On the 8th of May, the north bluff of the Platte valley approaching near to the river, a cedar post was erected, on which the following inscription was written:

176From Winter Quarters, 295 Miles,

176May 8th, '47, Camp, all well.

176W. Clayton. [^50]

Two days later a letter was addressed to the officers of the next camp, which it was expected would pass that point in about six or eight weeks. A piece of board 6x18 inches was sawed into a sufficient depth parallel to its surface and the letter placed in the track of the saw; cleats were then nailed on the top and sides to protect it from the weather, and the following direction written upon the board:

Open this Box and you will find a Letter:

177316 miles to Winter Quarters, Pioneers.

177Latitude 41 degrees.

177The letter contained an account of the journey up to that point. The board was then nailed to a pole four or five inches in diameter and fifteen feet long and set in the ground about five feet. [^51]

177At other times the whitened skull of a buffalo would be used for the same purpose. An engraving of one such "Bulletin of the Plains" accompanies this chapter. Not, however, as an actual reproduction of any one of these "bulletins" but an idealized representation of what they were like. [^52] It is engraved as follows:

178Pioneers

178camped here

178June 23rd, 1847

178making 15 miles today

178All well

178Brigham Young.

178Westward of Fort Laramie, where they were following the Oregon-California route, the Pioneers planted posts every ten miles, the distance being measured by their odometer. They improved the road as they journeyed over it. "We fully work our poll tax," says Orson Pratt, in his journal entry for the 9th of June, "for we have ten or twelve men detached daily whose business it is to go in advance of the company with spades, iron bars and other necessary implements to work the road."

178

PIONEER CAMP JOURNEY A SCIENTIFIC EXPEDITION

The Pioneer journey in some respects resembled a scientific expedition. By means of his full equipment of the latest and best scientific instruments for ascertaining latitude and longitude, altitude and the state of the atmosphere, Orson Pratt recorded each day's encampment in respect of these particulars, except on such days or nights—few in number—when solar or luna observation could not be taken. [^53] At Fort Laramie he made very careful observations, using the tower in the central part of the fort's buildings for this purpose. "By the meridian altitude of the sun," he records in his Journal entry of the 2nd of June, "I determined the latitude of Fort Laramie to be 42 deg. 12 min. 13 sec., differing from Captain Fremont only 3 sec. of a degree, or about 8 rods. By a mean of several barometrical observations during our short stay of three days, the height of the fort above the level of the sea was calculated to be 4,090 feet." On the 4th of June he makes this entry:

179"I again visited the fort, and ascended the tower, which is built over the main entrance of the fort, from which I took the angular distance of the sun and moon, and from a mean of six sights with the sextant, determined the longitude to be 104 deg., 11 min., 53 sec."

179And so throughout the journey the careful man of science took and recorded his observations.

179In like manner Elder Pratt noted the flora and fauna and the geological formation of the country through which the route of the company passed. Along the windings of the Platte, of course, there was great uniformity in the structure of the country and in vegetation and animals: yet such physical changes as came into view were carefully noted. After entering the mountain country west of Fort Laramie there was greater variety of scenery and physical structure, with corresponding variation in animal and vegetable life. A few extracts from Elder Pratt's Journal will illustrate the care with which he noted and recorded his observations in respect of these subjects:—

179"May 25th: A hard frost last night, and at 5 1/2 o'clock the barometer stood 26:350, attached thermometer 40 deg., detached thermometer 35.8 deg. The morning is calm with a beautiful clear sky. * * * We traveled five and a quarter miles, when I halted a few minutes to take the sun's meridian which gave the latitude 41 deg. 41 min. 46 sec. * * * I here took a luna distance for the longitude; also by an imperfect trigonometrical measurement with the sextant at the distance of three miles, Chimney Rock appeared to be about 260 feet in altitude. * * * On account of the late rains the ground has been quite wet during the day. The soil being of soft marly formation causes the water to stand in ponds and pools, which have been numerous for 15 or 20 miles.

179May 26th: * * * In about four and three-quarter miles we arrived at the meridian of Chimney Rock, our road being about three miles to the north of it. The Platte valley is here about 3,790 feet above the level of the sea. * * * Grasshoppers seem to be an inhabitant of this country: I noticed that they were plenty in dry places. Prickly pears are becoming more numerous. * * * No buffalo seen for several days; antelope yet plentiful.

179June 5th: * * * Timber much more plentiful than below Laramie. It consists of ash, cottonwood, willows, and box elder in low places, with mountain cherry, wild currants, pine, and cedar thinly scattered upon the bluffs. The wild sage grows in great quantities, and increases in size as the country increases in elevation. The wild rose flourishes in great abundance. The principal herbs and plants of this elevated region are highly odoriferous, perfuming the atmosphere with their fragrance. A thunder shower passed over just after sundown.

179June 7th: This forenoon we have gained in elevation very fast. Laramie Peak, about 12 or 15 miles to the southwest, shows from this position to good advantage. Its top is whitened with snow, that acts the part of a condenser upon the vapour of the atmosphere which comes within its vicinity, generating clouds which are precipitated in showers upon the surrounding country. This peak has been visible to our camp for eight or ten days, and I believe that almost every afternoon since, we have been visited with thunder showers, which seem to originate in the vicinity of this peak.

179June 9th: * * * Our road this forenoon passed over a red clay formation, numerous strata of rocks appeared in various directions of the same red argillaceous formation. * * * We observed some few stalks of wild flax blossom, the first that we have seen.

179June 10th: * * * The rock in the bluffs at this place would make excellent grindstones, being a fine grit sandstone. * * * On the right bank (i. e. the stream on which the camp was formed called "Fourche Boisee") and about three-quarters of a mile from our ford, we found an extensive bed of bituminous coal of superior quality.

179June 22nd: At 4 a. m. barometer stood at 24:250, attached thermometer 46 deg., detached thermometer 42 deg. The morning is calm and clear. Early this morning I visited the top of 'Devil's Gate Rock,' having with me my barometer and thermometer. By a barometrical measurement, the perpendicular walls were about 400 feet high above the river, which here cuts through a granite rock, forming a chasm about 900 or 1000 feet in length, and 130 feet in breadth. The rock upon the right bank runs back from the river about a quarter of a mile, and consists of alternated and perpendicular strata of gray granite and scoriated trap rock. I observed five alternate strata of trap rock trending to the northeast and southwest: these varied in breadth from one to five rods. The bed of the river in this chasm is nearly choked up by massive fragments of rock, which have been precipitated from above. About a quarter of a mile from the river, near the point of this granite hill, appeared some sandstone and conglomerate formation.

And so Elder Pratt's Journal continues to chronicle such matters to the end of the journey. The fact that the Pioneers had a man among them capable of doing such work; and also the fact that they had with them a large number of skilled artisans in many lines, and a still larger number of men of general affairs, marked off this company of "Mormon Pioneers" as an exceptional band of western emigrants. [^54]

MORE REDMEN VISITORS

The troubles experienced by the Pioneers from the thieving proclivities of the Pawnee Indians have already been detailed in this chapter. After leaving the Pawnee country, about Loupe Fork, they had no further trouble from the redmen either of the plains or of the mountains. On the 24th of May, however, they received a friendly visit from the Sioux Chief Owastate-cha, and a band of his people, numbering about thirty-five, including a few boys and women. The visit came about in the following manner: At the midday halt on that date two Sioux Indians came into camp; they were treated kindly, fed and they then passed on, not before signifying, however, that a band of their people were not far off. As the Pioneers were forming their night encampment they observed a party of Indians on the opposite bank of the Platte, who, by hoisting a flag and various maneuvers sought to indicate that they desired to visit the camp. President Young directed a flag to be hoisted in answer, "to let them know that they would be welcome;" and as soon as they saw the flag they began crossing the river. At first the precaution was taken to admit only the chief into the camp, but as the entirely friendly spirit of the band became manifest all were admitted. They had with them a United States flag and presented a written recommendation from Mr. Papan, one of the agents of the American Fur Company. When night came the chief sent his men some distance—half a mile—from the camp to lodge, but he himself requested the privilege of staying with the Pioneers, and a tent was accordingly pitched for his accommodation. Notwithstanding the confidence entertained in the friendly disposition of these Indians precaution was taken to more securely stake down the horses that night; nothing occurred, however, to disturb the camp's rest.

182The whole company of Indians were fed both on the night of the 24th and the next morning; there was some trading of horses between the Indians and the brethren, some peltries bought, also moccasins and other trinkets, and the Indians recrossed the Platte "in high glee," apparently well satisfied with their visit. [^55] These Indians were much better dressed, according to Orson Pratt, "than the Indians on the frontiers [i. e. at Council Bluffs], many of them wearing broadcloth, blankets, and fur caps, ornamented with an abundance of beads and other ornaments, having bows and steel pointed arrows. They were (of) the Dacotah tribe, which interpreted signifies 'cut throat,' but generally known to the whites by the name of Sioux." [^56]

182"THE LORD'S DAY"—BRIGHAM YOUNG'S REPROOF

The camp in its march usually observed "The Lord's Day" by resting from their journey and holding religious services. Only the emergencies of securing food for their animals, the necessity of making some point for encampment or fording streams to that end, seem to have occasioned the breaches of the custom. There was at times much merriment in camp. There were musical instruments brought along and those who could play them. There was dancing, too, occasionally, notwithstanding the absence of ladies; [^57] the games of quoits, of checkers, some card-playing for amusement, scuffling, wrestling, the telling of humorous stories of doubtful propriety, loud laughter, the playing of practical jokes and the like were indulged. If these things were an offense in a company made up of churchmen engaged in a New Dispensation of the gospel of the Christ, and seeking then a home for the exiles of a religious persecution, it should be remembered that in the main the company was composed of young men. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were then forty-six years old, respectively; Willard Richards forty-three. These were the recognized leaders of the camp; the rest of the personnel of the Pioneers, with very few exceptions, ranged below this age, and many of them far below it; and they were possessed of the exuberance natural to youth, and that youth alive in a new atmosphere of freedom—of open plains and boundless physical prospects, to which environment their souls were unconsciously expanding.

All this may be urged in extenuation of the sport-loving spirit of the camp; but it did not appeal to the leader, Brigham Young, whom, it should always be remembered, was of Puritan extraction, and in sympathy with that stern school of moral uprightness by training as well as by birth; therefore what he regarded as the somewhat lax camp life of his associates did not escape censure. He had engaged if the camp would attend strictly to its duties, "abide his counsels and observe his directions, they should go safely, and they and their teams be preserved from the Indians and from every enemy." [^58] When completing the organization of the camp on the Elkhorn he had predicted their success upon the condition of their faithfulness, humility, vigilance and prayerfulness, while on the journey, "and if they would go in such manner as to claim the blessing of heaven." [^59] He therefore reproved the camp from time to time for its tendency to lightmindedness, and sternly reminded his brethren of their obligations to humility and sober-mindedness. [^60]

184Finally, respecting these matters, things reached a climax on Saturday the 29th of May. The morning of that day was cold and rainy. The horn for gathering up the horses and cattle was sounded, but instead of proceeding on the journey, President Young required each captain to call out his men and each group to stand by itself. It was found that when this was done the whole camp, excepting two, were present, and these two were out hunting. President Young then addressed himself to the camp in the following terms—the account is from Woodruff's Journal:

184"I think I will take for my text to preach my sermon from—(these words):

184'I am about to revolt from traveling with this camp any further with the spirit they now possess'."

184He then proceeded to say:

184"I had rather risk myself among the savages with ten men that are men of faith, men of mighty prayer, men of God, than to be with this whole camp when they forget God and turn their hearts to folly and wickedness. Yes, I had rather be alone; and I am now resolved not to go any further with the camp unless you will covenant to humble yourselves before the Lord and serve him and quit your folly and wickedness. For a week past nearly the whole camp has been cardplaying, and checkers and dominoes have occupied the attention of the brethren, and dancing and 'hoeing down'—all this has been the act continually. Now, it is quite time to quit it. And there has been trials of law suits upon every nonsensical thing; [^61] and if those things are suffered to go on, it will be but a short time before you will be fighting, knocking each other down and taking life. It is high time it was stopped." [^62]

185So he continued in this spirit to admonish and reprove the camp, showing the brethren how inconsistent the course of the camp had been for a week past or more, for men who were going "to seek out a location in the mountains for a resting place for the saints, even the whole church of God, who have been driven out from the Gentiles and rejected of them; * * * a resting place for the saints where the standard of the kingdom of God would be reared, and a banner unfurled for the nations to gather unto." [^63]

185Finally he called first upon his fellow apostles of the twelve to know if they were willing to humble themselves before the Lord and covenant to do right; if so they must manifest it by the uplifted hand. Every hand in that council was raised. The same question was put to the high priests, to the seventies, to the elders, and to the members, and all unanimously covenanted to repent of their sins and keep the commandments of the Lord. President Young then addressed himself to the few members of the camp who were not members of the church—"as there were some present." [^64] He informed them "that they would be protected in their rights, but they must not introduce wickedness in the camp, for it would not be suffered." [^65]

The day following—which was Sunday—was set apart as a day of fasting, humiliation and prayer. Prayer meeting was held by the whole camp; and a second meeting at which the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered. "The Lord seemed to accept the offerings of our hearts," wrote Erastus Snow that day, "and poured out his spirit upon us." [^66] The twelve and a few others, in addition to attending these public services, "went into the valley of the hills; and, according to the order of the priesthood, prayed in a circle." Two of the brethren were stationed on guard to protect these brethren from interruption by the Indians. [^67]

186The repentance of the camp seems to have been most effectual as we hear no more complaint of their conduct en route for their destination.

186On the 1st of June the Pioneer camp arrived opposite Fort Laramie. Here the Black Hills project abruptly down from the north to the banks of the Platte river, and the Pioneers learned that further progress with wagons on the north bank of that stream was impracticable, and preparations had to be made for crossing over to the south bank. The distance from Winter Quarters to the point they had now reached was 543 miles. The company had a good road from Winter Quarters to Loupe Fork, a distance of about 140 miles, but for four hundred miles the Pioneers had made a new trail across the plains, and now were about one half the distance from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake valley.

NOTES

The personnel of the Pioneer band, was as follows. They are given as divided into companies of "Tens":

186First Ten—Wilford Woodruff, captain; John S. Fowler, Jacob D. Burnham, Orson Pratt, Joseph Egbert, John M. Freeman, Marcus B. Thorpe, Geo, A. Smith, Geo. Wardle.

186Second Ten—Ezra T. Benson, captain; Thomas B. Grover, Barbaras L. Adams, Roswell Stevens, Amasa M. Lyman, Starling G. Driggs, Albert Carrington, Thomas Bullock, George Brown, Willard Richards, Jesse C. Little.

186Third Ten—Phineas H. Young, captain; John Y. Green, Thomas Tanner, Brigham Young, Addison Everett, Truman O. Angell, Lorenzo D. Young, Bryant Stringham, Joseph S. Scofield, Albert P. Rockwood.

186Fourth Ten—Luke S. Johnson, captain; John Holman, Edmund Ellsworth, Alvarus Hanks, George R. Grant, Millen Atwood, Samuel B. Fox, Tunis Rappleyee, Harry Pierce, Wm. Kykes, Jacob Weiler.

186Fifth Ten—Stephen H. Goddard, captain; Tarlton Lewis, Henry G. Sherwood, Zebedee Coltrin, Sylvester H. Earl, John Dixon, Samuel H. Marble, George Scholes, Wm. Henrie, Wm. A. Empey.

186Sixth Ten—Charles Shumway, captain; Andrew Shumway, Thos. Woolsey, Chauncey Loveland, Erastus Snow, James Craig, Wm. Wordsworth, Wm. Vance, Simeon Howd, Seeley Owen.

186Seventh Ten—James Case, captain; Artemas Johnson, Wm. C. A. Smoot, Franklin B. Dewey, Wm. Carter, Franklin G. Losee, Burr Frost, Datus Ensign, Franklin B. Stewart, Monroe Frink, Eric Glines, Ozro Eastman.

186Eighth Ten—Seth Taft, captain; Horace Thorton, Stephen Kelsey, John S. Eldredge, Charles D. Barnum, Alma W. Williams, Rufus Allen, Robert T. Thomas, James W. Stewart, Elijah Newman, Levi N. Kendall, Francis Boggs, David Grant.

186Ninth Ten—Howard Egan, captain; Heber C. Kimball, Wm. A. King, Thomas Cloward, Hosea Cushing, Robert Byard, George Billings, Edison Whipple, Philo Johnson, Wm. Clayton.

186Tenth Ten—Appleton M. Harmon, captain; Carlos Murray, Horace K. Whitney, Orson K. Whitney, Orrin P. Rockwell, Nathaniel T. Brown, R. Jackson Redding, John Pack, Francis Pomeroy, Aaron Farr, Nathaniel Fairbanks.

186Eleventh Ten—John S. Higbee, captain; John Wheeler, Solomon Chamberlain, Conrad Klineman, Joseph Rooker, Perry Fitzgerald, John H. Tippetts, James Davenport, Henson Walker, Benjamin Rolfe.

186Twelfth Ten—Norton Jacobs, captain; Charles A. Harper George Woodward, Stephen Markham, Lewis Barney, George Mills, Andrew Gibbons, Joseph Hancock, John W. Norton.

186Thirteenth Ten—John Brown, captain; Shadrach Roundy, Levi Jackman, Lyman Curtis, Hans C. Hansen, Mathew Ivory, David Powers, Hark Lay (colored), Oscar Crosby (colored).

186Fourteenth Ten—Joseph Mathews, captain; Gilbroid Summe, John Gleason, Charles Burke, Alexander P. Chessley, Rodney Badger, Norman Taylor, Green Flake (colored), Ellis Eames, who, it will be remembered, returned to Winter Quarters from the Pioneer camp on the 18th of April on account of sickness.

187Besides the men, there were three women and two children in the camp. Their names are given in the text of this History, and their presence in the camp is also explained.

The published account of the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1804-6 created a lively interest in the great west and northwest; and men of bold spirits saw the opening both for a life of adventure and a prospect of profit in the fur trade that might be opened with the native tribes of the vast region partly explored and in hunting and trapping either on their own account or for the fur companies then forming in the United States. This threw into the intermountain west an irregular vanguard of the civilization that was to follow; for the trading posts of the fur companies, usually called "forts"—though for the most part without ordinance or garrisons or governmental authority—became the objective points to which the subsequent missionaries and settlers successively moved in their irregular march through and conquest of the west. Following these rough men of the wilderness came the missionaries to the Indians. The missionaries so far as they were Protestants and from the United States, began their work in the northwest in 1834. The first company was headed by Jason and Daniel Lee, sent out under the auspices of the missionary board of the Methodist Episcopal church. They went via Kansas river, the forks of the Platte, Fort Laramie, Green river, Fort Hall, Walla Walla and down the Columbia to the Willammette valley. [^68]

188The next company of Protestant missionaries for Oregon went under the auspices of the Presbyterian church in 1835. These were Rev. Samuel Parker and Dr. Marcus Whitman. They traveled under the protection of a company of sixty trappers and hunters of the American Fur Company, and took the same route as the Methodist missionaries and with wagons as far as Fort Laramie; but at the rendezvous on Green river Dr. Whitman returned to the east to obtain teachers for the proposed mission.

188Dr. Whitman in the spring of 1836, was again on the Missouri ready to start a second time for the northwest, and now accompanied by his wife whom during the winter he had married and persuaded to share his missionary labors. Also he had persuaded the Rev. H. H. Spalding and wife, both of Ohio, to join him in missionary work. The wives of these missionaries were the first white women to make the overland journey to the northwest.

188There were almost yearly efforts at migrations to either California or Oregon after 1836, but none of any great importance until 1841, in which year a company of forty-eight men and fifteen women, formed into a company to go to California, subsequently joined by a small party of missionaries, hunters and gentlemen seeking pleasure—seventeen in all. John Bartleson was chosen captain of this company, and in emigrant annals the company usually bears his name; but John Bidwell was the historian of the camp. The missionaries carried their effects upon five carts; thirteen wagons made up the rest of the train. The route followed was the Kansas river, north fork of the Platte, South Pass, Green river and "Beer" or "Soda Springs," where the company divided, part going to Oregon via Fort Hall, the others making their way down the Bear river through Cache valley, thence round the north end of Salt Lake to the sinks of the Humbolt and so to California. [^69]

In 1842 the main body of western emigrants was led by Elijah White. White had been in Oregon with the Lees, with whom, however, he had quarrelled and as a consequence had returned to the east. But when the settlers of the Willammette valley asked that a civil magistrate or governor be sent to execute such laws of the United States as might obtain there, White was appointed sub-Indian agent with the understanding also that "the settlers, if they chose to do so, could by mutual consent sustain the sub-Indian agent's claim to be regarded as a magistrate among them, although without definite authority from the United States, White was also authorized to use every reasonable effort to induce emigrants to accompany him. By the middle of May, 1842, a company of 112 persons, 52 being men over eighteen years of age, chiefly from Jackson and Platte counties, Mo., rendezvoused about twenty miles southwest of Independence. The start was made on the 16th of May, the train consisted of 18 Pennsylvania wagons with a long procession of horses, pack mules and cattle. The company went via the Kansas river, forks of the Platte, Fort Laramie, South Pass, Green river and Fort Hall. At Fort Laramie they abandoned one-half the number of their wagons, at Green river a number of the wagons were cut up and pack saddles made of them; the remainder of wagons were abandoned at Fort Hall and the rest of the journey to the Willammette valley was made as a pack train. [^70]

189In 1843 a still larger emigrant company was formed near Independence, under various leading spirits from Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee, Illinois, Iowa and Missouri, nearly one thousand in all: 120 wagons, and 5,000 cattle. This company veered from the usual route, in that after reaching Green river, via Fort Laramie, they went via Fort Bridger, and down Bear river to Soda Springs, and so to Fort Hall, where part of the company turned off with L. W. Hastings as leader for California. According to the register kept by McLoughlin, agent of the Hudson Bay Company at Fort Vancouver, on the lower Columbia, the number of emigrants arriving in Oregon for 1843, was registered as 875, men, women and children. [^71]

189The emigration of 1844 collected at different points on the Missouri, amounted in all to about 1,400 persons. One of the chief companies was that which assembled at Weston, Mo., under the leadership of Cornelius Gilliam of Platte county, who took a prominent part in mobbing the saints at Far West in 1838. (See ante, this History, ch xxxv.) His company numbered 48 families, 323 persons; 410 oxen, 160 cows, 143 young cattle, 54 horses, 41 mules, and 72 wagons. The emigration followed the Platte route to Laramie, South Pass, Bear river, Fort Hall and so following to the lower Oregon. [^72]

The emigration to Oregon in 1845 "was larger than any that had preceded it, three thousand persons are registered as arriving in the Columbia valley that year;" following practically the same route of travel. Speaking of the Oregon California route via Fort Hall, Bancroft says: "Let it suffice to regard the route to Fort Hall as a great national highway along which ox and mule teams passed westward during the season, not with the frequency or regularity or convenience of the more modern railroad trains, but yet without hardships and dangers so excessive as to prevent the travelers from being born and married and buried on the way." [^73] Morris declares that in 1845 there were "seven thousand Americans and only a few British in Oregon." [^74]

190The emigration of 1846 was not so large as that of the previous year. The best evidence yet collected gives the number of emigrants leaving Missouri river points that year as 2,500 persons. Of these, from fifteen to seventeen hundred went to Oregon, the remainder to California, turning to the Oregon route at Fort Hall, [^75] though some went via Echo and Weber canons and around the south end of Salt Lake; and one company—the Donner party, turning off at the head of Weber canon, followed up Ogden's Fork of the Weber, which was afterwards called "Canon Creek," now "East Canon Creek"—down Emigration canyon to the road around the south end of the lake: thence bearing northwestward for the Humbolt river. In 1847 the number of emigrants to Oregon numbered from four to five thousand, following the same route via the Platte, South Pass, Bear river, and Fort Hall. The above are exclusive of those who went to California via Fort Hall and other routes. [^76]

The following is the description of the Pioneer odometer given by William Clayton; "The whole machinery consists of a shaft about eighteen inches long, placed on gudgeons, one in the axletree of the wagon, near which are six arms placed at equal distances around it, and in which a cog works which is fastened on the hub of the wagon wheel, turning the shaft once around at every revolution of the wagon wheel. The upper gudgeon plays in a piece of wood nailed to the wagon box, and near this gudgeon, on the shaft, a screw is cut. The shaft lays at an angle of 45 degrees. In this screw a wheel works on an axle (fixed in the side of the wagon) of 60 cogs, and which makes one revolution for each mile traveled. In the shaft on which this wheel runs four cogs are cut on the forepart, which plays in another wheel of 40 cogs, which shows the miles and quarters of miles up to ten miles. The box incasing the whole is 18 inches long, 15 inches high and 3 inches thick." [^77]

According to the Deseret Museum Curator's report upon the machine in that institution and the above description by the principal inventor, there are material differences, both as to the size of the machine over all, and the number of cogs in wheels and in the levers for transmitting motion, etc. Which differences may be accounted for either by defectiveness in the description, or by the absence of parts of the machine, perhaps by both of these circumstances.

191It is said on the label of the machine in the museum that it "was used by Brigham Young and his company to measure the distance from the Missouri river to Salt Lake valley;" and that the "difference between the measurements made with this instrument and those made by the government surveyors, who subsequently passed over the route, was less than 60 feet." Of course this use of the odometer by Brigham Young and "his company" must refer to some journey made by the great leader subsequent to the Pioneer journey; for, as stated in the text of this History, the odometer was not installed until about the 12th of May, when the Pioneer company was midway between Council Bluffs and Fort Laramie. It may have been used—this museum odometer—and this record made on President Young's journey the following year.

Footnotes

(Clayton's Journal, entry for 16th April).

"At the sight of these words, traced on the skull of a buffalo, as a guide to the friends who were behind in the great hegira, imagination rouses itself. From the shadow of the past, long vanished yesterdays emerge. The west's wild, free, vivid day's return. With its hardships, its heroism, its romance, and its story of splendid achievement written across the landscape of half a continent, the Old Trail lives for us again." (Charles M. Harvey in Atlantic Monthly, July, 1910.)

---
Notas:
[^1] HISTORY OF FORT LARAMIE "Such is the description of the fort by Orson Pratt, see journal entry for June 1st. It differs but slightly from Colonel Fremont's description of five years before. The latter adds the following concerning the entrances to the Fort: "There are two entrances, opposite each other and midway the wall, one of which is a large public entrance; the other smaller and more private, a sort of postern gate. Over the great entrance is a square tower with loopholes, and like the rest of the work, built of earth. At two of the angles, and diagonally opposite each other are large square bastions, so arranged as to sweep the four faces of the walls" (Report of Fremont's First Expedition, 1842, p. 39). For a brief history of Fort Laramie see Note 1, end of this chapter.
[^2] THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY OF SAINTS As a matter of fact this "fort" was never completed, "having one side open towards the river." It was erected by Sabille Adams and Co. (See Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 685).
[^3] THE MEETING OF THE PIONEERS WITH THOMAS L. SMITH The Mississippi company of saints were converts chiefly from Monroe county, Mississippi, who under instruction from President Young had left their homes in the south, to take up the journey westward. For the history of this company, see Note 2 end of chapter.
[^4] ORSON PRATT, PIONEER OF THE PIONEER COMPANY Woodruff's Journal entry for June 1st. Also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 91. The names of the Mississippi detachment here met were as follows:
[^5] ROSTER OF ORSON PRATT'S "ADVANCE COMPANY" Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for June 3rd, 1847. These emigrants were represented to be from Missouri, Iowa and Illinois. (See Erastus Snow's Journal of same date).
[^6] ERASTUS SNOW Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 5th and 6th of June. Erastus Snow gives the number in the 2nd company as 19 wagons. (Snow's Journal, entry 6th of June).
[^7] EMIGRANT COMPANIES PASSING THROUGH SALT LAKE VALLEY IN 1846 History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 92. Wilford Woodruff says: "We visited the traders and got some information from the Salt Lake country which was flattering: good account was given of it." (Woodruff's Journal, entry 8th of June).
[^8] THE ARRIVAL OF BRIGHAM YOUNG IN SALT LAKE VALLEY History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 92. In this incident I follow the text of Young's History.— Woodruff's Journal gives the number of wagons in the detached company as fifteen; Snow at "about twenty," entries for 9th of June.
[^9] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for June 9th. These "Packers" seem to have given out different stories as to where they were from and whither bound, hence there are different accounts of them in the Journals of the Pioneers.
[^10] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry 10th June, Improvement Era, vol. xv, p. 165.
[^11] This boat was capable of carrying from 1>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>,500 to 1,800 lbs. (Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 12th of June).
[^12] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 94. "It looked as much of a miracle to me," says Wilford Woodruff, "to see our flour and meal bags replenished in the midst of the Black Hills, as it did to have the children of Israel fed on manna in the wilderness." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 13th of June).
[^13] Fifty Years Ago Today," June 12, 1897.
[^14] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 13th of June.
[^15] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry 13th of June.
[^16] "From that point, between the 18th of June and the latter part of that month, 560 wagons started for the west, bringing with them 1,553 souls. These companies had 2,213 oxen, 124 horses, 887 cows, many of which had to do service under the yoke; 358 sheep, 716 chickens, and a number of pigs." (Whitney's History of Utah, vol. 1, p. 358, also History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 94).
[^17] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 26th of June, 1847.
[^18] Report of Fremont's First Exploring Expedition, 1842-3, p. 60, Government Document No. 166.
[^19] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 26th of June.
[^20] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, entry for June 27th, 1847.
[^21] Utah Pioneers, pp. 44-5. See also Note 3, end of chapter.
[^22] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 28th of June.
[^23] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 28th of June.
[^24] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry 28th of June. Also Woodruff's Journal to the same effect.
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, p. 95. Erastus Snow in his great reminiscent discourse on the "Utah Pioneers" (p. 43) delivered in Salt Lake City, July 25th, 1880, said Bridger's offer was "for the first ear of corn raised in the valley of the Great Salt Lake or the valley of the Utah Outlet," meaning Utah Lake valley, some 30 miles south of Salt Lake. Snow in his discourse spoke extemporaneously and from memory. There is a sense in which Bridger's offer of $1,000 for a bushel of corn raised in the Salt Lake valley can be understood other than regarding it as an expression of belief in the impossibility of the thing, viz., an expression of hope that it might be done—a reward for a desired demonstration of the thing. Wilford Woodruff's Journal account of the interview with Bridger would warrant such a view. He says: "He (Bridger) spoke more highly of the Great Basin for a settlement than Major Harris did; that it was his paradise, and if this people [i. e. the saints] settled in it, he wanted to settle with them. There was but one thing that could operate against it becoming a great grain country, and that would be the frost. He did not know but the frost would kill the corn" (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 28th of June)—he would give a $1,000 to have a demonstration that this was not so, as Salt lake valley, "his paradise," would then be known as a desirable place for settlement. Bridger was evidently tiring of his isolated, half-outcast life, and desired to settle with white people, proven by the fact of his purchase of a farm less than ten years later at Westport, Missouri, and his attempt to settle down to a regular life. (Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 685, note).
[^26] Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 43.
[^27] Brannan had made a brave march of more than 800 miles to confer with the church leaders, and that with only two companions. Orson Pratt thus describes that journey in his Journal, entry of June 30th, 1847, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 161: "He left the Bay of San Francisco on the 4th of April last, expressly to meet us, accompanied by only two persons; and, having at this early season of the year braved the dangers of the deep snows upon the mountains, and the wild and savage tribes of Indians that roam over these terrific regions, he arrived in safety at our camp; having also passed directly over the camping ground where about 40 or 50 California emigrants had perished, and been eaten up by their fellow-sufferers only a few days before. Their skulls, bones, and carcasses lay strewed in every direction. He also met the hindmost one of these unfortunate creatures making his way into the settlements. He was a German, and had lived upon human flesh for several weeks." The party that perished as described above was the ill-fated Donner party, of which more later.
[^28] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry for 4th of July.
[^29] Their names were Phineas H. Young, Geo. Woodward, Aaron Farr, Eric Clines and Rodney Badger.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 96.
[^31] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 97. Thomas S. Williams, named in the above quotation, was Sergeant Williams of Company D in the original battalion organization, and was the officer in command of the company of 13 which had overtaken the Pioneers. (Journal of John Brown, 1847, p. 67).
[^32] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 9th of July.
[^33] Ibid, entry of 7th of July. The "Post" was founded in 1842 by its then—1847—present owners. [James Bridger et al] and was abandoned in 1853. (Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 684).
[^34] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 9th of July.
[^35] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 9th of July. Three small wagon trains passed over the trail, of which more later.
[^36] His effort at "farming" consisted in fencing a small patch of land on the banks of the Weber, in 1846, "and [he] had tried the experiment of sowing grain and planting vegetables in a small way." (See Erastus Snow's Discourse, Utah Pioneers, p. 45.) In Fifty Years Ago Today, Goodyear's "farm" is erroneously located "in the Bear river valley;" and he is credited with being "the pioneer farmer in Utah" (See Fifty Years Ago Today, July 11th, 1897). Goodyear came to the west from Iowa, with the Whitman-Spalding missionary party, in the spring of 1836. He was then a lad of sixteen, and traveled with the missionaries in the capacity of a servant to Fort Wyeth, on Snake river, where he left the missionaries to join a fur hunting expedition; and so drifted into the business of Indian trader and mountain guide. (See Bancroft's History of Oregon, vol. 1, p. 127.)
[^37] Woodruff speaking of the meeting with Goodyear said: "He has settled at Salt Lake, has a garden and vegetation of all kinds, he says, doing well. He spoke of three roads to Salt Lake." (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 10th of July.) The three roads referred to were (1) the road via Bridger, down Bear River via Soda Springs, Cache valley and so to the north end of Salt Lake, Captain Bartelson's route 1841; also the route of Fremont to Salt Lake, 1843 (See this History, chapter lxxviii, Note 2. Emigration to Oregon, 1834-1847); (2) the route via Weber canon, down which Hastings had led two companies with wagons: (3) the Donner-Reed route which led up Ogden's Fork of Weber river, or Canon Creek, down Emigration canon, to the south end of the Salt Lake where it again picked up Hastings' new road.
[^38] Brown's Journal, 1847, Ms., p. 67.
[^39] Pratt's Journal, entry for the 13th of July. See also Note 4, end of this chapter on Pratt's appointment to the leadership of this "advanced party," and for the names of the party see Note 5, end of chapter.
[^40] History of California, Bancroft, vol. iv, p. 399.
[^41] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. pp. 528-9 and footnotes.
[^42] Ibid. p. 530.
[^43] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. pp. 529-30.
[^44] Ibid: also What I Saw In California, Journal of a Tour, by Edwin Bryant, p. 144. See Note 7, end of this chapter.
[^45] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. p. 531.
[^46] "Reid" in "Mormon" Pioneer Journals, but "Reed" in Bancroft's works.
[^47] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. 1, p. 296.
[^48] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. p. 531.
[^49] History of California, vol. v, p. 531.
[^50] It is reported in some of our "Mormon" annals that the Donner party was from Missouri; but that is not borne out by the facts. Its composition as to the states whence its members started from was as follows:
[^51] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 531.
[^52] See Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, ch. xxxv, pp. 301-302.
[^53] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 543. "There was nothing remarkable in the composition of the [Donner] company," says Bancroft, "which included rich and poor; American, Irish and German; Protestant, Catholic and Mormon" (History of California, vol. v, p. 531). The "Mormons" were represented by the family of a Mrs. Lovenia Murphy, a widow with three sons and two daughters, one of whom, Harriet, was married to Wm. M. Pike. "Mrs. Murphy had lived at Nauvoo and later at Warsaw," according to Bancroft she accepted "an engagement to cook and wash for the emigrants with a view to reach with her children the ultimate destination of the saints." (History of California, vol. v, p. 531, note). She was among those who perished in the mountains. Sergeant Tyler of the Mormon Battalion saw one of the daughters of Mrs. Murphy—Mary—who had meantime married a Mr. Johnson, in California—and from her learned the story condensed by Bancroft. Tyler credits "Sister Murphy" with good motives, but thinks she made a mistake in leaving the saints to go with this party. (Tyler's Mormon Battalion, p. 312. Tyler gives Mrs. Murphy's name as Murry. Wilford Woodruff, who baptized Mrs. Murphy, while on his mission in Tennessee, says she apostatized and joined the mob. See Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 1847, entry for 10th July), by which he means no more, perhaps, than that she lived among those who were mobbing the saints in Illinois.
[^54] "Our journey down 'Red Fork'," says the leader of the "advance party," "has truly been very interesting and exceedingly picturesque. We have been shut up in a narrow valley from ten to twenty rods wide, while upon each side the hills rise very abruptly from 800 to 1200 feet, and for most of the distance we have been walled in by vertical and overhanging precipices of red pudding-stone, and also red sandstone dipping to the northwest in an angle of about 20 degrees. * * * The country is very mountainous in every direction." (Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 14th of July).
[^55] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 15th of July; and John Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 68. "Brother Pratt and myself, who acted as pilots and pioneers of the camp, went down and examined the canon, but did not find it practicable."
[^56] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 15th of July, John Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 68. After describing the examination of the road down Weber canon, Brown adds: "We then examined the other pass to the south, through which a small company of California emigrants passed the year before, but we could scarcely see their trail."
[^57] Pratt's Journal, 16th of July.
[^58] "This creek passes through a canon about 40 rods below, where it is for a few rods shut up by perpendicular and overhanging walls, being a break in a mountain, which rises several hundred feet upon each side. The creek plunges underneath a large rock which lay in its bed, near the foot of the canon, blockading the same and making it wholly impassable for wagons or teams." (Pratt's Journal, entry for 17th July). It was this mountain gorge which Reed, the year before, found it necessary to go round, hence "the circuitous route over the hills," back to the canon's creek again followed by Pratt and Brown as described in the text.
[^59] "July 16, we sent a messenger back to the main camp to report progress and bring us word from our brethren. On the 17th moved over to 'Big Canon Creek.' Erastus Snow, who was with the main part of the camp, says when reaching this point "We * * * struck a large creek, which proved to be a branch of the Weber river, which Elder Pratt named Canon Creek, from the fact of its entering a tremendous, impassable canon just below where the road strikes it, and also winds its way between these mountain cliffs and empties into the river between upper and lower canons on that stream." (Erastus Snow's Journal, enry 19th of July, 1847).
[^60] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 17th of July, 1847. Also Brown: "We * * * ascended a high mountain on the left of the road; we could see nothing but mountains except a beautiful park which lay up the creek." (Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 69).
[^61] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 18th of July, 1847.
[^62] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 19th of July. Brown says, writing of the events of the 19th: "We went ahead as usual to explore the route. Went as far as the top of the big mountain. Here we had a view of the valley for the first (time). We went on to the mountain to the right and saw what we supposed to be one corner of the lake, which intelligence we carried back to the camp causing all to rejoice." (Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 69).
[^63] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 19th of July, 1847. Erastus Snow's description of the pass is as follows: "The pass over the summit was narrow, peaks of the mountain rising on each side for three-fourths of a mile. This pass is the only notch or opening of the mountains known in this region of the country that is at all practicable for a road, except through the canon down the bed of the Weber river, which is very rough, and passable only in the lowest stages of water, and scarcely passable for wagons up the stream at any stage. From the summit of the pass, for the first time, I got a sight of the valley of the Utah Outlet, (i. e. valley of the Jordan) extending from the Utah to the Salt Lake." Pratt registers the altitude of the pass to be 7,245 feet above the sea.
[^64] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for July 20th, 1847.
[^65] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 21st of July. Of this view of the valley obtained from near the mouth of Emigration canon, Erastus Snow also says: "From the view we had of the valley from the top of the mountain, we supposed it to be only an arm of prairie extending up from the Utah valley, but on ascending this butte we involuntarily, both at the same instant, uttered a shout of joy at finding it to be the very place of our destination, and beheld the broad bosom of the Salt Lake Spreading itself before us." (Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 21st July, 1847).
[^66] Erastus Snow, Utah Pioneers, p. 46.
[^67] The fact that President Young thus directed the movements of the advance company of Pioneers is beyond question. Following is extracted from John Brown's Journal, for 1847, p. 69, Ms. Writing of the incidents of the 19th of July, and speaking of his own and Elder Pratt's return from Big Mountain, he says: "Our messenger [O. P. Rockwell sent to President Young's camp on the 16th to report the progress of the advance company] had returned to us and brought word that the president was better. He had started the main camp on, and was still stopping with a few wagons to rest a little longer, telling the brethren when they got into the valley to turn a little north and put in their seed of all kinds, a small quantity of each to try the soil." And so Erastus Snow, in describing the advent of Orson Pratt and himself into Salt Lake valley, he says: "We could see the canes down in the valley on what is now called Mill Creek, south of the lower grist mill, which looked like grain: and thither we directed our course. But when we reached it and ascertained what it really was, and remembering the last injunction of President Young, we turned northward and crossed Mill Creek on to City Creek [present site of Salt Lake City], which appeared to us the point of our destination as indicated by the president." (Utah Pioneers, p. 46).
[^68] Life and Labors of Orson Pratt, by his son, Milando Pratt, 1891, The Contributor, vol. xii, p. 188.
[^69] An ominous presense this, in view of events to be recounted later; but at the time their presence was first noticed, there was no premonition that these black, ugly crickets would become a terror to the settlers—a menace to their very existence.
[^70] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 22nd July. John Brown who was one of the company of nine who made this detour into the valley, agrees in all the essentials reported by Pratt. (See Brown's Journal, 1847, Ms., pp. 69-70. Ditto Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 23rd of July).
[^71] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 23rd of July, Erastus Snow also says: "At noon on the 23rd we made our camp on City Creek below Emigration Street, or the street where the street railroad runs east from the Clift House, and just below that on the old channel of the creek; the creek divided just below this Temple Block, one branch running west and the other south. It was on the south branch of the creek we formed our camp on the noon of the 23rd; and here we bowed ourselves down in humble prayer to Almighty God with hearts full of thanksgiving to him, and dedicated this land unto him for the dwelling place of his people." (Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 46).
[^72] Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 46.
[^73] I think this statement is true notwithstanding what is said in this chapter about the irrigated garden of Goodyear at the mouth of Weber canon at the time the Pioneers arrived in the valley; and notwithstanding what is said by Fremont of Captain Sutter—a Swiss immigrant to America—and irrigation at Sutter's Fort at the mouth of the American river in March, 1844, where a simple Indian system of irrigation was in operation, with a more extensive one in prospect from the use of the American river which is spoken of, but whether put into operation or not is unknown. At any rate it was from the Salt Lake valley irrigation example that modern Anglo-Saxon irrigation took its rise, and has progressed to its present large achievements and importance. Following is Fremont's passage with reference to irrigation at Sutter's Fort in March, 1844:
[^74] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 23rd of July. There was not enough rain, however, to lay the dust, and at three o'clock the thermometer stood at 96 degrees.
[^75] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 17th of July.
[^76] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 18th of July.
[^77] From the Journal of Wilford Woodruff it is learned that this "Canon Creek," so named by Orson Pratt, for reason previously given, was known as "Ogden's Fork," [i. e. of Weber river] doubtless because of some connection of Peter Skeen Ogden with this region, as trapper and Indian trader; and the road over the hills to avoid the passage through the canon was called "Reed's Pass," after James F. Reed of the Donner company who passed over the route the year before. The passage in Woodruff's Journal is as follows: "Brothers Kimball, Benson and Lorenzo we camped on (Canon Creek). The route we are taking is 'Reed's Pass,' which we have named 'Pratt's Pass' in consequence of his going on to make the road. (Journal, Ms., entry for July 21st). Then in his journal entry for 22nd he remarks: "We traveled four miles today on East Canon Creek, where the 'Pratt Pass' leaves the fork for good and turns to the west." (Ibid).
