B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

192CHAPTER LXXIX

192THE PIONEER JOURNEY FROM FORT LARAMIE TO SALT LAKE VALLEY

192FORT LARAMIE was situated about two miles from the south bank of the Platte, on the left bank of the Laramie river, and about a mile and a half from its confluence with the Platte. The Laramie is a mountain stream and its pure, clear water, for the Pioneers, was in pleasant contrast with the muddy, yellow waters of the Platte. It took its name from a french trapper who in the earlier fur-hunting times was killed on the stream by the Arapahoe Indians.

FORT LARAMIE

The walls of Fort Laramie were built of clay or unburnt brick, being about 15 feet high, "and of a rectangular construction, measuring on the exterior 116 by 168 feet. Ranges of houses were built in the interior adjoining the walls, leaving a central yard of about 100 feet square. The post belonged to the American Fur Company, and was occupied by about eighteen men with their families under the charge of Mr. Boudeau." [^1] A mile further down the river, but nearer to the right bank of the Platte than to the Laramie stream, was 'Fort Platte," founded in 1842, but at the time of the arrival of the Pioneers it was vacated and just crumbling into ruins. [^2]

193When it was learned that the north bank of the Platte could be followed no further, the Pioneers obtained the use of a good flat boat from the agents of the American Fur Company at Fort Bridger for the sum of $15.00, and the 2nd, 3rd and part of the 4th of June was occupied in ferrying their seventy-three wagons over to the south bank of the Platte. While the ferrying over was in progress a pit of charcoal was burned and the blacksmiths at three portable forges set to work to repair wagons, shoe horses, etc., preparatory to encountering the harder roads of the mountains; and by the time the ferrying was completed the camp was in condition to resume its journey.

THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY OF SAINTS

Arriving on the "Oregon Trail," for the Pioneer company, was like coming back into the world again after a temporary absence—like renewing social relations that had been severed. The first item of news they received from the outside world was conveyed to their camp on the evening of its arrival opposite Fort Laramie. This was by two brethren, Robert Crow and George Therlkill, from what is known in Latter-day Saints annals as the "Mississippi company of saints," [^3] which had wintered at Pueblo, two hundred and fifty miles south of Fort Laramie, with the several detachments of the Mormon Battalion that had been invalided and sent there for the winter. Part of this Mississippi company—seven wagons and seventeen people, chiefly the Crow and Therlkill families—had been at Fort Laramie for two weeks, anxiously waiting the arrival of the first company of saints from Winter Quarters with whom they expected to cross the mountains. The rest of the Mississippi company were with the detachments of the battalion at Pueblo and would start for Fort Laramie about the first of June, expecting to follow on the trail of the Pioneer company into the mountains; the battalion detachment, of course, then expecting to go on to California, as per their orders. [^4] The Mississippi brethren could give information of the detachments of the battalion at Pueblo, of the four deaths that had occurred, but nothing of the main part of the battalion except its departure from Santa Fe.

194The next day Amasa M. Lyman, Thomas Woolsey, Raswell Stevens and J. H. Tipets were designated as a party to go to meet the detachments of the battalion and the remainder of the Mississippi company of saints and hasten their journey to Fort Laramie, in order to follow the Pioneer company into the mountains. This party of four men departed on their mission about midday of the 3rd of June not without anxious solicitude on the part of the camp for their safety, as it was a dangerous mission owing to hostile bands of Indians on their route.

194At Fort Laramie the Pioneer company also learned of the immense emigration en route from the eastern states to Oregon and California that year. While the Pioneer company was still at Fort Laramie a party of four men arrived from St. Joseph, Missouri, having made the journey in seventeen days. They had passed 2,000 wagons in detached companies en route for the west, and some of the advanced companies would reach Fort Laramie within a day or two. [^5]

ON THE "OREGON TRAIL"

The first and second day out from Fort Laramie the Pioneer company was in contact with two companies of Oregon emigrants, one of which they overtook, consisting of eleven wagons; and one which overtook them, consisting of twenty-one wagons. [^6] On the 8th of June they met a small number of wagons loaded with peltries, traveling east from the west side of the Rocky Mountains—these from Fort Bridger. The company—nine in all—was led by Jas. H. Grieve—"from whom we learned," says Brigham Young, "that Mr. Bridger was located 300 miles west, that the mountaineers could ride from Bridger to Salt Lake in two days, and that the Utah country was beautiful." [^7]

195Grieve also told the Pioneers of a boat made of buffalo skins his party had concealed at the crossing of the North Fork of the Platte, near the mouth of the Sweetwater, and gave the Pioneer company permission to use it. A company of about forty men and nineteen wagons was sent forward as an advanced detachment to secure the Grieve boat, build a raft, kill game, and make all preparations for ferrying the whole Pioneer company over the river. [^8]

195On the 9th of June the Pioneers were overtaken by a pack train of from fifteen to twenty horses with a small party of men en route for San Francisco Bay, via the Great Salt Lake. [^9]

The Pioneers were now passing over the most pleasant part of their journey. Writing of the camp at Deer Creek, half a mile back from the right bank of the Platte, Erastus now says:

196"This is the most delightful place we have seen since we left states,—a large creek of clear water with a stony bottom, and the way our boys are hauling out the fish is not so slow. Excellent feed, thrifty timber, plenty of game, beautiful scenery; and, added to this, one of our miners had discovered a very excellent bed of bituminous coal up the creek, a sample of which he has brought into camp; also quarry of excellent sandstone. I have been agreeably surprised in the country of the Black Hills, over which we have traveled a distance ninety miles from Fort Laramie. Instead of sand and continual barrenness, without water, as I had expected, we have found hard roads through the hills, and at convenient distances beautiful creeks skirted with timber, and bottoms covered with grass, though the country otherwise presents generally a rough and barren appearance." [^10]

196On the 12th of June the main company of the Pioneers arrived at the Platte ferry, to find that their advanced company was employed in ferrying over the Oregon emigrants, carrying their goods over in the "revenue cutter"— their leather boat, [^11] floating over the empty wagons by means of ropes; but the stream was so swift and deep that the wagons would roll over several times in transit in spite of all efforts prevent it. Ordinarily the Platte was fordable at this point, but this was the season of high water. The brethren received for ferry over the Oregon emigrants "1,295 lbs. of flour, at the rate of two and a half cents per pound; also meal, beans, soap and honey at corresponding prices, likewise two cows, total bill for ferrying $78.00." [^12]

The ferriage price agreed upon was from $1.50 to $2.00 wagon, paid in the articles and at the prices named above. "As flour was readily worth $10 per cwt. at that point, it was a good bargain" is one comment, non-"Mormon," however. [^13] "We received it as the providence of God in getting the supplies we needed," is what Erastus Snow said of it. [^14]

197The Pioneer company remained five days at the Platte crossing. They made various experiments in ferrying over their wagons, first stretching a rope across the stream and trying to float single empty wagons over attached to the aforesaid over-stream rope, and drawn by other ropes; but the current, deep and swift, rolled them over and over as if they were logs, much to the injury of the wagons. Then the experiment was made of fastening from two to four wagons together to prevent capsizing in transit, but the mad stream would roll them over in spite of all the ingenuity and care of the men. Then small rafts were tried with a single wagon, but the difficulty of polling a raft in water so deep and swift was so great that frequently they would be swept down from one to two miles, though the stream was not more than from forty to fifty rods wide. [^15] The plan that proved the most successful was to use a raft,—of which two were made—constructed with oars, well manned, with which a landing with a single wagon could be effected in about a half a mile. In this way wagons even partly loaded could be ferried over, but most of the goods of the camp were carried across in the leather boat—the "revenue cutter."

Meantime a company of the Pioneers had been at work on the construction of a large ferry boat capable of carrying over loaded wagons for the use of the large companies of saints about now starting from the Elkhorn; [^16] besides companies of Oregon emigrants were daily arriving, and very willing to pay from $1.50 to $2.50 per wagon to be ferried over; so that the prospect was that the ferry would be very profitable to those who would establish it. Accordingly a company of ten men—one of whom was a blacksmith—under the leadership of Thomas Grover was left in charge of ferry, and the main company continued its journey.

AT THE SOUTH PASS—SUMMIT OF THE CONTINENT

The Pioneer company now followed up the Sweetwater river, which they forded back and forth several times, to the South Pass, along the Oregon route.

198The name of this noted landmark of the early pioneer days is likely to be misleading since "pass" as marking a continental divide in a mountainous country is generally thought as some "gorge-like" passageway between abrupt walls mountains, approached by "winding assents." The South Pass was nothing like that. "It was with great difficulty," writes Orson Pratt, "that we could determine the dividing point of land which separates the waters of the Atlantic from those of the Pacific. * * * The South Pass from some fifteen or twenty miles in length and breadth is a gently undulating plain or prairie, thickly covered with wild sage from one to feet high. * * * The elevation above sea level [ascertained by him by scientific observation] was seven thousand eighty five feet. The distance of this pass from Fort Laramie as measured by our mile machine [odometer] is two hundred and seventy five and one half miles. [^17]

Fremont's description of the pass is as follows: "The ascent had so gradual [i. e. from the place of their encampment of the night before—six miles east of the summit of the pass] that with all the intimate knowledge possessed by Carson, who had made this country his home for seventeen years, we were obliged to watch very closely to the place at which we had reached the culminating point. This between two low hills, rising on either hand fifty or sixty feet. When I looked back at them, from the foot of the immediate slope on the Western plain, their summits appeared to be about one hundred and twenty feet above. From the impression on my mind at this time, and subsequently on our return, I should compare the elevation which surmounted immediately at the Pass, to the ascent of the capitol from the avenue, at Washington. It is difficult for me to fix positively the breadth of this pass. From the broken ground where it commences, at the foot of the Wind river chain, the view to the southeast is over a champaign country, broken, at the distance of nineteen miles, by the Table Rock; which, with the other isolated hills in its vicinity, seems to stand on a comparative plain. This I judged to be its termination, the ridge recovering its rugged character with the Table Rock. It will be seen that it in no manner resembles the places to which the term is commonly applied—nothing of the gorge-like character and winding ascents of the Allegheny passes in America; nothing of the Great St. Bernard and Simplon passes in Europe. Approaching it from the mouth of the Sweet Water, a sandy plain, one hundred and twenty miles long, conducts, by a gradual and regular ascent, to the summit, about seven thousand feet above the sea; and the traveler, without being reminded of any change by toilsome ascents, suddenly finds himself on the waters which flow to the Pacific ocean." [^18]

199

MID THE NATIONAL STREAM OF MOVEMENT EAST AND WEST

The Pioneer company was now in frequent contact with companies of Oregon emigrants, and occasionally met companies of traders, trappers and mountaineers moving eastward. Near the South Pass, for instance, at which the company arrived on the 26th of June, they met a number of men from the Oregon settlements, led to this point by one Major Moses Harris, who had been a mountaineer for twenty or twenty-five years. He had extensive knowledge of the country from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific. "We obtained much information from him in relation to the great, interior basin of the Salt Lake," says Orson Pratt, "the country of our destination. His report like that of Captain Fremont's is rather unfavorable to the formation of a colony in this basin, principally on account of the scarcity of timber. He said that he had traveled the whole circumference of the lake, and there was no outlet to it." [^19] Harris had with him "some Oregon newspapers; also [copies of the] California Star, published by Samuel Brannan, [^20] the leader of the Brooklyn colony of saints to California.

200It was at this encampment also, called by some "Pacific Springs"—"fourteen miles from the last crossing of the Sweetwater"—that the Pioneer company met a somewhat noted mountain character in the person of Thomas L. Smith who had a trading post on Bear river, in the neighborhood of Soda Springs. He described Bear Lake, Cache, and Marsh valleys, all of which he had visited in the course of his trapping and trading expeditions. "He earnestly advised us," says Erastus Snow, "to direct our course northwestward from Bridger, and make our way into Cache valley; and he so far made an impression upon the camp, that we were induced to enter into an engagement with him to meet us at a certain time and place some two weeks afterwards to pilot our company into that country. But for some reason, which to this day has never to my knowledge been explained, he failed to meet us; and I have ever recognized his failure to do it as a providence of the Allwise God. The impressions of the Spirit signified that we should bear rather to the south of west from Bridger than to the north of west." [^21]

THE MEETING WITH JAMES BRIDGER

On the 28th of June the Pioneers met James Bridger, mountaineer and guide, also a member of the American Fur Company. Himself and two companions were en route for Fort Laramie. He expressed a desire for a conference with President Young and the twelve; they were equally anxious to have an interview with him. An early encampment was accordingly made and the mountaineers invited to spend the night with the camp. [^22] Mr. Bridger "being a man of extensive acquaintance with this interior country," says Orson Pratt, "we made many inquiries of him in relation to the 'Great Basin' and the country south. His information was rather more favorable than that of Major Harris." [^23] "Mr. Bridger * * * camped with us and gave us much information relative to roads, streams, and country generally." [^24] "Bridger considered it imprudent to bring a large population into the Great Basin," says President Young, "until it was ascertained that grain could be raised; he said he would give $1,000 for a bushel of corn raised in that basin. [^25] President Young replied: "Wait a little, and we will show you." [^26]

A GREEN RIVER MEETING WITH BRANNAN

At Green river, which the Pioneer company reached on the 30th of June, Samuel Brannan, leader of the Brooklyn colony rode into the Pioneer camp, direct from San Francisco. He and two companions had made the journey via Fort Hall. He brought news from the colony of Brooklyn saints now settling in the San Joaquin valley; of the battalion which had reached the Pacific coast; of the founding of the California Star, a file of sixteen numbers of which he had brought with him; of the richness of California's soil; of her salubrious climate; of the conquest of the country by the United States; and of the Brooklyn colony's anticipation of the arrival of the Pioneers on the Pacific coast doomed, however, to disappointment. The reception given to Brannan was evidently not very cordial. There was recollection of course of the contract he had made with the ex-postmaster general of the United States, Amos Kendall, "A. G. Benson & Co.," which, if carried into effect, would have loaded the material progress of the saints with intolerable burdens. It was in vain that he urged the advantage of the Pacific slope as a place of settlement for the saints, [^27] though he remained, and was identified with the activities of the Pioneers, until their movements indicated permanent settlement in what he regarded as a barren waste.

At Green river ferry the Pioneers remained until the 3rd of July, detained by the necessity of making rafts with which to effect the crossing of that stream as its waters were high. The camp moved three miles from the ferry down the right bank and there spent the fourth of July—"Independence Day," some of them noted in their Journals, [^28] also "the Lord's Day." At this encampment it was decided that a few of the Pioneers should return eastward to meet the large emigrating companies of saints now en route from Winter Quarters, and act as their guides to Green river. Five volunteered, [^29] taking with them the "revenue cutter"—wagon, as it constituted a sort of light wagon and there were not horses enough to spare to mount the "pilots," as the returning company was called.

CONTACT WITH A DETACHMENT OF THE MORMON BATTALION

Brigham Young with Dr. Willard Richards, Heber C. Kimball and others accompanied this party back to Green river ferry. Here they saw a group of thirteen horsemen on the opposite bank with their baggage stacked on one of the Pioneer's rafts preparatory to crossing over the river. It was soon learned that the party was an advanced company of Captain James Brown's Pueblo detachment of the Mormon Battalion, and they were given three cheers. "I led out," says President Young, "in exclaiming 'Hosannah! Hosannah! Give glory to God and the Lamb, Amen!' In which all joined simultaneously." [^30] The members of the battalion were conducted to the camp where also they were received with great rejoicing. They were in pursuit of horse thieves who had stolen about a dozen of the battalion horses of which they had recovered all but one or two, and they understood that these were at Fort Bridger to which place they were en route. They reported the Pueblo detachment as not more than seven days drive east of the Green river.

203The incident with names of the members comprising the thirteen men of the battalion is treated as follows in the Journal of Thomas Bullock—which was regarded as the official Journal of the Pioneer camp:

203"July 4th (1847): * * * Accompanied by President Young, Kimball, Richards, the five brethren, appointed to go East to meet the on-coming companies of saints from Winter Quarters, they arrived at the ferry about half past eleven and met 13 of the battalion who had placed their goods on the raft, preparatory to crossing over the river. It was decided that one of them, Wm. Walker, should return with our five men. The presidency and brethren came to camp at a quarter past two—formed a line. President Young spoke a few words; the camp gave three cheers for their safe return, all crying, 'Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, give glory to God and the Lamb, Amen, Amen!' Then dismissed to receive congratulations of the brethren.

204July 5th: * * *

204Thomas S. Williams, Samuel Gould,

204John Buchannan, Benjamin Roberts,

204Allen Compton, James Oakley,

204Joel J. Terrial, George Clarke,

204Francilias Durfee, Thomas Bingham,

204Andrew J. Shupe, William Castro.

20412 of the battalion traveled with us this day. William Walker returned with the five brethren.

204July 9th: * * * Elder Brannan and Sergeant Williams returned to the battalion with the letter to Amasa Lyman which was signed by President Young and [Willard] Richards. The other brethren of the battalion go on with us. Camp started at 8 a. m."

ARRIVAL AT FORT BRIDGER

It was decided by the council at this Green river encampment, after the arrival of the party of battalion members, "that Thomas S. Williams, and Samuel Brannan return and meet Captain Brown and the battalion company from Pueblo; and in as much as they have neither received their discharge nor their full pay, Brother Brannan shall tender them his services as pilot to conduct them to California." [^31] Brannan and Williams, however, did not leave the Pioneer camp on their mission until the 9th of July, [^32] by which time the camp had arrived at Fort Bridger. This trading post was located on a delta formed by several branches of Black's Fork of Green river. "The Post," says Orson Pratt, "consists of two adjoining log houses, dirt roofs, and a small picket yard of logs set in the ground and about eight feet high. The number of men, squaws and half-breed children in these houses and [surrounding] lodges, may be about fifty or sixty." [^33]

204ON THE HASTINGS CUT-OFF ROUTE

At this point the Pioneer company left the "Oregon Trail," "taking Mr. Hastings' new route to the Bay of San Francisco," journalizes Orson Pratt; "this route is but dimly seen as only a few wagons passed over it last season." [^34] "We took a blind trail," is Erastus Snow's account of the direction taken on the departure of the Pioneer company from Fort Bridger; "the general course of which is a little south of west, leading in the direction of the southern extremity of the Salt Lake, which is the region we wish to explore. Fortunately for us a party of emigrants bound for the coast of California passed this way last fall, though their trail is in many places, scarcely discernable." [^35]

MEETING WITH MILES GOODYEAR FROM SALT LAKE VALLEY

On the 10th of July the Pioneers came to a small tributary of Bear river, less than two miles from the main stream. The next day being Sunday, the camp rested, as usual. Here they met Miles Goodyear and a small company from the Bay of San Francisco on their way home to the states. They had come via the Weber and what was afterwards called Echo canon, to this point. The party numbering four, was under the leadership of a Mr. Craig. Goodyear had acted as their guide from his trading station, sometimes referred to as his "farm" [^36] at the mouth of the Weber river, on the site of the present city of Ogden. In addition to acting as guide to the Craig party, Goodyear had intended to meet the Oregon emigration, with whom he hoped to do some trading. Learning from the Pioneers that the Oregon emigration had largely taken the northern route, he decided to go down the Bear river and intercept their line of travel, while the Craig party pursued its journey eastward.

206Before leaving the Pioneer camp, Mr. Goodyear had considerable conversation with various members of the company; but respecting Salt Lake valley as a promising place for a settlement "he too," says Erastus Snow, "was unable to give us any hope; on the contrary, he told us of hard frosts, cold climate; [that it was] difficult to produce grain and vegetables in any of this mountain region. The same answer was given to him as to Mr. Bridger, 'give us time, and we will show you.'" [^37]

OUTBREAK OF MOUNTAIN FEVER

From the arrival of the camp at Green river, various members had suffered from what they called "mountain fever." At the camp on Bear river President Young himself was severely stricken with the malady. The main encampment moved westward, but eight wagons and a number of leading brethren remained at Bear river with the president, expecting to follow in a few hours. Closing his journal entry for the day's march, Orson Pratt says rather sadly—"Mr. Young did not overtake us tonight." His next day's entry in the Journal begins—"Early this morning we dispatched two messengers back to meet Mr. Young, being unwilling to move any further until he should come up." These messengers were Joseph Mathews and John Brown. [^38] They found President Young had been too ill to move, but was improving. Heber C. Kimball returned to the main encampment with the two messengers. Many were sick with the fever at the main encampment, and it was thought advisable to stop over for a few days and send forward a company in advance to mark out the road more clearly. "Those of the twelve present," says Orson Pratt, "directed me to take 23 wagons and 42 men, and proceed on the journey and endeavor to find Mr. Reed's [this was Mr. Reed of the Donner party of the previous year] route across the mountain, for we had been informed that it would be impracticable to pass through the canon [i. e. the Weber canon] on account of the depth and rapidity of the water." [^39] This doubtless was Goodyear's report, for he had just conducted the Craig party eastward through Weber canon. Here it is necessary to say a word on the routes over which pack companies and companies with wagons had passed into Salt Lake valley. The Bartleson route down Bear river via Soda Springs through Cache valley, is sufficiently described in footnote 37 of this chapter. Of the other two, the one down Weber canon, and the other up Ogden's Fork or Canon Creek, over the passes at the head of it, and down Emigration canon to the south end of the lake more should be said.

ON THE HASTINGS' CALIFORNIA ROUTE

In 1845 Lansford W. Hastings, who first went to Oregon in 1842, thence to California, became an enthusiast on the Americanization of the Pacific coast, especially of California; and at Cincinnati in 1845 published The Emigrant's Guide to Oregon. Describing the most direct route to California, he said:

"The most direct route would be to leave the Oregon route about two hundred miles east from Fort Hall; thence bearing w. s. w. to the Salt Lake; and thence continuing down to the Bay of St. Francisco." [^40]

208In the spring and early summer of 1846 Hastings traversed this route eastward from California, and met the Oregon-California emigrants at Bridger and induced two companies, known as the Young and Harlan companies, to accept his leadership and take this "cut-off." [^41] Hastings' associate Hudspeth, led a train of packers known as the Bryant party, over the same route; [^42] that is, from Bridger via Echo canon, Weber canon, the south end of Salt Lake, to California. It is said, however, that the Bryant company "left letters advising others with families and wagons not to attempt it [i. e. their route]—letters which are said "not to have been delivered." [^43]

208The Young and Harlan companies, guided by Hastings in person, "had much difficulty in finding a way for their wagons, lost much of their live stock in the Salt Lake desert, but at last reached the old route and were the last to cross the Sierra"—for the season of 1846. [^44]

208THE DONNER-REED PARTY'S ROUTE THROUGH SALT LAKE VALLEY

The Donner party on reaching Bridger also determined to take "the Hastings' cut off;" and left Bridger on the 28th of July, 1846, only a few days behind the Young and Harlan companies led by Hastings. Before reaching Weber canon, however, they received a letter from Hastings "advising a change of route to avoid obstacles encountered by the other company in Weber canon." [^45] A Mr. James F. Reed [^46] of the Donner party—and by some accounted the real head of the party,—with two companions were sent to overtake the advanced companies, obtain additional information and explore the route. Reed and his companions overtook Hastings and his companies at Black Rock at the south end of Salt Lake, and about twelve miles directly west of the present site of Salt Lake City. [^47] After consultation had with Hastings, Reed and his companions returned to their encampment at the head of Weber canon. Their march to overtake Hastings and their explorations had occupied a week's time. [^48]

209From what they regarded as the head of Weber canon the Donner-Reed party turned southward, going up the stream which Orson Pratt a year later named "Canon Creek." They crossed over the hills to avoid the deep gorge or canon through which this creek passes, calling it "Reed's Pass;" thence via Big and Little Mountain down Emigration canon into Salt Lake valley, where they picked up Hastings' road around the south end of the lake. The whole of August had been consumed in making the journey from the head of Weber canon to the "open country on the lake shore." [^49]

The Donner-Reed party numbered 87 persons; 36 being men, 21 women, 30 children, five of the latter being infants; 49 of the whole number belonged to four families, Donner, Graves, Breen, and Murphy. [^50] How many wagons were in camp is nowhere stated, so far as I can learn; but since the party, in the main, was made up of well-to-do people, and therefore "well enough provided with the necessary outfit;" and especially was it so with George Donner—from whom the party takes its name—who "was a man of some wealth, and was carrying a stock of merchandize to California for sale" [^51]—it is probable, I say, from these circumstances, that the camp had even more than the usual number of wagons with which such companies traveled. From twenty to thirty wagons would certainly be a conservative estimate for a company having in it thirty-six men, with fifty-one women and children, and carrying a stock of goods to California for sale.

210THE FATE OF THE DONNER-REED PARTY

210This was the party that was caught by the snows in the high passes of the Sierras along the Truckee river and at Lake Tahoe; and which suffered so terribly before relief could reach them. Thirty-nine of the 87 perished, a number of them becoming the victims of the cannibalism of the survivors; and whose remains were strewn about the shores of Lake Tahoe when Samuel Brannan passed that point en route for the Pioneer camp; and whose remains—such as could be found at the time—were buried by General Kearney's party, when passing the lake in June, 1847, en route for the east. Twelve of Kearney's escort, it will be remembered, were members of the Mormon Battalion. [^52] The work of burial was "completed in September by the returning Mormons of the battalion." [^53]

MOVEMENTS OF ORSON PRATT'S ADVANCE PARTY OVER REED'S TRAIL

We may now return to the march of the Pioneer company. Orson Pratt's company of 23 wagons and 42 men, known in our records as "Pratt's advance party," was sent, as we have seen by his own statement, "to find Mr. Reed's route across the mountains." Elder Pratt's company started on the morning of the 14th of July, following what was called the "Red Fork" of Weber river, the creek running down Echo canon. [^54] It was followed thirteen miles to its junction with the Weber river. On the 15th the advance party continued down the Weber, "and encamped about one mile above the canon, [about where the present village of Hennefer is located] which at the entrance is impassable for wagons. The road [Hastings'] crossing the river to the right bank makes a circuit of about two miles, and enters the canon at the junction of a stream putting in from the right bank." [^55] Orson Pratt and John Brown rode five miles down Weber canon until convinced that it was the "ten mile canon" they had heard of and which the Donner party had been warned against taking by Hastings. Meantime other parties from Pratt's camp, led by Stephen Markham, had followed up the stream on the right bank of the Weber in search of Reed's trail. "Mr. Brown and I also went in search," says Orson Pratt, "traveling along the bluffs on the south. We soon struck the trail, although so dimly seen that it only now and then could be discerned, only a few wagons having passed here one year ago, and the grass having grown up, leaving scarcely a trace." [^56]

212The next day word was sent back to the main camp that Reed's route had been found, "which we had anticipated would be troublesome to find," says Orson Pratt.

The journey was resumed, following Reed's route up a small stream, a company of about a dozen men going in advance of the wagons with spades, axes, etc., "to make the road passable, which required considerable labor." [^57] The camp moved about eight and a half miles during the day, their road in the last two miles of the journey leaving the small stream up which they had traveled to cross a ridge into another ravine in which they camped. They spent some four hours in labor with picks and spades on the latter part of the road. After an encampment was made, Orson Pratt and a Mr. Newman went further down the road to examine it. "We found that Mr. Reed's company last season," journalizes Orson Pratt, "had spent several hours labor in spading, etc., but finding it almost impracticable for wagons they had turned up a ravine, at the mouth of which we had camped, and taken a little more circuitous route over the hills." On the morning of the 17th after examining the road over which they had passed the day before for some distance back, and satisfying himself that no more practical route could be found, Elder Pratt directed that the camp spend several hours labor on the road over which they had already passed before resuming their march. Meantime he and John Brown rode on ahead to explore the road they were following. A little over three miles brought them again to what Orson Pratt had called "Canon Creek," [^58] and Brown "Big Canon Creek." [^59] "We followed the dimly traced wagon tracks up this stream for eight miles," writes Orson Pratt in his Journal, "crossing the same thirteen times. The bottoms of this creek are thickly covered with willows from 5 to 15 rods wide, making an immense labor in cutting a road through for the emigrants of last season. We still found the road almost unpassable and requiring much labor. The mountains upon each side rise abruptly from 600 to 3,000 feet above the bed of the stream. Leaving our horses at the foot, we ascended to the summit of one which appeared to be about 2,000 feet high. We had a prospect limited in most directions by still higher peaks; the country exhibited a broken succession of hills piled on hills, and mountains in every direction." [^60]

213Having spent two-thirds of the day in working on the road passed over on the 16th, for the benefit of the main part of the camp following them, Pratt's camp had moved but four and a half miles from their encampment of the night before.

The 18th of July being Sunday, as usual, camp was not broken, and religious services were held in the morning. The latitude was ascertained to be 40 deg. 54 min. 7 sec.; "A luna observation was taken for the longitude," says Orson Pratt, "I also obtained an observation of the altitude of the moon for the time." [^61]

THE FIRST VIEW OF SALT LAKE VALLEY

Soon after sunrise of the 19th the two Pioneers of this advance company, Orson Pratt and John Brown, started along the route of last year's emigrants [the Donner party] to examine the road and country ahead. They continued along the road over which they had passed the day before and ascertained that it left Canon Creek near the point where they had turned back to camp, and followed a ravine running west. This they ascended for four miles when they came to a dividing ridge from which they "could see over a great extent of country." Here they tied their horses and on foot ascended a mountain on the right for several hundred feet. "On the southwest we could see an extensive level prairie, some few miles distant which we thought must be near the lake." [^62] It was; and this is the first view any of the Pioneers had of Salt Lake valley. Returning to their horses the two Pioneers went down the southwest side of the mountain, the descent of which was very rapid. The small stream they were following "passed through a very high mountain," where they judged it impossible for wagons to pass. They found too that near the point they had reached the wagon trail made the year before "ascended quite abruptly," and "passed over a mountain and down into another narrow valley, and thus avoided the canon—on the left." [^63]

215—This mountain became known as "Little Mountain;" and the "narrow valley" as Emigration canon. From this point the two Pioneers, Pratt and Brown returned to find their camp which had moved forward six and a quarter miles from their position in the morning. Also to learn that the main Pioneer encampment had nearly overtaken them.

215Before beginning the day's journey on the 20th, Orson Pratt wrote a description of the road and country he had reconnoitered the day before, and deposited it in a conspicuous place for the benefit of the main camp soon expected to pass that point. Pratt's camp moved but six miles over the mountains, working the road en route.

215On the 21st Pratt's advance company resumed its journey, made five miles and camped for noon, having passed over "Little Mountain," descending on the west side until they came upon a swift running creek to which they gave the name of "Last Creek," later called "Emigration Creek," since it runs down Emigration canon.

The main camp of the Pioneers reached Orson Pratt's camping place of the 19th, on the 20th; and there they found Pratt's description of the road; "on perusal of which," writes Erastus Snow, "Elders [Willard] Richards and [Geo. A.] Smith determined on sending me with a letter to overtake Elder Pratt, and accompany him to the valley and assist in exploring and searching out a suitable place for putting in our seed." Accordingly on the morning of the 21st, Erastus Snow, mounted, rode alone over Pratt's route of the day before and overtook him on the afternoon of the 21st near the foot of the, later called "Little Mountain," which Pratt's company had passed over that day. Leaving the camp to proceed with their task of improving the road down what is now called Emigration canon, Elders Pratt and Snow proceeded down the canon "four and a half miles," where the creek then passed through a gorge, "and issues into the broad valley below." "To avoid the canon [gorge] the wagons last season," says Orson Pratt, "had passed over an exceedingly steep and dangerous hill:" [^64]

216

216

THE FIRST OF THE PIONEERS TO ENTER THE SALT LAKE VALLEY

"Mr. Snow and myself ascended this hill, from the top of which a broad open valley, about twenty miles wide and thirty long, lay stretched out before us, at the north end of which the broad water of Great Salt Lake glistened in the sunbeams, containing high mountainous islands from twenty-five to thirty miles in extent. After issuing from the mountains among which we had been shut up for many days, and beholding in a moment such an extensive scenery open before us, we could not refrain from a shout of joy which almost involuntarily escaped from our lips the moment this grand and lovely scenery was within our view." [^65]

216The two Pioneers descended the butte at the mouth of the canon, and proceeded over the gentle declivity of the east slopes of the valley to a point on one of the several streams that enter from the east range of mountains, where tall canes were growing, "which looked like waving grain." The course they had followed bore a little southwestward, and on reaching the stream—since called Mill Creek [^66]—on the banks of which the canes grew—they remembered that the instructions of President Young had been to turn to the north on emerging into the valley and there plant their seeds. [^67]

217Accordingly they turned northward from this point, designing to reach another stream that they could see emerging from a canon into the valley, along the course of which a few scattered cottonwood trees and underbrush grew. It was a hot day, that 21st of July, when those two Pioneers entered Salt Lake valley. On the 23rd Orson Pratt reports the thermometer as standing at 96 degrees. It must have been about the same on the 21st. The two Pioneers had but one horse between them, so that they walked and rode in turns. A few miles from the mouth of the canon through which they had come into the valley, Erastus Snow discovered he had lost his coat, having taken it off and thrown it loosely before him on the saddle from which evidently it had slipped to the ground. This occasioned his return over their trail from what is called Mill Creek, to find it, and meanwhile Orson Pratt walked northward alone until he arrived at the beautiful crystal stream that issued from the ravine leading down from the distant pine-clad mountains to the northeast; and thus became the first of the Pioneers to stand upon the present site of Salt Lake City. [^68] Some are disposed to doubt the accuracy of this incident but it is well attested. Delivering a reminiscent discourse on these early scenes in the valley, Orson Pratt on July 21, 1867, Journal of Discourses, Vol. XII, pp. 88, 89, before a large audience said:

"It is a wonder to me to look upon the great sea of faces now before me in this bowery. Twenty years ago on the twenty-first day of July, I stood solitary and alone on this great city plot, near the place where now stands Bishop Hunter's house (this would be on the corner of the block immediately north of the northwest corner of the temple square), being the first man of the Latter-day Saints that ever stood on this ground: this was in the afternoon of the twenty-first day of July, 1847. Brother Erastus Snow entered the valley with me in the afternoon. We traveled down to the southeast of the city. Brother Erastus lost his coat off his horse, and went back to hunt it up, and told me if I wanted to look over the country he would wait for me at the mouth of what we now call Emigration canon. I started from where we parted, and came up and stood on the bank of City Creek. I gazed on the surrounding scenery with peculiar feelings in my heart. I felt as though it was the place for which we had so long sought."

218Elder Pratt's companion, Erastus Snow, rejoining him on Emigration Creek, a few miles below where it issues from the canon of the same name, they returned to their encampment about nine o'clock at night, having made a circuit of some ten or twelve miles in the valley. Their company in Emigration canon, meantime, had moved forward from their noon encampment about three miles, while the main encampment had come up within a mile and a half of Pratt's advance company.

THE SECOND PARTY OF PIONEERS TO ENTER THE VALLEY

The following morning—July 22nd—a party of nine, headed this time by Orson Pratt and Geo. A. Smith, the latter from the main encampment of the Pioneers, rode out into the valley to explore it, directing the remainder of the camp to proceed with the road making down into the valley.

Arriving at the gorge at the entrance of the valley, Pratt's exploring party concluded that by cutting away the thick timber and underbrush, together with some digging, a better and safer road could be made than the one leading over the step and dangerous hill passed over by the Donner party the previous year. A note calling the attention of the working camp to this fact was left in a conspicuous place, and the explorers moved on. "For three or four miles north," writes Orson Pratt, "we found the soil of a most excellent quality. Streams from the mountains and springs were very abundant, the water excellent, and generally with gravel bottoms. A very great variety of green grass, and very luxuriant, covered the bottoms for miles where the soil was sufficiently damp, but in other places, although the soil was good, the grass had nearly dried up for want of moisture. We found the drier places swarming with very large crickets, about the size of a man's thumb. [^69] This valley is surrounded with mountains, except on the north: the tops of some of the highest being covered with snow. Every one or two miles streams were emptying into it from the mountains on the east, many of which were sufficiently large to carry mills and other machinery. As we proceeded towards the Salt Lake the soil began to assume a more sterile appearance, being probably at some seasons of the year overflowed with water. We found as we proceeded on, great numbers of hot springs issuing from or near the base of the mountains. These springs were highly impregnated with salt and sulphur: the temperature of some was nearly raised to the boiling point. We traveled for about 15 miles down after coming into the valley, the latter part of the distance the soil being unfit for agricultural purposes. We returned and found our wagons encamped in the valley, about five miles from where they left the canon." [^70]

THE THIRD PARTY OF PIONEERS TO ENTER THE SALT LAKE VALLEY

But this encampment was made on the stream first visited by Elders Pratt and Snow, since called Mill Creek. Considerations of President Young's directions to turn northward after emerging into the valley influenced this main encampment as it had done Elders Pratt and Snow the day before, and accordingly in the forenoon of the 23rd, the camp moved between three and four miles north to the banks of City Creek. At that time the stream divided into two branches just below the present temple block, in Salt Lake City, one branch running west and the other turning south. It was on the south branch of the creek that the main Pioneer encampment was formed at noon on the 23rd of July. The camp was called together and, as was most fitting, the Pioneer who had piloted the way so much of the distance in the journey, and especially over the last and most difficult stages of it, and as was his right by virtue of being the senior apostle present, Orson Pratt led in prayer—a prayer of thanksgiving and of dedication: "thanksgiving in behalf of our company," writes the apostle who prayed—"all of whom had been preserved from the Missouri river to this point;" and then the dedication of themselves and the land unto the Lord "and imploring his blessings" upon it. [^71] After this there was reenacted the scenes of organized industry we have witnessed at Mt. Pisgah and Garden Grove in Iowa, and at the founding of Winter Quarters—men divided into groups—some to clear the land preparatory to plowing; others to unpack and get ready the plows; others to care for the stock and perfect the camp arrangements. At the first attempt at plowing the ground was found hard and dry, and several plows were broken in the effort. [^72] A company was set at work to put a dam in the creek and flood the land—the beginning of Utah irrigation—to be worked out later into scientific systems to bring to pass the redemption of arid and semi-arid regions of America and of the world. In other words modern scientific irrigation had its origin in the Salt Lake valley among the Utah Pioneers. [^73] Several acres were plowed that afternoon, and towards evening the valley was visited by a light thunder shower. [^74]

THE REAR SECTION OF THE PIONEER TRAIN

Here we return to bring up the last section of the Pioneer company. As previously stated a half day's drive from the Sunday encampment on Bear river,—made on the 12th of July—found Brigham Young so stricken with fever that it was impossible for him to go further, so that here occurred the first division of the Pioneer camp, by reason of the main body going on six and a half miles for its night encampment, and eight wagons remaining with Brigham Young. The later division by the detachment of Pratt's advance company from the main camp, the march of both divisions, and their reunion just upon entering the Salt Lake valley, has been already detailed.

222Brigham Young remained at the noon encampment formed on the 12th until the 15th, when the small number of wagons that made up the last division of the camp, with the sick leader on a bed made up in Wilford Woodruff's carriage—came up to the main encampment, and together in the afternoon moved some distance into Echo canon. On the 16th the drive through Echo canon was made. The canon received its name, as will be supposed by the reader, because of the wonderful reverberations of sounds that are produced in the tortuous windings of the canon's perpendicular walls, and among the crags and peaks rising above them. The report of a rifle, the crack of a whip, the shouts of the teamsters at the ox teams straining at their yokes, the lowing of cows, the rumble of the wagons over rough roads—these sounds were picked up and repeated, echoed and reechoed, from point to point as if every particular crag or angle of the canon had a magic tongue to mock the new sounds made by man's entrance into these solitudes.

At the juncture of the creek running through Echo canon with the Weber, reached early on the 17th, it was again found that President Young's condition was such that he could not travel further, and camp was made. The members of the twelve with this division of the camp retired and held prayer in temple order for President Young and the rest of the sick in camp. [^75] The 18th being the "Lord's Day," religious services were held; the sacrament of the Lord's supper administered, and special prayer made in the camp for the recovery of President Young and the sick generally. "We had an excellent meeting," says the chronicler; "the Holy Spirit was upon us, and faith seemed to spring up in every bosom. In the afternoon the president, who had been nigh unto death, was sensibly better, and the effects of the prayers of the brethren were visible throughout the camp." [^76]

223On the 19th this part of the camp divided again, about forty wagons moving on over "Pratt's route," and fifteen staying with President Young, who, though some better, was not able to renew the journey. He remained in this encampment on the Weber until the 20th, when fifteen miles were covered, and encampment made on Canon Creek, [^77] where three other wagons with sick men had camped. Here this company remained over until the 21st, both on account of the sick and to repair wagons that had been damaged by the roughness of the roads. On the 22nd this rear division of the camp made but four miles, which Elder Woodruff declares to be the worst four miles of the journey. The next day, 23rd of July, President Young passed over Big Mountain and from its summit he had a view of part of Salt Lake valley. His account of the incident is as follows:

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S ENTRANCE INTO SALT LAKE VALLEY

"July 23rd: I ascended and crossed over the Big Mountain, when on its summit I directed Elder Woodruff, who kindly tendered me the use of his carriage, to turn the same half way round, so that I could have a view of a portion of Salt Lake valley. The Spirit of Light rested upon me, and hovered over the valley, and I felt that there the saints would find protection and safety. We descended and encamped at the foot of the Little Mountain." [^78]

224The last stage of President Young's great pioneer journey was made on the 24th of July, from his camp at the foot of Little Mountain down into and through Emigration canon, and out into the valley of the great Salt Lake. It was about two o'clock in the afternoon when he and all the rear wagons of the Pioneer company arrived at the City Creek encampment. There appears to have been no special demonstration in the camp upon the arrival of the great leader of the western movement of his people; if there was, all the Journals are silent upon the subject. President Young's own narrative of the day's events is very simple:

224"July 24th: I started early this morning and after crossing Emigration Canon Creek eighteen times, emerged from the canon. Encamped with the main body at 2 p. m. About noon, the five-acre potato patch was plowed, when the brethren commenced planting their seed potatoes. At five, a light shower accompanied by thunder and a stiff breeze." [^79]

224So closes the account of the great Pioneer journey from Winter Quarters, on the banks of the Missouri, to the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

224

NOTES

Fort Laramie was erected in 1834, by William Sublette and Robert Campbell. It was for a time called Fort William, after Sublette. It was established with the design of monopolizing the trade of the Indian tribes from the Missouri on the northeast to the Sweetwater on the west of the Black Hills. In 1835 it was sold to Milton Sublette, James Bridger and three other fur hunters, who had hunted with the American Fur Company. The fort was rebuilt in 1836 by the new owners at an outlay of $10,000; and for a time was called "Fort John," but gradually became permanently known as Fort Laramie. It continued to be a fort of the American Fur Company, until 1849, when it was sold to the United States government and for many years was an important post in the Indian wars of the west. [^80]

The Mississippi company of saints originally consisted of fourteen families from Monroe county, Mississippi, who under the leadership of William Crosby and John Brown left their homes April 8th, 1846, for the west, expecting to fall in with some of the first camps of the saints en route from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountains. This company arrived at Independence, Mo., in the latter part of May, where they were joined by Robert Crow and family from Perry county, Illinois, and William Kartchner, members of the church, and a small company of non-members of the Latter-day Saint Church, but emigrants en route for Oregon. The united companies had in all twenty-five wagons, and organized for the western journey by choosing William Crosby captain, with Robert Crow and John Holladay counselors. It was not until they had reached the Indian country on the south bank of the Platte that the party for Oregon learned that they were traveling with a party of "Mormons." They soon after discovered that their "Mormon" friends were not traveling fast enough for them and so parted company and went on ahead. They numbered fourteen men, and six wagons. The Mississippi company with the Illinois addition numbered twenty-four men with nineteen wagons. This latter company followed up the south bank of the Platte to within a few miles of Fort Laramie, where, not being able to obtain any definite information concerning the advanced companies of the saints from Nauvoo, they resolved to go no further west that fall, but to seek a suitable location on the east side of the mountains at which to winter and meantime learn something definite as to the movements of the main body of the church. At their last encampment on the Platte they met a Mr. John Kershaw who suggested that the headwaters of the Arkansas river would be the best place at which they could winter as corn was being raised there and it was near the Spanish country where supplies could be had. This was also the destination of Mr. Kershaw who was traveling with two ox teams and was acquainted with the route. Accordingly on the 10th of July they left the "Oregon Trail" and started south and finally reached Pueblo on the 7th of August, where the company went into winter quarters, having made a journey from the initial point in Mississippi of about 1,600 miles.

226At Pueblo the Mississippi saints learned that the main body of the church had halted for the winter on the Missouri, and that five hundred of their men had gone into the army of the United States and were en route for California. This of course was the Mormon Battalion.

226The camp of saints at Pueblo was organized into a branch of the church, and then eight men of their number, including the captain of their company, William Crosby, and John Brown, on the 1st of September, started on the return journey to Monroe county, Mississippi, to bring out their families to join in the western movement of the church in the spring.

226The returning party of Mississippi brethren arrived at their homes on the 29th of October, and began preparations to move their families to Council Bluffs. While so engaged messengers arrived from Brigham Young that they leave their families another year in their old homes, but that they fit out and send all the men that could be spared to go west as pioneers. Accordingly a small company of men, including "four colored men servants,"—that is to say, slaves—were fitted out with two wagons, and under the leadership of John Brown were conducted to Council Bluffs, where, after a trying journey, in which two of the colored men died, they arrived a few days before the Pioneer company left winter quarters. Five of the party led by John Brown joined the Pioneer company, viz., himself, Mathew Ivory, David Powell, [^81] and the two remaining colored servants, Hark Lay and Oscar Crosby. Hence when the Pioneer company at Fort Laramie, on the 1st of June, 1847, met part of the Mississippi company of saints as stated in the text, it was a happy reunion of long separated fragments of the Mississippi company of saints.

226The account here given of the Mississippi company of saints is condensed from the Journal of Elder John Brown. Valuable extracts from that Journal will be found in the Improvement Era for July, 1910, compiled by his son, Dr. John Z. Brown.

This Thomas L. Smith is known to fame in the mountain trapper lore as "Peg-leg Smith." He was in Jedediah S. Smith's expedition to California in 1826, and is generally represented as a disreputable character. [^82] Linn sarcastically refers to this circumstance of meeting with Thomas L. Smith and the arrangements entered into with him for examining the valley he had spoken of, as an incident "which narrowly escaped changing the plans of the Lord, if he had already selected Salt Lake valley; [^83] a remark which discloses the spirit of Linn's work. It has been established in these pages beyond question that the destination of the saints, even before leaving Nauvoo, (and even before Joseph Smith's death) was known to be somewhere within the "valleys of the Rocky Mountains;" but no one ventured to designate any particular spot or valley as the exact place at which settlement would begin. And it was lack of knowledge as to this exact spot or place at which beginning a settlement would be made that was the cause of such expressions as implied doubt as to the destination of the saints. Following are examples of such expressions: "They * * * [the saints] had started out desertward, for—where? To this question the only response at that time was, 'God knows'." [^84] Also in speaking of the exodus from Nauvoo, Eliza R. Snow said: "Labors in the temple were closed and the energies of the saints directed towards a hasty flight. * * * Time and circumstances admitted of very little, and in many instances no preparation for a journey of an indefinite length; and to what point we did not know, but go we must. * * * On the first day of March, the ground covered with snow, [this in Iowa] we broke encampment about noon, and soon nearly four hundred wagons were moving to—we knew not where." [^85] Erastus Snow says: "When President Young was questioned by any of the Pioneers as to the definite point of our destination, all he could say was, that he would know it when he should see it, and that we should continue to travel the way the Spirit of the Lord should direct us." [^86]

The appointment of Orson Pratt to the leadership of the special party that was to become the pioneer party of the Pioneers in the last stages of their journey, is one that came about by a natural force operating among men, by which men that are fit rise to their proper place. Orson Pratt was appointed to this leadership because in the things now required—engineering skill and science—he had been leading all along. His place was always in the van, and even leading that van, and this from the very nature of the duties required of him, as being placed in charge of and using, the splendid set of scientific instruments carried in the camp—and which he alone, perhaps, could use. Hence it will be found both in his own Journal and in the Journals of others, that he is always in the lead, and consulted with reference to all the engineering problems that confronted the Pioneers on their journey. (See Pratt's Journal in Millennial Star, Vol. XII, passim; for being on lead at important points, see pp. 18, 146, 162). Of the pioneer journey resembling in some respects a scientific expedition I have already spoken in the text of chapter 1xxviii of this History and of Elder Pratt's ascertaining, and registering the latitude, longitude, altitude, geological structure of the country, together with notices of the flora and fauna of the country through which the pioneer route passed. Also in the matter of the construction of the pioneer odometer it is quite probable that the scientific principles on which it was constructed were largely furnished by him. The following entry in his Journal for the 6th of May, would justify such a conclusion:

228"For several days past, Mr. Clayton, and several others, have been thinking upon the best method of attaching some machinery to a wagon, to indicate the number of miles daily traveled. I was requested this forenoon, by Mr. B. Young, to give this subject some attention; accordingly, this afternoon, I proposed the following method: Let a wagon wheel be of such a circumference, that 360 revolutions make one mile. (It happens that one of the requisite dimensions is now in camp). Let this wheel act upon a screw, in such a manner, that six revolutions of wagon wheel shall give the screw one revolution. Let the threads of this screw act upon a wheel of sixty cogs, which shall evidently perform one revolution per mile. Let this wheel of sixty cogs be the head of another screw, acting upon another wheel of thirty cogs, it is evident that in the movements of this second wheel, each cog will represent one mile. Now, if the cogs were numbered from 0 to 30, the number of miles traveled will be indicated during every part of the day. Let every sixth cog of the first wheel be numbered from 0 to 10, and this division will indicate the fractional part of a mile, or tenths; while if any one should be desirous to ascertain still smaller divisional fractions, each cog between this division will give five and one-third rods. This machinery (which may be called the double endless screw) will be simple in its construction, and of very small bulk, requiring scarcely any sensible additional power, and the knowledge obtained respecting distances in traveling will certainly be very satisfactory to every traveler, especially in a country but little known. The weight of this machinery need not exceed three pounds."

228At the time of his pioneering the way into Salt Lake valley in July, 1847, Orson Pratt was thirty-six years of age, of only medium height, spare-built, but hard and sinewy, capable of great physical endurance, intense and long mental application. Tireless energy was his, and absolute devotion to assigned duty; simple faith mingled with large and absolute trust in God marked the outlines of character in this Pioneer—this apostle of Jesus Christ in the New Dispensation of the gospel.

Following are the names of the forty-two men who made up Pratt's advance company:

Orson Pratt (commanding), Stephen Markham (aid), John Brown, C. D. Barnum, Charles Burk, Francis Boggs, A. P. Chessley, Oscar Crosby (colored), Lyman Curtis, James Chessney, Walter Crow, John Crow, Robert Crow, Walter H. Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, John S. Eldredge, Joseph Egbert, Nathaniel Fairbanks, John S. Freeman, Green Flake (colored), John S. Gleason, David Grant, Hans G. Hansen, Levi Jackman, Stephen Kelsey, Levi N. Kendall, Hark Lay (colored), Joseph Mathews, Elijah Newman, David Power, Lewis B. Myers, O. P. Rockwell, Jackson Redding, Shadrach Roundy, James W. Stewart, Gilbroid Summe, Horace Thornton, Marcus B. Thorpe, George W. Therlkill, Norman Taylor, Seth Taft, Robert Thomas.

This Pioneer was in his 28th year when with Orson Pratt he entered Salt Lake valley on the 21st of July, 1847. He had been sent forward from the main encampment expressly to join Elder Pratt and assist him in the selection of a place for settlement. Accordingly Elder Pratt took him for his companion on the last day of the necessary advance exploration of the route to be traveled by the main company. Erastus Snow was then, though a young man, one of marked judgment and ability, as witnessed by the fact of his being sent forward from the main encampment to assist the captain of the advanced company of the Pioneers in selecting a place of settlement. Less than two years later he was ordained one of the twelve apostles of the New Dispensation, and throughout his long life was a most faithful and devoted servant of God, prominent in all the activities of the church both in foreign lands and in the organized stakes of Zion. He was preeminently successful as a Pioneer, and after Brigham Young easily the most active and prominent in the founding of settlements in the intermountain west. We shall have occasion to speak frequently of his work in the progress of this History. Here, however, it is proper to say that the Church of Jesus Christ in the New Dispensation has developed no more saintly or manly character than Erastus Snow; neither has the church had a more devoted servant than he was; nor the Lord Jesus Christ a more faithful apostle. He died on the 27th of May, 1888.

So interesting and important to our History are the movements of these early Pioneer companies through portions of the country later to comprise parts of Utah—the land occupied by the Latter-day Saints—that I quote the following from Mr. Bryant's work, What I Saw in California, respecting the passage of the several companies through the Salt Lake valley in 1846. The quotations are from the 3rd edition of the work. Mr. Bryant was for one term alcalde or mayor of San Francisco. The quotations are journal entries under the dates given:

229EXCERPTS FROM THE JOURNAL OF EDWIN BRYANT

"July 18, 1846: We determined, this morning to take the new route, via the south end of the great Salt Lake. Mr. Hudspeth—who with a small party, on Monday, will start in advance of the emigrant companies which intend traveling by this route, for the purpose of making some further explorations—has volunteered to guide us as far as the Salt Plain, a day's journey west of the lake. Although such was my own determination, I wrote several letters to my friends among the emigrant parties in the rear, advising them not to take this route, but to keep on the old trail, via Fort Hall. Our situation was different from theirs. We were mounted on mules, had no families, and could afford to hazard experiments, and make explorations. They could not." (p. 144.)

230"July 29: Mr. Hudspeth and two young men came into camp early this morning, having bivonacked last night a short distance from us, on the opposite side of the river. They had forced their way through the upper canon, and proceeded six miles further up Weber river, where they met a train of about forty emigrant wagons under the guidance of Mr. Hastings, which left Fort Bridger the same day that we did. The difficulties to be encountered by these emigrants by the new route will commence at that point; and they will, I fear, be serious. Mr. Hudspeth thinks that the passage through the canon is practicable, by making a road in the bed of the stream at short distances, and cutting out the timber and brush in other places.

230Resuming our march, we took a south course over the low hills bordering the valley in which we have been encamped; thence along the base of a range of elevated mountains which slope down to the marshy plain of the lake. This plain varies in width from fifteen to two miles, becoming narrower as we approach what is called the 'Utah Outlet,' the channel through which the Utah Lake empties its waters into the Salt Lake." (pp. 158-9).

230"The number of wagons which took the new route from Fort Bridger via the south end of the Great Salt Lake, intersecting with the old wagon trail on Mary's river, 250 miles above the sink, was about eighty. The advance company of these was Mr. Harlan's. The Pioneers, and those following their trail, succeeded by energetic exertions in opening a road through the difficult mountain passes near the Salt Lake, and reached the settlements of California in good season. The rear party, known as Messrs. Reed and Donner's company, did not follow the trail of those who had preceded them, but explored for a portion of the distance, another route, and opened a new road through the Desert Basin. In making these explorations and from other causes, they lost a month's time, the consequence of which was, that they did not reach the pass of the Sierra Nevada until the 31st of October, when they should have been there by the 1st of October."

The complete entry in Wilford Woodruff's Journal for—

"July 24, 1847: This is an important day in the history of my life and the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On this important day, after traveling from our encampment six miles through the deep ravine-valley ending with the canon through the Last Creek, we came in full view of the great valley or basin [of the] Salt Lake and the land of promise held in reserve by the hand of God for a resting place for the saints upon which a portion of the Zion of God will be built. We gazed with wonder and admiration upon the vast, rich, fertile valley which lay for about twenty-five miles in length and 16 miles in width, clothed with the heaviest garb of green vegetation in the midst of which lay a large lake of salt water of — miles in extent, in which could be seen large islands and mountains towering towards the clouds; also a glorious valley abounding with the best fresh water springs, riverlets, creeks, brooks and rivers of various sizes all of which gave animation to the sporting trout and other fish, while the waters were wending their way into the great Salt Lake. Our hearts were surely made glad after a hard journey—from Winter Quarters—of 1200 miles through flats of Platte river and steeps of the Black Hills and the Rocky Mountains, and burning sands of the eternal sage region, and willow swales and rocky canons and stumps and stones—to gaze upon a valley of such vast extent entirely surrounded with a perfect chain of everlasting hills and mountains, covered with eternal snows, with their innumerable peaks like pyramids towering towards heaven, presenting at one view the grandest and most sublime scenery that could be obtained on the globe. Thoughts of pleasing meditation ran in rapid succession through our minds while we contemplated that not many years hence and that the House of God would stand upon the top of the mountains, while the valleys would be converted into orchards, vineyards, gardens and fields by the inhabitants of Zion, the standard be unfurled for the nations to gather thereto.

231President Young expressed his full satisfaction in the appearance of the valley as a resting place for the saints, and was amply repaid for his journey. After gazing awhile upon the scenery we traveled across the table lands into the valley four miles, to the encampment of our brethren who had arrived two days before us. They had pitched their encampment upon the bank of two small streams of pure water and had commenced plowing and had broke about five acres of ground and commenced planting potatoes. As soon as we were located in the encampment, before I took my dinner, having one-half bushels of potatoes I repaired to the plowed field and planted my potatoes, hoping with the blessings of God at least to save the seed for another year. The brethren had dammed up one of the creeks and dug a trench, and by night nearly the whole ground was irrigated with water. We found the ground very dry. Towards evening, in company with Brothers Kimball, Smith and Benson, I rode several miles up the creek into the mountains to look for timber and see the country, etc. There was a thunder shower and it extended nearly over the whole valley, also it rained some the forepart of the night, we felt thankful for this as it was the general opinion that it did not rain in the valley during the summer time."

Footnotes

Robert Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow,

Elizabeth Crow, George J. Therlkill,

Benjamin B. Crow Matilda J. Therlkill,

Harriet Crow. Milton Howard Therlkill,

Elizabeth J. Crow, Jas. Wm. Therlkill,

Jno. McHenry Crow, Archibald Little,

Walter H. Crow, James Chesney,

Wm. Parker Crow, Lewis B. Myers,

Isa Vinda Exene Crow, (Fifty Years Ago Today, June 4,

1847).

This company had a splendid outfit, strong, fresh mule teams, four to a wagon, and good wagons. John Brown gives the number of wagons as six. (Brown's Journal for 1847, p. 63.)

Twenty-nine were from Springfield, Illinois, and constituted the original Donner-Reed party—"Reed being the most prominent member of it."

Thirteen were from Marshall county, Ill.

Ten from Keokuk, Iowa.

Thirteen from Tennessee.

Four from Belleville, Ill.

Three from Jackson Co., Mo., and one other, Luke Haloran, was from Missouri.

Four were Germans, a family which had been in America but two years.

Ten from various parts of the United States, two of them being of the Spanish race. (See Bancroft's notes, History of California, vol. v, pp. 530-1, where the names of the Donner party, as well as whence they started for the west, are given). It appears from the above that only four of the 87 were from Missouri.

"Captain Sutter emigrated to this country (California) from the western part of Missouri in 1838-'39, and formed the first settlement in the valley (the American river valley) on a large grant of land which he obtained from the Mexican government. He had, at first, some trouble with the Indians; but, by the occasional exercise of well timed authority, he has succeeded in converting them into a peaceable and industrious people. The ditches around his extensive wheat fields: the making of the sun-dried bricks, of which his fort is constructed; the ploughing, harrowing, and other agricultural operations, are entirely the work of these Indians, for which they receive a very moderate compensation—principally in shirts, blankets, and other articles of clothing. In the same manner, on application to the chief of a village, he readily obtains as many boys and girls as he has any use for. There were at this time a number of girls at the fort, in training for a future woolen factory; but they were now all busily engaged in constantly watering the gardens, which the unfavorable dryness of the season rendered necessary. The occasional dryness of some seasons, I understood to be the only complaint of the settlers in this fertile valley, as it sometimes renders the crops uncertain. Mr. Sutter was about making arrangements to irrigate his lands by means of the Rio de los Americanos. He had this year sown, and altogether by Indian labor, three hundred fanegas of wheat." (Fremont"s Report of Exploring Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, 1842, and to Oregon and California, 1843-44, Senate Document No. 166).

---
Notas:
[^1] This, of course, is its approximate extent; and still, approximately only, it may be said that the "basin" lies between the 110th and the 120th degrees of longitude; and between the 26th and the 45th degrees of north latitude, at the points of its extremest length and breadth.
[^2] See topographical map accompanying Fremon'ts Report of His First and Second Expedition, 1842-3-4; published by order of the United States senate, at Washington, 1845. Others regard the "basin" as "roughly triangular" in outline. (See Great Salt Lake, Present and Past, Dr. James E. Talmage, 1900, p. 88). For a more minute description of the Great Basin by Fremont, and one of great interest, see Note end of chapter.
[^3] The Mormons or Latter-day Saints, pp. 14, 15. Lieutenant Gunnison was of the U. S. A. topographical engineers accompanying Captain Howard Stansbury in his government topographical surveying expedition to Utah, 1849-50. His book is written from personal observation and deduction while in the United States service in Utah.
[^4] This ancient inland sea is now called Lake Bonneville, of which more later. See Notes 2 and 3, end of chapter lxxxi.
[^5] See articles in Lewiston (Maine) Journal, as late as August and September, 1903, reproduced in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. i, pp. 83-107, by the author of this History; also current anti-"Mormon" literature generally.
[^6] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for July 22nd, 1847, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 178.
[^7] See Note 8, end of chapter lxxix, excerpt from Woodruff's Journal, entry for July 24th, 1847.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Clara Decker Young's Experiences, Ms., p. 5, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 261.
[^10] Bancroft's History of Utah, page 262, quoting from Early Experiences, Lorenzo Young, Ms., p. 415. The manner of gathering this "harvest" is thus described by Lorenzo Young (brother of Brigham Young): "The Indians made a corral twelve or fifteen feet square, fenced about with sage brush and grease-wood, and with branches of the same drove them [the crickets] into the enclosure. Then they set fire to the brush fence, and going amongst them, drove them into the fire. Afterward they took them up by the thousands, rubbed off their wings and legs, and after two or three days separated the meat, which was, I should think, an ounce or half an ounce of fat to each cricket." (Early Experiences, Lorenzo Young, Ms., pp. 4-5).
[^11] History of Mormon Battalion, Tyler, page 315.
[^12] See ante this History, ch. lxxix.
[^13] The Utah Pioneers, p. 41.
[^14] The Mormon Prophet, Waite, 1866, page 5.
[^15] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 453.
[^16] McBride's Route of the Mormons, Ms., quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, footnote, page 258.
[^17] Plainly an error, since the Pioneers did not arrive until the 24th of July and no planting took place except as to corn, vegetables, and buckwheat as an experiment. From this planting nothing matured. (See Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, p. 401).
[^18] A Salt Lake correspondent of the Lewiston [Maine] Journal, Aug. 19, 1903, Defense of the Faith and the Saints, pp. 86-87.
[^19] See The Mormon Question, p. 2. This pamphlet, published by the church, is made up of a speech by the vice-president from the veranda of his hotel in Salt Lake City. October, 1869, making certain strictures upon the religion of the Latter-day Saints: Elder John Taylor's answer thereto through the press; the vice-president's reply through the New York Independent; and Elder Taylor's rejoinder.
[^20] The Mormon Question, Colfax-Taylor, p. 18.
[^21] Gunnison, The Mormons, pp. 15-18.
[^22] Fremont's First and Second Expedition, pp. 275-6, United States Senate Document.
[^23] The Great Salt Lake, Present and Past, p. 88.
[^24] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry 28th of June. Also Woodruff's Journal to the same effect.
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, p. 95. Erastus Snow in his great reminiscent discourse on the "Utah Pioneers" (p. 43) delivered in Salt Lake City, July 25th, 1880, said Bridger's offer was "for the first ear of corn raised in the valley of the Great Salt Lake or the valley of the Utah Outlet," meaning Utah Lake valley, some 30 miles south of Salt Lake. Snow in his discourse spoke extemporaneously and from memory. There is a sense in which Bridger's offer of $1,000 for a bushel of corn raised in the Salt Lake valley can be understood other than regarding it as an expression of belief in the impossibility of the thing, viz., an expression of hope that it might be done—a reward for a desired demonstration of the thing. Wilford Woodruff's Journal account of the interview with Bridger would warrant such a view. He says: "He (Bridger) spoke more highly of the Great Basin for a settlement than Major Harris did; that it was his paradise, and if this people [i. e. the saints] settled in it, he wanted to settle with them. There was but one thing that could operate against it becoming a great grain country, and that would be the frost. He did not know but the frost would kill the corn" (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 28th of June)—he would give a $1,000 to have a demonstration that this was not so, as Salt lake valley, "his paradise," would then be known as a desirable place for settlement. Bridger was evidently tiring of his isolated, half-outcast life, and desired to settle with white people, proven by the fact of his purchase of a farm less than ten years later at Westport, Missouri, and his attempt to settle down to a regular life. (Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 685, note).
[^26] Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 43.
[^27] Brannan had made a brave march of more than 800 miles to confer with the church leaders, and that with only two companions. Orson Pratt thus describes that journey in his Journal, entry of June 30th, 1847, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 161: "He left the Bay of San Francisco on the 4th of April last, expressly to meet us, accompanied by only two persons; and, having at this early season of the year braved the dangers of the deep snows upon the mountains, and the wild and savage tribes of Indians that roam over these terrific regions, he arrived in safety at our camp; having also passed directly over the camping ground where about 40 or 50 California emigrants had perished, and been eaten up by their fellow-sufferers only a few days before. Their skulls, bones, and carcasses lay strewed in every direction. He also met the hindmost one of these unfortunate creatures making his way into the settlements. He was a German, and had lived upon human flesh for several weeks." The party that perished as described above was the ill-fated Donner party, of which more later.
[^28] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry for 4th of July.
[^29] Their names were Phineas H. Young, Geo. Woodward, Aaron Farr, Eric Clines and Rodney Badger.
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 96.
[^31] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1847, p. 97. Thomas S. Williams, named in the above quotation, was Sergeant Williams of Company D in the original battalion organization, and was the officer in command of the company of 13 which had overtaken the Pioneers. (Journal of John Brown, 1847, p. 67).
[^32] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 9th of July.
[^33] Ibid, entry of 7th of July. The "Post" was founded in 1842 by its then—1847—present owners. [James Bridger et al] and was abandoned in 1853. (Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 684).
[^34] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 9th of July.
[^35] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 9th of July. Three small wagon trains passed over the trail, of which more later.
[^36] His effort at "farming" consisted in fencing a small patch of land on the banks of the Weber, in 1846, "and [he] had tried the experiment of sowing grain and planting vegetables in a small way." (See Erastus Snow's Discourse, Utah Pioneers, p. 45.) In Fifty Years Ago Today, Goodyear's "farm" is erroneously located "in the Bear river valley;" and he is credited with being "the pioneer farmer in Utah" (See Fifty Years Ago Today, July 11th, 1897). Goodyear came to the west from Iowa, with the Whitman-Spalding missionary party, in the spring of 1836. He was then a lad of sixteen, and traveled with the missionaries in the capacity of a servant to Fort Wyeth, on Snake river, where he left the missionaries to join a fur hunting expedition; and so drifted into the business of Indian trader and mountain guide. (See Bancroft's History of Oregon, vol. 1, p. 127.)
[^37] Woodruff speaking of the meeting with Goodyear said: "He has settled at Salt Lake, has a garden and vegetation of all kinds, he says, doing well. He spoke of three roads to Salt Lake." (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for 10th of July.) The three roads referred to were (1) the road via Bridger, down Bear River via Soda Springs, Cache valley and so to the north end of Salt Lake, Captain Bartelson's route 1841; also the route of Fremont to Salt Lake, 1843 (See this History, chapter lxxviii, Note 2. Emigration to Oregon, 1834-1847); (2) the route via Weber canon, down which Hastings had led two companies with wagons: (3) the Donner-Reed route which led up Ogden's Fork of Weber river, or Canon Creek, down Emigration canon, to the south end of the Salt Lake where it again picked up Hastings' new road.
[^38] Brown's Journal, 1847, Ms., p. 67.
[^39] Pratt's Journal, entry for the 13th of July. See also Note 4, end of this chapter on Pratt's appointment to the leadership of this "advanced party," and for the names of the party see Note 5, end of chapter.
[^40] History of California, Bancroft, vol. iv, p. 399.
[^41] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. pp. 528-9 and footnotes.
[^42] Ibid. p. 530.
[^43] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. pp. 529-30.
[^44] Ibid: also What I Saw In California, Journal of a Tour, by Edwin Bryant, p. 144. See Note 7, end of this chapter.
[^45] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. p. 531.
[^46] "Reid" in "Mormon" Pioneer Journals, but "Reed" in Bancroft's works.
[^47] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. 1, p. 296.
[^48] History of California, Bancroft, vol. v. p. 531.
[^49] History of California, vol. v, p. 531.
[^50] It is reported in some of our "Mormon" annals that the Donner party was from Missouri; but that is not borne out by the facts. Its composition as to the states whence its members started from was as follows:
[^51] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 531.
[^52] See Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, ch. xxxv, pp. 301-302.
[^53] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 543. "There was nothing remarkable in the composition of the [Donner] company," says Bancroft, "which included rich and poor; American, Irish and German; Protestant, Catholic and Mormon" (History of California, vol. v, p. 531). The "Mormons" were represented by the family of a Mrs. Lovenia Murphy, a widow with three sons and two daughters, one of whom, Harriet, was married to Wm. M. Pike. "Mrs. Murphy had lived at Nauvoo and later at Warsaw," according to Bancroft she accepted "an engagement to cook and wash for the emigrants with a view to reach with her children the ultimate destination of the saints." (History of California, vol. v, p. 531, note). She was among those who perished in the mountains. Sergeant Tyler of the Mormon Battalion saw one of the daughters of Mrs. Murphy—Mary—who had meantime married a Mr. Johnson, in California—and from her learned the story condensed by Bancroft. Tyler credits "Sister Murphy" with good motives, but thinks she made a mistake in leaving the saints to go with this party. (Tyler's Mormon Battalion, p. 312. Tyler gives Mrs. Murphy's name as Murry. Wilford Woodruff, who baptized Mrs. Murphy, while on his mission in Tennessee, says she apostatized and joined the mob. See Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 1847, entry for 10th July), by which he means no more, perhaps, than that she lived among those who were mobbing the saints in Illinois.
[^54] "Our journey down 'Red Fork'," says the leader of the "advance party," "has truly been very interesting and exceedingly picturesque. We have been shut up in a narrow valley from ten to twenty rods wide, while upon each side the hills rise very abruptly from 800 to 1200 feet, and for most of the distance we have been walled in by vertical and overhanging precipices of red pudding-stone, and also red sandstone dipping to the northwest in an angle of about 20 degrees. * * * The country is very mountainous in every direction." (Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 14th of July).
[^55] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 15th of July; and John Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 68. "Brother Pratt and myself, who acted as pilots and pioneers of the camp, went down and examined the canon, but did not find it practicable."
[^56] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 15th of July, John Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 68. After describing the examination of the road down Weber canon, Brown adds: "We then examined the other pass to the south, through which a small company of California emigrants passed the year before, but we could scarcely see their trail."
[^57] Pratt's Journal, 16th of July.
[^58] "This creek passes through a canon about 40 rods below, where it is for a few rods shut up by perpendicular and overhanging walls, being a break in a mountain, which rises several hundred feet upon each side. The creek plunges underneath a large rock which lay in its bed, near the foot of the canon, blockading the same and making it wholly impassable for wagons or teams." (Pratt's Journal, entry for 17th July). It was this mountain gorge which Reed, the year before, found it necessary to go round, hence "the circuitous route over the hills," back to the canon's creek again followed by Pratt and Brown as described in the text.
[^59] "July 16, we sent a messenger back to the main camp to report progress and bring us word from our brethren. On the 17th moved over to 'Big Canon Creek.' Erastus Snow, who was with the main part of the camp, says when reaching this point "We * * * struck a large creek, which proved to be a branch of the Weber river, which Elder Pratt named Canon Creek, from the fact of its entering a tremendous, impassable canon just below where the road strikes it, and also winds its way between these mountain cliffs and empties into the river between upper and lower canons on that stream." (Erastus Snow's Journal, enry 19th of July, 1847).
[^60] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 17th of July, 1847. Also Brown: "We * * * ascended a high mountain on the left of the road; we could see nothing but mountains except a beautiful park which lay up the creek." (Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 69).
[^61] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 18th of July, 1847.
[^62] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 19th of July. Brown says, writing of the events of the 19th: "We went ahead as usual to explore the route. Went as far as the top of the big mountain. Here we had a view of the valley for the first (time). We went on to the mountain to the right and saw what we supposed to be one corner of the lake, which intelligence we carried back to the camp causing all to rejoice." (Brown's Journal, 1847, p. 69).
[^63] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 19th of July, 1847. Erastus Snow's description of the pass is as follows: "The pass over the summit was narrow, peaks of the mountain rising on each side for three-fourths of a mile. This pass is the only notch or opening of the mountains known in this region of the country that is at all practicable for a road, except through the canon down the bed of the Weber river, which is very rough, and passable only in the lowest stages of water, and scarcely passable for wagons up the stream at any stage. From the summit of the pass, for the first time, I got a sight of the valley of the Utah Outlet, (i. e. valley of the Jordan) extending from the Utah to the Salt Lake." Pratt registers the altitude of the pass to be 7,245 feet above the sea.
[^64] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for July 20th, 1847.
[^65] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 21st of July. Of this view of the valley obtained from near the mouth of Emigration canon, Erastus Snow also says: "From the view we had of the valley from the top of the mountain, we supposed it to be only an arm of prairie extending up from the Utah valley, but on ascending this butte we involuntarily, both at the same instant, uttered a shout of joy at finding it to be the very place of our destination, and beheld the broad bosom of the Salt Lake Spreading itself before us." (Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 21st July, 1847).
[^66] Erastus Snow, Utah Pioneers, p. 46.
[^67] The fact that President Young thus directed the movements of the advance company of Pioneers is beyond question. Following is extracted from John Brown's Journal, for 1847, p. 69, Ms. Writing of the incidents of the 19th of July, and speaking of his own and Elder Pratt's return from Big Mountain, he says: "Our messenger [O. P. Rockwell sent to President Young's camp on the 16th to report the progress of the advance company] had returned to us and brought word that the president was better. He had started the main camp on, and was still stopping with a few wagons to rest a little longer, telling the brethren when they got into the valley to turn a little north and put in their seed of all kinds, a small quantity of each to try the soil." And so Erastus Snow, in describing the advent of Orson Pratt and himself into Salt Lake valley, he says: "We could see the canes down in the valley on what is now called Mill Creek, south of the lower grist mill, which looked like grain: and thither we directed our course. But when we reached it and ascertained what it really was, and remembering the last injunction of President Young, we turned northward and crossed Mill Creek on to City Creek [present site of Salt Lake City], which appeared to us the point of our destination as indicated by the president." (Utah Pioneers, p. 46).
[^68] Life and Labors of Orson Pratt, by his son, Milando Pratt, 1891, The Contributor, vol. xii, p. 188.
[^69] An ominous presense this, in view of events to be recounted later; but at the time their presence was first noticed, there was no premonition that these black, ugly crickets would become a terror to the settlers—a menace to their very existence.
[^70] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for the 22nd July. John Brown who was one of the company of nine who made this detour into the valley, agrees in all the essentials reported by Pratt. (See Brown's Journal, 1847, Ms., pp. 69-70. Ditto Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 23rd of July).
[^71] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 23rd of July, Erastus Snow also says: "At noon on the 23rd we made our camp on City Creek below Emigration Street, or the street where the street railroad runs east from the Clift House, and just below that on the old channel of the creek; the creek divided just below this Temple Block, one branch running west and the other south. It was on the south branch of the creek we formed our camp on the noon of the 23rd; and here we bowed ourselves down in humble prayer to Almighty God with hearts full of thanksgiving to him, and dedicated this land unto him for the dwelling place of his people." (Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 46).
[^72] Erastus Snow in Utah Pioneers, p. 46.
[^73] I think this statement is true notwithstanding what is said in this chapter about the irrigated garden of Goodyear at the mouth of Weber canon at the time the Pioneers arrived in the valley; and notwithstanding what is said by Fremont of Captain Sutter—a Swiss immigrant to America—and irrigation at Sutter's Fort at the mouth of the American river in March, 1844, where a simple Indian system of irrigation was in operation, with a more extensive one in prospect from the use of the American river which is spoken of, but whether put into operation or not is unknown. At any rate it was from the Salt Lake valley irrigation example that modern Anglo-Saxon irrigation took its rise, and has progressed to its present large achievements and importance. Following is Fremont's passage with reference to irrigation at Sutter's Fort in March, 1844:
[^74] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for 23rd of July. There was not enough rain, however, to lay the dust, and at three o'clock the thermometer stood at 96 degrees.
[^75] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 17th of July.
[^76] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 18th of July.
[^77] From the Journal of Wilford Woodruff it is learned that this "Canon Creek," so named by Orson Pratt, for reason previously given, was known as "Ogden's Fork," [i. e. of Weber river] doubtless because of some connection of Peter Skeen Ogden with this region, as trapper and Indian trader; and the road over the hills to avoid the passage through the canon was called "Reed's Pass," after James F. Reed of the Donner company who passed over the route the year before. The passage in Woodruff's Journal is as follows: "Brothers Kimball, Benson and Lorenzo we camped on (Canon Creek). The route we are taking is 'Reed's Pass,' which we have named 'Pratt's Pass' in consequence of his going on to make the road. (Journal, Ms., entry for July 21st). Then in his journal entry for 22nd he remarks: "We traveled four miles today on East Canon Creek, where the 'Pratt Pass' leaves the fork for good and turns to the west." (Ibid).
[^78] 78. History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, entry for July 23rd. Wilford Woodruff relates a similar incident as occurring at the mouth of Emigration Canon and on the 24th. His statement is as follows: "When we came out of the canon into full view of the valley, I turned the side of my carriage around, open to the west, and President Young arose from his bed and took a survey of the country. While gazing on the scene before us, he was enwrapped in vision for several minutes. He had seen the valley before in vision, and upon this occasion he saw the future glory of Zion and of Israel, as they would be, planted in the valleys of these mountains. When the vision had passed, he said: "It is enough. This is the right place, drive on." (Utah Pioneers, p. 23).
[^79] 79. History of Brigham Young, Ms., 3. Journal entry for the 24th of July, 1847. For Wilford Woodruff's Journal account of President Young's and his own entrance into Salt Lake valley, see Note 8, end of chapter.
[^80] 80. Condensed from Bancroft's History of Wyoming, pp. 583-4.
[^81] 81. This name is recorded Powers in the list of Pioneers, but in the Journal of John Brown it is several times recorded Powell. (See Brown's Journal for 1847, pp. 54, 56).
[^82] 82. Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 23. Also Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 286.
[^83] 83. Ibid, p. 385.
[^84] 84. Eliza R. Snow in The Women of Mormondom, Tullidge, p. 308.
[^85] 85. Biography and Autobiography of Lorenzo Snow, by Eliza R. Snow, 1884 pp. 85-6.
[^86] 86. Utah Pioneers, p. 44.
