B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

232CHAPTER LXXX

232THE SALT LAKE REGION: FERTILE OR NOT FERTILE?

232IT was a wonderful country into which the Pioneers of the Church of the Latter-day Saints had penetrated, and which their Prophet-leader designated so positively as their place of habitation. It was a country practically unknown, through the eastern states, except through Fremont's reports, and his topographical maps, published in the year 1845. Other reports that reached the east concerning the great west and northwest, from agents of the fur companies, from returned adventurers—hunters and trappers—and from missionaries, concerned themselves chiefly with Oregon or California. The great Intermountain West had not, as yet, inspired a great amount of interest.

232

THE "GREAT BASIN"

The Great Basin, in which are located, on the east side, Salt Lake and Utah Lake (the latter a body of fresh water some thirty miles south of the former) was marked off on Fremont's topographical map as having a diameter of eleven degrees of latitude, by ten degrees of longitude; [^1] and an elevation above the sea between 4>,000 and 5,000 feet. It extends from the Blue Mountains of Oregon in the north to the approaching southern ends of the Wasatch and Sierra ranges, in the south. Its eastern rim, or wall, is the Wasatch range, the western cordillera of the Rocky Mountains; while the Sierra Nevada range forms the western rim. The Sierra and the Wasatch ranges describe, respectively, a great but irregular arc of a mighty circle, the ends of which approach each other at both the north and the south, so that the Great Basin is irregularly oval rather than circular in form, with its greatest extent running north and south. [^2] Fremont describes it on the face of his topographical map as,

233"A region surrounded by lofty mountains; contents almost unknown, but believed to be filled with rivers and lakes which have no communication with the sea, deserts and oases which have never been explored, and savage tribes which no travelers have described."

233Subsequent exploration and settlement proved much of this conjecture to be true. It is a region surrounded by lofty mountains; also with many local, narrow mountain ranges, for the most part running parallel with the ranges forming the basin's east and west sides. "The absence of one or more short ranges opposite each other will occasionally unite several valleys into one," says Lieutenant J. W. Gunnison. [^3] He also notes that some partial cross ridges in the basin form minor basins. Much of the Great Basin's area is desert and semi-desert, with here and there fertile tracts of land bordering local river systems, the oases of Fremont's conjectures. It has the river sinks and shallow, brackish lakes which have no outlet to the sea. Indeed the whole basin itself is but the bottom of some ancient sea with a probable outlet via the Columbia river, connecting it with the Pacific Ocean. [^4]

It is within this region about the Great Salt Lake, however, where the Latter-day Saint Pioneers had halted, and where, and in adjacent local valleys, their colonizing activities for some years will be employed, with which I am here immediately concerned.

234A controversy in subsequent years arose as to the fertility or barrenness of the region the "Mormon" Pioneers designated as a habitat for their people, viz., in Salt Lake and adjacent valleys on the east side of the Great Basin, echoes of which are still to be heard in controversial literature upon this subject. [^5] It is quite probable that the early settlers in the Salt Iake valley, regarding the subject from the standpoint of the hardships they endured while planting their colonies, and instituting practically a new system of agriculture, involving the added toil and expense of irrigation to raise their crops, unconsciously emphasized the barren and desert features which made the added toil and expense of farming imperative. Also in some of their descriptions they were holding in contrast with their present semi-barren and treeless environment the well watered, alternating prairie and woodlands of Missouri, Illinois and Iowa, fertile beyond all other lands, and the paradise of the agriculturist.

CONFLICTING TESTIMONY ON FERTILITY AND STERILITY

Yet, as we have seen in a previous chapter, leading Pioneers themselves did not fail to note the natural advantages of the Salt Lake valley. Orson Pratt notes in his Journal that "streams from the mountains and springs were very abundant, the water excellent and generally with gravel bottoms. A great variety of green grass, and very luxuriant, covered the bottoms for miles where the soil was sufficiently damp, but in other places, although the soil was good, yet the grass had nearly dried up for want of moisture." He also notes that streams were entering into the valley from the mountains on the east every few miles, "many of which were sufficiently large to carry mills and other machinery." [^6] Wilford Woodruff, as we have seen already, was enthusiastic in his commendation, speaking of the valley as the "vast, rich, fertile," and "glorious valley;" and as "abounding with the best fresh water springs, riverlets, creeks, brooks and rivers of various sizes." [^7] He also assures us that President Young "expressed his full satisfaction in the appearance of the valley as a resting place for the saints, and was amply repaid for his journey." [^8]

235All the Pioneers, however, especially some of those who came into the valley that same year, but after the first companies, were not equally enthusiastic in their appreciation of the valley's beauty, grandeur, or fertility. The principal drawbacks noted were its treeless state, its wide stretches of alkali bottom lands, its dry bench lands, and the fact that even before it could be plowed, the land had to be irrigated. "My mother was heartbroken," writes Clara Decker Young, one of the women of the Pioneer company, "because there were no trees to be seen. I don't remember a tree that could be called a tree. * * * The ground was so dry that they found it necessary to irrigate it before plowing, some plows having been broken." She adds that to the other two women who had made the journey from Winter Quarters, "there was a sense of desolation and loneliness" [^9] in the new country to which they had come.

The first impression of the valley upon other Pioneers was very disheartening, says Lorenzo Young. Except for two or three cottonwood trees along the water course no other trees were in sight, and Brigham Young regretted the destruction of the willows and wild roses growing on the banks of City Creek, in widening the channel of the stream for irrigating purposes, "leaving nothing to vary the scene but rugged mountains, the sage brush and the sun flower. The ground was covered with millions of black crickets which the Indians were harvesting for their winter food." [^10]

236Samuel Brannan, meeting the returning members of the Mormon Battalion in the Sierra mountains, in September, 1847, who were en route for Salt Lake valley, said:

236"The saints could not possibly subsist in the Great Salt Lake valley, as, according to the testimony of the mountaineers, it froze there every month in the year, and the ground was too dry to sprout seeds without irrigation, and irrigated with the cold mountain streams the seeds planted would be chilled and prevented from growing; but if they did grow they would be sickly and fail to mature. He considered it no place for an agricultural people, and expressed his confidence that the saints would emigrate to California the next spring. On being asked if he had given his views to President Brigham Young he answered that he had. On further inquiry as to how his views were received he said in substance that the president laughed and made some rather insignificant remark, 'but,' said Brannan, 'when he has fairly tried it, he will find that I was right and he was wrong, and will come to California.'" [^11]

236The doubts of Bridger concerning grain maturing in the Salt Lake valley have already been recorded. [^12]

236Erastus Snow during the celebration of the thirty-third anniversary of the entrance of the Pioneers into Salt Lake valley, said:

236"When the pioneers found it [i. e. Salt Lake valley], it was well-nigh purified by the lapse of time and the desolation of ages, and the wickedness of its ancient inhabitants was well-nigh obliterated, though the curse of barrenness and desolation still existed." [^13]

237An anti-"Mormon" author declares that Brigham Young had led his people "to a land as barren as the desert of Sahara, and as devoid of vegetation as the Rock of Gibralter;" [^14] and Senator Seddon, of Virginia, in referring to the Great Basin, in a speech before the United States senate, declared that it "had been abandoned to the Mormons for its worthlessness." [^15]

237Other anti-"Mormon" writers desiring to depreciate the achievements of the Latter-day Saints in conquering a barren wilderness by means of ceaseless toil and irrigation, have exaggerated the natural fertility of Salt Lake valley, and represented it almost as a fertile paradise. "The Mormons found a plain road into a fertile, unoccupied country; * * * its isolation alone was the cause of its non-occupation." [^16]

237"There never was any barren valley [i. e. Salt Lake valley], for it has always been one of the best watered, most easily cultivated, and reproductive valleys west of the Mississippi. The Mormons raised bountiful crops of grain the very first year of their arrival." [^17] "The difficulty of securing a crop here in this fertile valley with its mild and equable climate was very small in comparison with the difficulties encountered by the first settlers of New England along the bleak Atlantic shore." [^18]

Schuyler Colfax, vice-president of the United States, in the New York Independent, 1870, having then recently returned from California via Salt Lake valley, refers to the credit claimed by the "Mormons" for fertilizing the desert. "For this," said he, "they claim great credit; and I would not detract one iota from all they are legitimately entitled to. It was a desert when they first emigrated thither. They have made large portions of it fruitful and productive, and their chief city is beautiful in location and attractive in its gardens and shrubbery. But the solution of it all is in one word—water! What seemed to the eye a desert became fruitful when irrigated; and the mountains whose crests are clothed in perpetual snow, furnished in the unfailing supplies of their ravines, the necessary fertilizer." [^19]

238Commenting upon the above passage in the text, Elder Taylor said:

238"Water! Mirabile dictu! Here I must help Mr. C. out.

238This wonderful little water nymph, after playing with the clouds on our mountain tops, frolicking with the snow and rain in our rugged gorges for generations, coquetting with the sun and dancing to the sheen of the moon, about the time the 'Mormons' came here took upon herself to perform a great miracle, and descending to the valley with a wave of her magic wand and the mysterious words, 'hiccory, diccory, dock,' cities and streets were laid out, crystal waters flowed in ten thousand rippling streams, fruit trees and shrubbery sprang up, gardens and orchards abounded, cottages and mansions were organized, fruits, flowers and grain in all their elysian glory appeared, and the desert blossomed as the rose; and this little frolicking elf, so long confined to the mountains and water courses proved herself far more powerful than Cinderella or Aladdin. * * * But, to be serious, did water tunnel through our mountains, construct dams, canals and ditches, lay out our cities and towns, import and plant choice fruit trees, shrubs, and flowers, cultivate the land, and cover it with the cattle on a thousand hills, erect churches, school houses and factories, and transform a howling wilderness into a fruitful field and garden? * * * What if a stranger on gazing upon the statuary in Washington and our magnificent Capitol, and after rubbing his eyes were to explain, 'Eureka! it is only rock and mortar and wood.' This discoverer would announce that instead of a development of art, intelligence, industry and enterprise, its component parts were simply stone, mortar and wood, Mr. Colfax has discovered that our improvements are attributed to water!" [^20]

In anti-"Mormon" literature generally, I say again, will be found an effort to discredit the achievements of the saints in redeeming the desert lands of Salt Lake and adjacent valleys, and other regions of the Great Basin; for desert, to a large extent, they were, even as much of their area remains to testify to this day. On the other hand, yielding to the desire so natural to man, to magnify his own achievements, the triumph of his faith, or represent himself as the special object of divine care, it is possible that the saints in their account of things have unconsciously emphasized the desert appearance and conditions of the land to which they came as exiles from better lands, out of all due proportion. The fact is that there is data in abundance for both sides to the controversy, according to the mental attitude assumed by the disputant, or the viewpoint of the narrator. It is the two-sided-shield sort of a question. Looked upon from one side the shield seemed to be gold; looked upon from the other, it appeared to be silver; for the reason that one side was gold and the other silver. To get the truth both sides had to be looked upon. It is so with our fertile-desert controversy of the Salt Lake and adjacent valleys at the time the Pioneer company entered them. There was plenty of desert lands out of the reach of water by any means of irrigation that the Pioneers could then adopt; with staked plains of alkali and sand utterly barren; the whole lake district with adjacent valleys, and, for matter of that, the whole of the Great Basin, save for some mountain ranges that rimmed it, was practically treeless. On the other hand, considerable land along the east side of Salt Lake valley and in a number of adjacent valleys extending north and south for a distance of many miles, were well watered, and needed only that the streams be spread out over the intervening stretches of land in a simple system of irrigation, to make the seeming dry and barren waste fruitful. Of this fertile region, its extent and possibilities, Lieutenant Gunnison, of Captain Stansbury's company of United States army engineers, in the early days of Salt Lake valley's settlement—1849-50—perhaps gave the most accurate dsecription, and formed the most intelligent judgment. After speaking of the barren and desert condition of the larger part of the Great Basin, the lieutenant then says of the fertile region:

LIEUTENANT J. W. GUNNISON'S DESCRIPTION OF EARLY UTAH

"Along the western foot of the Wasatch range, for three hundred miles, is a strip of alluvion, from one to two miles in width,—and in the valley of the Jordan this is widened by what can be reclaimed by irrigating from its waters; and the spots similarly situated in other valleys, furnish the only land suited to cultivation in the Utah territory. This arises from the want of rain during the growing season; and water for the crops is only to be procured from the numerous streams that flow down the mountain gorges, fed during the spring, and into midsummer, by the melting snows. The higher mountains retain the snow, and irrigate the bases the longest time, and where the streams cannot be taken at the canon mouths, and led off for the farmer's use, the ground is lost to the plough. Most of these creeks are absorbed in the porous alluvion before they have reached a mile from the base, and frequently reappear in very diminished quantity in springs, at too low a level for use, in the arid plain that borders the salt pools or lakes. The land around Salt Lake is flat, and rises imperceptibly on the south and west for several miles, where it is not broken up by the abrupt hills, and is a soft, and sandy barren, irreclaimable for agricultural purposes. On the north the tract is narrow, and the springs bursting out near the surface of the water, the grounds cannot be irrigated; but the eastern side, above the line overflow when the lake rises with the spring freshets, is fertile and cultivated between the mountain and shore."

OF POSSIBLE FUTURE POPULATION

Estimating the population that could possibly be sustained in this fertile region within the territory of Utah, in view of the resources then in sight, Gunnison said:

"In order to estimate the probable amount of population which can well be sustained in the territory, we may safely rely on an equivalent of 2,000 pounds of flour to the acre of the plowed lands, and, drawing the meat part of the ration, or one half, from the herds fed elsewhere, there could be fed four thousand persons on the square mile. Such a density of inhabitants it can hardly be supposed will ever be attained there; but modified by the peculiar circumstances of the case, and social character of the people, and giving a far less amount to the mile, we may calculate that the territory of Utah will maintain, with ease, a million of inhabitants. Stretching southward from the point we have been noticing and passing over the rim of the Great Basin into a cotton-growing region, and where it is contemplated to try the sugar cane; having abundant iron mines everywhere in its whole extent, and inexhaustible beds of coal in the Green River Basin—with hill pastures, the finest in the world for sheep and wool raising—with water power for manufactures on every considerable stream—there are elements for a great and powerful mountain nation." [^21]

241After eighty-three years of growth and development within the region of country referred to, the possibilities of which in the above passage were forecast, realization, in population at least, has not yet overtaken the anticipation of Lieutenant Gunnison; but realization may be on the way; and doubtless but waits upon a further development of the resources of the intermountain west to bring to pass in accomplished fact all—and more than all—that the young officer foresaw as possibility.

NOTE

FREMONT'S DESCRIPTION OF THE "GREAT BASIN"—THE INTERMOUNTAIN WEST

"Differing so much from the Atlantic side of our continent, in coast, mountains, and rivers, the Pacific side differs from it in another most rare and singular feature—that of the great interior basin, of which I have so often spoken, and the whole form and character of which I was so anxious to ascertain. Its existence is vouched for by such of the American traders and hunters as have some knowledge of that region; the structure of the Sierra Nevada range of mountains requires it to be there; and my own observations confirm it. Mr. Joseph Walker, who is so well acquainted in those parts, informed me that, from the Great Salt Lake west, there was a succession of lakes and rivers which have no outlet to the sea, nor any connection with the Columbia, or with the Colorado or the Gulf of California. He described some of these lakes as being large, with numerous streams, and even considerable rivers, falling into them. In fact, all concur in the general report of these interior rivers and lakes; and, for want of understanding the force and power of evaporation, which so soon establishes an equilibrium between the loss and the supply of waters, the fable of whirlpools and subterraneous outlets has gained belief, as the only imaginable way of carrying off the waters which have no visible discharge. The structure of the country would require this formation of interior lakes; for the waters which would collect between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, not being able to cross this formidable barrier, nor to get to the Columbia or the Colorado, must naturally collect into reservoirs each of which would have its little system of streams and rivers to supply it. This would be the natural effect; and what I saw went to confirm it. The Great Salt Lake is a formation of this kind, and quite a large one; and having many streams, and one considerable river, four or five hundred miles long falling into it. This lake and river I saw and examined myself; and also saw the Wasatch and Bear river mountains which enclose the waters of the lake on the east, and constitute, in that quarter, the rim of the Great Basin. Afterwards, along the eastern base of the Sierra Nevada, where we traveled for forty-two days, I saw the line of lakes and rivers which lie at the foot of that Sierra; and which Sierra is the western rim of the basin. In going down Lewis's Fork and the main Columbia, I crossed only inferior streams coming in from the left, such as could draw their water from a short distance only; and I often saw the mountains at their heads, white with snow; which, all accounts said, divided the waters of the desert from those of the Columbia, and which could be no other than the range of mountains which form the rim of the basin on its northern side. And in returning from California along the Spanish trail, as far as the head of the Santa Clara Fork of the Rio Virgin, I crossed only small streams making their way south to the Colorado, or lost in sand—as the Mohave; while to the left, lofty mountains, their summits white with snow, were often visible, and which must have turned water to the north as well as to the south, and thus constituted, on this part, the southern rim of the basin. At the head of the Santa Clara Fork and in the Vegas de Santa Clara, we crossed the ridge which parted the two systems of waters. We entered the basin at that point, and have traveled in it ever since, having its southeastern rim [the Wasatch Mountains] on the right, and crossing the streams which flow down into it. The existence of the basin is therefore an establishd fact in my mind; its extent and contents are yet to be better ascertained. It cannot be less than four or five hundred miles each way, and must lie principally in the Alta California; the demarcation latitude of 42 degrees probably cutting a segment from the north part of the rim. Of its interior, but little is known. It is called a desert, and, from what I saw of it, sterility may be its prominent characteristic; but where there is so much water, there must be some oasis. The great river, and the great lake, reported, may not be equal to the report but where there is so much snow, there must be streams; and where there is no outlet, there must be lakes to hold the accumulated waters, or sands to swallow them up. In this eastern part of the basin, containing the Sevier, Utah, and the Great Salt lakes and the rivers and creeks falling into them, we know there is good soil and good grass, adapted to civilized settlements. In the western part, on Salmon Trout river, and some other streams, the same remark may be made.

The contents of this Great Basin are yet to be examined. That it is people, we know; but miserably and sparsely. From all that I heard and saw, I should say that humanity here appeared in its lowest form, and in its most elementary state. Dispersed in single families; without firearms; eating seeds and insects; digging roots, (and hence their name)—[Digger Indians]—such is the condition of the greater part. Others are a degree higher, and live in communities upon some lake or river that supplies fish, and from which they repulse the miserable Diggers. The rabbit is the largest animal known in this desert; its flesh affords a little meat, and their bag-like covering is made of its skins. The wild sage is their only wood, and here it is of extraordinary size—sometimes a foot in diameter and six or eight feet high. It serves for fuel, for building material, for shelter to the rabbits, and for some sort of covering for the feet and legs in cold weather. Such are the accounts of the inhabitants and productions of the Great Basin; and which, though imperfect, must have some foundation, and excite our desire to know the whole." [^22]

243This description is important and of interest in this History because it was the account given of this region, and published in the Nauvoo papers before the exodus of the saints from that city, and hence the description with which some of the Pioneers were familiar. In the Nauvoo Neighbor of September 17, 1845, is the following excerpt from the National Intelligencer, "A basin which may hold a kingdom such as France, and which has for its rim a circle of mountains whose summits penetrate the regions of eternal snow, is certainly a new and grand object to be revealed."

243Dr. Talmage, sometime professor of geology in University of Utah, describes the Great Basin as follows: "The largest closed drainage area in North America is the Great Basin now under consideration. The region to which this name is applied is of outline roughly triangular. * * * It extends about 880 miles in greatest length, running east of south and west of north, and 572 miles in extreme width from east to west. The area thus included is about 210,000 square miles, comprising the western half of Utah, the greater part of Nevada, and portions of eastern California, southeastern Oregon, southeastern Idaho and southwestern Wyoming. The southern part of the Great Basin has not been definitely surveyed." (This 1900). [^23]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] THE ADVENTURE OF ETIENNE PROVOT WITH MAUVAISE GAUCHE Usually writers upon this subject begin with an expedition sent out by Francis Vasquez de Coronado from Cibola, New Mexico, consisting of twelve men led by Captain Garcia Lopes de Cardenas. Their object was to find and explore a large river reported by the natives as lying far to the northwest from Cibola. It is supposed that after many days of hard travel the expedition arrived at the canon of the Colorado at a point within the present state of Utah; but could not reach the river itself because of the depth and precipitous sides of the mighty gorge through which it passed; and hence the expedition failed of its purpose and returned, after much suffering, to the main encampment of Coronado's "exploring army," in New Mexico. Because the expedition led by Lopes de Cardenas did not enter the Great Basin, the region with which I am dealing, and because his expedition to the Colorado was barren of results, I excluded mention of it in the text.
[^2] SHORE LINE AND EXTENT OF THE ANCIENT INLAND SEA—LAKE BONNEVILLE A translation from the Spanish of this valuable record is made, and is now published in a recent book on the Catholic Church in Utah, by the very Reverend W. R. Harris, D. D., L. L. D., 1909, (who will hereafter be referred to as "Dean Harris") it occupies 117 pages of Dean Harris' book, pp. 125-242.
[^3] BONNEVILLE'S DESCRIPTION OF GREAT SALT LAKE It was thought for some time that these Catholic Fathers entered Utah Lake valley via the stream now called Provo river, but the published Journal of the Fathers, makes it clear that they came down the Spanish Fork stream which they named "Auguas Calientes" (river of warm water). (See Escalante's Journal, also Dean Harris' discussion of the question, The Catholic Church in Utah, p. 248).
[^4] GREAT SALT LAKE The remaining large stream of the valley, American Fork, they called "Rio de San Antonio de Padua." (The Catholic Church in Utah, 248. See also Escalante's Journal, Ibid, pp. 173-184).
[^5] Escalante's Journal, Ibid, pp. 180-181.
[^6] Escalante's Journal, The Catholic Church in Utah, p. 176.
[^7] The Catholic Church in Utah, p. 179.
[^8] Ibid, pp. 178-9.
[^9] See the Catholic Church in Utah, p. 180. The dimensions of the lake, "north and south, are about 22 miles; and in width, east and west, nine, or ten miles." (Elwood Mead, Report U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1903, p. 95).
[^10] Escalante's Journal, The Catholic Church in Utah, pp. 181-2.
[^11] Among other things they represented that "its waters were very harmful and very salty; and that if one moistened any part of the body with it, he would at once feel the part bathed greatly inflamed." (Ibid, p. 182.)
[^12] Escalante's Journal in the Catholic Church in Utah, pp. 194-7.
[^13] Hiram Martin Chittenden, Captain Corps of Engineers, U. S. Army, and author of the History of American Fur Trade of the Far West, 3 vols., 1902. A most valuable and reliable work on the movements of the fur traders in the Rocky Mountain regions.
[^14] Ross was a clerk of the Pacific Fur Company, with headquarters at Astoria, founded 1811.
[^15] History of American Fur Trade of the Far West, vol. ii, p. 795.
[^16] History of Nevada, Bancroft, p. 37. It was also called for a time "Mary's river." Chittenden says Ogden married an Indian woman from one of the tribes of the valley, calling her name "Mary;" and from this circumstance the river was called "Mary's river." (American Fur Trade, vol. ii, p. 797). Bancroft says "one of Ogden's party married the Indian girl, but does not say it was Ogden." (History of Nevada, p. 37.) The Indian wife was soon abandoned, and then the river was no longer called "Mary's river."
[^17] History of American Fur Trade, vol. i, p. 277. Bancroft, however, refers to General Ashley as "a brave man, shrewd and honest; he was prosperous and commanded the respect of his men." (History of Utah, p. 21.)
[^18] One other stream, before noted, bore Ogden's name, viz.: East Canon Creek, was called "Ogden's Fork." (See footnote 77. chapter lxxix, this History). "The name 'Weber river' dates from this same period (i. e., 1825), but the identity of the individual for whom it was given is lost." (Chittenden's American Fur Trade, vol. ii, p. 796).
[^19] "Peter Skeen Ogden was the son of Chief Justice Ogden of Quebec, and prior to this time (i. e., 1825) had served both in the Pacific Fur Company and in the North West Company. Later he rose to be chief factor and manager. At Fort Vancouver he was second only to Douglas, who succeeded McLoughlin, and indeed at one time was chief factor in charge [at the Hudson Bay station of Vancouver]. He was short, dark and exceedingly tough, with an inexhaustible fund of humor, and consequently a great favorite. He died at the age of sixty, in Oregon City, 1854." (Bancroft's History of Nevada, p. 36, and footnote).
[^20] On the representatives of the successive races of men who temporarily operated throughout the intermountain west, Dean Harris has a paragraph in his work that is very instructive: "A singular, if not a unique fact in the history of Utah and southwestern Colorado, is the change of the nomenclature of rivers, mountains and localities, indicating that members of four different races of men passed through or occupied the land for a greater or lesser period. On the mountains, rivers and lakes aboriginal man conferred original names. The Spaniard, burning with religious enthusiasm, substituted for these names those of the saints, martyrs, confessors and canonized virgins of his church. Then came French-Canadian trappers and hunters of the Hudson Bay Fur Company, who gave French names to tribes, mountains and specified localities. Then entered on the scene, in 1823, the men of the American Fur Company, who incorporated English names with or supplanted those already bestowed by the Indian, Spaniard and French. So that on the maps of Utah and Colorado these national names remain as permanent witnesses to the presence, at one time or another, of the existence in our land of four different layers or strata of the human race." (The Catholic Church in Utah, p. 257.)
[^21] History of Wyoming, Bancroft, pp. 679-80.
[^22] "Tradition among the traders and trappers always ascribed the discovery of this pass to Provot, and there is little doubt of the fact; but positive proof there is none. The date of the discovery was probably late in the fall of 1823." (History of the American Fur Trade, vol. i, p. 271.) I follow the orthography of Dean Harris for Provot's name, which he obtained from official records in St. Louis. Usually it is given Provost. (See Catholic Church in Utah, pp. 261-2).
[^23] See Note 1, end of chapter.
