B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

244CHAPTER LXXXI

244THE SALT LAKE REGION BEFORE THE ADVENT OF THE "MORMON" PIONEERS

244THE first expedition of white men to enter this region, about which there can be no doubt, was that headed by the Catholic Fathers, Francisco Silvestre Velez de Escalante, and Francisco Atanasio Dominguez, in 1776. [^1]

244The expedition numbered ten all told, including, beside the Catholic fathers mentioned, Don Juan Pedro Cisneros, the mayor of the town of Zuni, and Don Bernado Miera y Pacheco, a retired captain, and citizen of Santa Fe.

244ROMAN CATHOLIC FATHERS IN UTAH LAKE VALLEY—1776

244The purpose of the expedition was to find a route from Santa Fe to Monterey on the coast of California, then recently made a post of entry for goods shipped from Spain and southern Mexico; and it was thought that if a road could be found direct from Santa Fe to Monterey it could be of great advantage in transporting both troops and goods to the New Mexican capital. Also it would doubtless give the priests access to other tribes of the natives, and facilitate communication among the stations the church had already established in California and New Mexico.

To achieve this purpose the expedition set out from Santa Fe on the 29th of August, 1776. From the Journal of the expedition [^2] it is learned that the course was northwesterly through what is now the western part of the state of Colorado, to a little above the 40th degree north latitude. Then westward until they crossed Green river (which they named Rio San Buenaventura) some distance above the mouth of what is now called Uintah river (by the fathers called Rio San Damian). Thence westward over a plateau and up the Uintah, Duchesne, and Strawberry valleys; thence down what is now called Spanish Fork canon into the beautiful Utah Lake valley, which the fathers called "The Valley and Lake of Our Lady of Mercy of the Timpanogotzis."

245The expedition arrived in the valley on the 23rd of September, 1776, and remained until the 27th, during which time they left their first encampment on the stream down the windings of which they had entered the valley, [^3] and moving northward crossed Provo river, and thence still northward to what was later called American Fork Creek, from which point they could see the outlet of the lake—the present Jordan river. They did not visit the outlet, but named it "Rio de Santa Ana." They noted the great beauty of the valley, and mention the fact that the "San Nicholas"—the name they gave to Provo river [^4]—"runs through large plains of good land for planting." It has more water than the two preceding streams; and "it has large groves, and plenty of good land if irrigated, [!] for two and even three large villages." [^5]

The fathers established friendly relations with the natives living on the eastern shore of the lake, whom they met in great numbers. They told them of God, and of obedience, and that while it was necessary for them (the fathers) to proceed on their journey, they would send priests to teach them of Christ, and Spaniards to live among them and teach them to cultivate the soil, and raise cattle, "so that they could be able to eat and to dress like the Spaniards, to obey the law, and to live as God had commanded." [^6] The fathers required and the Indians gave them a token that they desired to be Christians. This was to be shown to the great chief of the fathers, (the king of Spain), and which when the promised priests should come, they would bring with them for identification and to insure a friendly reception. These tokens were figures representing two of their chiefs and one other person of some authority among them painted with earth and red ochre on three separate crosses, the idea of which had been given them by the fathers displaying the cross of the rosary, and requesting that the token be drawn or painted upon a cross. [^7] One woman with a child that was sick begged that it might be baptized, but as, on inquiry, the fathers found the child was not likely to die, they "did not find it necessary to give it the water of baptism;" but for the mother's comfort told her they "would soon return and then would baptize all, both large and small." [^8]

The fathers estimated that the lake on the shore of which these people lived—Utah Lake—was six leagues wide, and fifteen leagues long; and as the "league" was the old Spanish standard, equal to about 2.41 United States miles, the dimensions of the lake by their estimation would be 12.46 miles in width, by 36.15 miles in length. [^9] The natives called this sheet of water "Timpanogo," meaning, doubtless, "fish lake" as the natives living upon its shores and subsisting upon its abundant supply of good fish were called "Timpanogotzis" by the surrounding tribes, meaning thereby "fisheaters." [^10] The ruling chief among these people was one "Tumnianchi."

247The natives told the fathers of the Salt Lake in the next valley northward, and of the "wonders of it to the native mind." [^11] The fathers, however, did not become sufficiently curious to visit this wonderful lake; on the contrary, after spending three days with the Timpanogotzis, they departed from the Utah valley southward upon their search for a route to Monterey. The expedition passed through Sevier valley, thence southward through one of the most extensive and noble valleys of the state of Utah—to which the name "Escalante" is given—to the valley of the Rio Virgin, thence to the Colorado and back to Santa Fe.

247While yet in the Sevier valley, being overtaken in the early October snows of that high region, the expedition lost all hope of finding a route to Monterey in any reasonable time, and hence determined upon the return to Santa Fe. This abandonment of the enterprise was not agreeable to all the party. They had come far, it was urged; they could surely find a way; why turn back? To determine the matter prayers were said and lots cast; and the lot was against seeking further a route to Monterey. This on the 11th of October, 1776. [^12] They arrived in Santa Fe on the 2nd of January, 1777.

THE HUNTER AND TRAPPER PERIOD

After the departure of the Catholic fathers the next white men to make their way into the intermountain region were the hunters and trappers of the great fur companies, who contended with each other for "fur hunting territory" as since their day, to compare small things with greater ones, nations have contended with each other for spheres of national commercial influence. There is evidence that representatives of the Hudson Bay Company and the North West Fur Company, as well as American fur companies extended their operations as far south and west as the Salt Lake and Utah valleys, as early as 1820-25. The advent of these will be briefly stated in chronological order as nearly as they may be followed.

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AGENTS

Hudson Bay Company men were known to have been active in the trapping regions of the headwaters of Snake river as early as 1819-20. "Donald McKenzie" says Chittenden, [^13] "worked all through the country and around the headwaters of the Snake river before 1820. Alexander Ross [^14] quotes a letter written by him from 'Black Bear Lake' [the present Bear Lake of Idaho and Utah] in 1819." And then he adds: "It seems scarcely possible that so large a trapping party could have passed so much time in this vicinity without discovering Great Salt Lake." [^15]

PETER SKEEN OGDEN

Peter Skeen Ogden was "a leading spirit of the Hudson Bay Company in the decade between 1820-1830. In 1825 he set out with a party of trappers from Van Couver on the Columbia river for the region round the headwaters of the Snake river, then known as the Lewis branch of the Columbia. This expedition built old Fort Boise, thence struck southwest until they came upon the stream now known as the "Humbolt river," in the present state of Nevada, so named by Captain Fremont, but for some time known as "Ogden's river," "which name by right," remarks H. H. Bancroft, "it should bear today, instead of that of Humbolt." [^16] Ogden also trapped on the Bear river in Cache valley, now in the northern part of the state of Utah. Here he accumulated and cached 130 "packs" of furs, in weight about 1,300 lbs.; and variously valued at from $75,000 to $200,000. It is part of the trapper tradition of the intermountain west that General Ashley, one of the charter members of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, of St. Louis, and Etienne Provot by accident came upon this cache and appropriated it. Another version of the affair was that Ogden "voluntarily" disposed of his cache to Ashley to obtain relief from some dire straits into which he had fallen, for some merely nominal consideration. It is generally believed that this transaction, whether accomplished by a-mess-of-pottage-purchase, or downright appropriation of a rival company's goods, became the foundation of General Ashley's considerable fortune, gained in the few years that he followed the fur trade. [^17] Five years later Ogden was again "relieved" of his furs, stored this time in the Hudson Bay station at "Ogden's Hole," a singular depression at the foot of the Wasatch range, east of the Salt Lake shore, and in the present vicinity, northerly of the city of Ogden. This time Ogden's cache of furs was "lifted" by one Thomas Fitzpatrick and associates in the employ of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company. [^18] But while the fortunes of the fur trade in these regions were against Ogden, his name is preserved in history by being given to one of the most beautiful of all the Rocky Mountain streams, "Ogden river," a tributary of the Weber; [^19] to the before mentioned depression at the foot of the Wasatch, "Ogden's Hole;" and to "Ogden City," the second city of the state of Utah, beautifully situated near the junction of the Ogden river with the Weber, and for many years the junction city of the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads, which formed the first transcontinental railway line in America; and where, it is evident that this agent of the Hudson Bay Company had a station at this point before the coming of the English speaking trappers into Green River valley in 1823. [^20]

THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN FUR COMPANY—ASHLEY—PROVOT—BRIDGER

The Rocky Mountain Fur Company was organized in St. Louis in 1823 by William Henry Ashley and Andrew Henry. Ashley was a Virginian by birth, but moved to St. Louis in 1802, at which time Missouri was still known as "Upper Louisiana." Ashley was made the first lieutenant governor of the territory and brigadier general of the militia (whence his title of general). [^21] Henry was from Pennsylvania. It is his name that is given to the "Henry Range" of mountains in the southeast section of Utah. The company advertised for one hundred young men to engage in its service, and in the number that responded are the names of men who became famous in the trapper period of the intermountain country's history, such names for example, as Etienne Provot (Provo) Jedediah S. Smith, James Bridger, and Milton and William Sublette—brothers.

After meeting with some disasters in the Upper Missouri river country in the early summer of 1823, attacks upon the expedition by treacherous Indian tribes, the trappers and traders of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company made their way to the Yellowstone river and its tributaries, where some of them had trapped the year before. From the mouth of Powder river Edward Henry sent Etienne Provot with a party of trappers to explore the country to the southwest for trapping fields. It was on this expedition that young Provot is said to have discovered the South Pass. [^22] He entered Green river valley, which afterwards became a celebrated rendezvous for the Rocky Mountain fur traders for many years. It is not certain that Provot pushed his way over the west range of mountains into Utah Lake valley that same fall, but he was on the stream which now bears his name, in 1824; and was the hero of one of the most thrilling adventures of trapper life in the intermountain west. [^23]

252General Ashley wintered in Green River valley 1824-25. It is generally supposed that he gave that stream its present name, calling it Green river, after a Mr. Greene of his party. [^24] Chittenden calls attention to the fact, however, that the stream was called "Green river" before General Ashley visited its valley; [^25] and that Fremont says the early Spanish traders called it Rio Verde.

252Early in the summer of 1825 Ashley and Provot met in the Green River valley south of the Uintah Mountains, and together made their way to Utah valley, thence south to the Sevier Lake which they called Ashley's Lake. [^26] It was during this visit to Utah Lake that "Fort Ashley"—a trading station, long since obliterated, was founded on its shores.

253Ashley's meanderings this year must also have extended as far north as Cache valley, as it was during this summer of 1825 that he and Provot secured Peter Skeen Ogden's cache of furs. The following year, 1826, Ashley brought to his station on Utah Lake a wheeled cannon, a six pounder, the first wheeled vehicle that came into the Great Basin. [^27]

253In this year Ashley disposed of his interests in the fur trade in the Rocky Mountains, and Jedediah S. Smith, William L. Sublette and David E. Jackson became the head of the new company. In 1830 the company was again reorganized with Milton Sublette, James Bridger and Thomas Fitzpatrick as chief factors.

253It was in 1826 also that Jedediah S. Smith with fifteen men started from Salt Lake valley on his celebrated trapping and exploring tour through Utah and California. He went southward through Utah valley, thence to Sevier Lake, thence southwesterly through the Mohave valley to San Gabriel, near the present city of Los Angeles, where the party arrived in December. Smith and his party worked their way up San Joaquin valley, crossed the Sierra Nevada Mountains, near the headwaters of that stream, in May, and returned eastward to Salt Lake valley in 1827.

PERIOD OF EXPLORATIONS IN THE WEST—BONNEVILLE

After this first trapper period in the intermountain west, the Salt Lake region began to be visited by travelers and explorers, sometimes in semi-official capacity, of such was Captain B. L. E. Bonneville, an army officer "on leave," and who with a party of one hundred and ten trappers came into Green River valley, in 1832, and founded a trading station; from which, and also from a station established on the Salmon river, a tributary of Snake river, he directed trapping and exploring expeditions throughout the intermountain west. One of these expeditions made up of forty men, had for its purpose the exploration of the Great Salt Lake, an enterprise Bonneville entrusted to his lieutenant, Mr. I. R. Walker, who with his party left Green River valley on the 24th of July, 1833. The expedition, however, was a sad failure so far as exploration of the lake was concerned, as Walker's party but skirted the north shore, then made their way to the Humbolt river and its tributaries, where they spent some time in trapping. Finally the party made its way over the Sierra to Monterey, California, thence returned to Bear River valley where they found Bonneville encamped.

254The report of the expedition's exploits in California and en route, going and returning, reflect little credit upon this party of men. Whatever advantage arose from a wider knowledge of hitherto unvisited regions of the intermountain and Pacific west, was more than counter-balanced by the acts of cowardice, injustice, and murder wantonly practiced upon the natives along their route. [^28]

Partial explorations of the Great Basin region by Bonneville brought to him lasting fame since his name has been given, albeit without sufficient reason, [^29] to that ancient inland sea which doubtless in very remote geological times practically filled the great eastern depression of the intermountain west, and of which Great Salt Lake with Utah and Sevier Lakes, are but the remnants. Chittenden's brief description of Lake Bonneville is: "The Quaternary Lake Bonneville, as traced out by geologists, had an area of nearly 20,000 square miles, was a freshwater lake, and drained north into Snake river, making the Great Basin, geologically at least, a portion of the Columbia valley." [^30]

The lakes, both salt and fresh water, lying along the eastern side of the Great Basin may be but the vanishing remnants of the great inland sea of the quaternary period, yet the ancient lake under the name of "Bonneville" will remain for all time to come a fact in the earth-surface history of our planet. Long after the well defined ancient shore lines which now attract the attention of every observer [^31] to the various levels at which the great inland sea stood at different epochs in its history, shall have been worn away by erosions, "Lake Bonneville" will live in the world's literature, and in the archives of geological lore.

FREMONT'S OBSERVATIONS AND REPORTS OF UTAH REGIONS

After Bonneville the next important person in order of time to visit Salt Lake valley was Colonel John C. Fremont, on his second exploring expedition, 1843. [^32] His coming was important because of the descriptions he gave of the Great Basin, the first reliable information about Great Salt Lake, and the topographical maps of the intermountain and Pacific coast west published with his reports. [^33]

Fremont's entrance into Salt Lake valley was from Soda Springs down the Bear river, through Cache valley to the mouth of that stream, thence, because of the marshiness of the delta of the river, across the foot hills of the Wasatch Mountains to the Weber river, where he made an encampment, and thence proceeded with his explorations of the lake. It was on the sixth of September that he ascended a butte rising from the plain, and came in full view of the object of his search. Here follows his description:

257"We reached the butte without difficulty, and ascending to the summit, immediately at our feet beheld the object of our anxious search.

257The waters of the inland sea stretched in still and solitary grandeur far beyond the limit of our vision. It was one of the great points of the exploration; and as we looked eagerly over the lake in the first emotions of excited pleasure, I am doubtful if the followers of Balboa felt more enthusiasm when, from the heights of the Andes, they saw for the first time the great western ocean. It was certainly a magnificent object, and a noble terminus to this part of our expedition; and to travelers so long shut up among mountain ranges, a sudden view over the expanse of silent waters had in it something sublime. Several large islands raised their high, rocky heads out of the waves; but whether or not they were timbered, was still left to our imagination, as the distance was too great to determine if the dark hues upon them were woodland or naked rock. During the day the clouds had been gathering black over the mountains to the westward, and, while we were looking, a storm burst down with sudden fury upon the lake, and entirely hid the islands from our view. So far as we could see, along the shores there was not a solitary tree, and but little appearance of grass on Weber's Fork, a few miles below our last encampment, the timber was gathered into groves, and then disappeared entirely." [^34]

258The 7th and 8th of September were spent in preparations to visit one of the islands of the lake for the purpose of making such observations as was then possible. Among the useful things that formed a portion of Fremont's equipage was an India rubber boat, eighteen feet long, made somewhat in form of a bark canoe of the northern lakes, capable of carrying five or six persons and a considerable weight of baggage. It was in this boat that Fremont with Charles Preuss, Christopher ("Kit") Carson, Baptiste Bernier, and Basil Lajeunesse, set out from the shore at the mouth of Weber river, and landed upon what is now called "Fremont's Island." [^35] It is about six or eight miles in circumference, "being simply a rocky hill, which rises abruptly from the water to a height of from eight to nine hundred feet. From its summit Fremont took observations and ascertained that he was in latitude 41 10' 42", and longitude 112 21' 05" from Greenwich; and on the shore of the island at an altitude of 4,200 feet above the Gulf of Mexico. After spending part of two days and a night on the island the explorer reluctantly took his departure. In addition to making his observation for the latitude and longitude, five gallons of the water of the lake was roughly evaporated over his camp fire, which yielded him fourteen pints of "very fine-grained and very white salt, of which the whole lake," he remarks, "may be regarded as a saturated solution." [^36] In the chemical analysis of the salt thus obtained he found 97.80 percent was chloride of sodium—common salt.

258On the 12th of September, 1843, Fremont and his party left the valley, going northward.

DISCOVERY OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE

What white man it was who first discovered Salt Lake is still an open question. Chittenden refers to a map of North America engraved for "Gutherie's New System of Geography" in 1811, in which is shown a lake without an outlet in nearly the same latitude and longitude as Great Salt Lake. On this map the lake has no name, but instead the following: "Lake, etc., laid down according to Mr. Lawrence," who is said to have traveled through this country to California in 1790-1791." [^37]

259Chittenden also notes that a party of men belonging to the Astoria company passed near the lake in 1811-1812, and speaks of other trapper parties who were in the region of the lake before 1824, and thinks it almost incredible that white men should have been in the immediate region of the lake without hearing of it; and hearing of it fail to visit such a remarkable body of water as it must have been represented to be. However, coming to the only known and definitely established facts about the visit of white men to the lake, he says:

259"So far as undubitable proof goes the discovery of the lake is connected with the expedition of General William Ashley which penetrated these regions 1823-6. A party of Ashley's men were encamped for the winter of 1824-5 in Cache valley, trapping on Bear river and its tributaries. Here a controversy arose as to the course of Bear river after it left the valley. A wager was laid and James Bridger was selected to follow the river and determine the bet. This he did and soon arrived at its outlet in Great Salt Lake valley. Testing the water he discovered it to be salt, and on reporting to his companions, all assumed that it was an arm of the Pacific Ocean. But in the spring of 1825, [^38] four men in skin boats explored its shore line and found that it had no outlet." [^39]

259Summing up the present status of the question of the discovery of the lake by white men, our author says:

260"The situation may be concisely stated by saying, that while Bridger is the first white man whom we positively know to have seen Great Salt Lake, we do not positively know that he was the first to see it." [^40]

260Bancroft arrives at practically the same conclusion when at the close of his discussion of the question, he writes:

260"That no white man ever saw the Great Salt Lake before Bridger cannot be proven; but his being the only well authenticated account, history must rest there until it finds a better one." [^41]

260SIGNIFICANCE OF MOVEMENTS—PRE-ARRIVAL OF THE "MORMON" PIONEERS

260These movements in the Great Basin and on the Pacific coast during the pre-"Mormon" Pioneer period—during the trapper period and the period of explorations by Bonneville, Fremont et al; for though the former was ostensibly on "leave of absence," and the latter on "personal exploration enterprises," yet both of them were doubtless in secret service for the federal government on the Oregon question-which was doubtless of great importance in the unfolding of what used to be included in the phrase "Manifest Destiny" respecting the movement of the people of the United States westward to the Pacific coast; and important to the church of the New Dispensation, the Latter-day Saints, as constituting—albeit blindly at the time—part of that movement and its achievements.

The international situation as to the claims upon the western part of what now constitutes our national Pacific coast line, and roughly eastward to the summit of the Rocky Mountains, was that the Republic of Mexico held conceded territorial rights as far northward as the forty second degree of north latitude, a line running just north of the Great Salt Lake westward to the coast and eastward to the afore-said summit of the Rocky Mountains. Right of possession northward of the forty-second degree of north latitude to the fifty-fourth and fortieth minute degree of north latitude was chiefly in dispute between England and the United States, with Russia in the background muttering though not so clearly asserting claims to the northern part of the same west coast territory. The claims of the United States to the territory were based upon early discovery of her ships around the mouth of the Columbia river and extending northward along the Pacific coast; also the extension and occupancy by her people of trading and trapping posts along the Columbia and Snake river regions, and permanent settlements in the Willammette valley. England, largely through the activities of her Hudson Bay company agents, extending along the same coast line and interior rivers and valleys, even as we have seen, into the north and east portions of the Great Basin—the region of the Great Salt Lake and adjacent valleys and streams in trapping and trading activities—laid claim to the same territory. It was the rival claims of these nations to this empire of territory that gave rise to the American alliterative political slogan of the presidential election of 1844—"Fifty-Four Forty or Fight;" which roughly represented the claims of the United States to territory along the Pacific coast as against the claims of England; upon the acquiring of which the United States would insist even at the cost of war with England. Ultimately, however, the United States accepted a considerable reduction of her northern claims to her present northern national boundary line of forty-nine degrees north latitude.

The important thing to be noted here, however, is that this movement of the American people westward to the Pacific coast, and possession of it practically to the same extent as to its possessions of coast line on the Atlantic seaboard—"Manifest Destiny" for the United States—was secured by this western movement of her people. Mexico with her mixed race of Spaniard and native Indian races crowded upward from the south to the forty-second degree north latitude; and England extended her claims southward to about the mouth of the Columbia river practically to the Mexican border region, thus excluding, if the British claims were allowed, the United States from the Pacific coast.

262The United States claims to the Oregon territory, and especially to the mouth of the Columbia river, however, constituted a corridor extending from her interior territory to the Pacific and was an entering wedge between the civilization of the Mexican on the south, and Britain and Russian on the north, which finally widened to our present national possession from the thirty-third to the forty-ninth degree of north latitude along the Pacific coast. And in this great movement the people of the church of the New Dispensation took an important part by their emigration into the eastern part of the Great Basin territory, though within the boundaries of the republic of Mexico—still disputed territory between the Hudson Bay Company (England) and American fur companies of the United States; and especially is their part important when the battalion of five hundred men furnished by their westward moving camps, and the march of that battalion with the United States Army of the West to the Pacific coast, is taken into account. For though fighting no battles they constituted by the performance of garrison duty at various points on the coast a force of occupation in the newly acquired territory that consolidated the victories of their country alike in the field and in the cabinet. And later, as we shall see, their settlements along the eastern crescent of the Great Basin formed a convenient and necessary halfway station for the mighty hosts of migrating Americans to the gold fields of California, and to possession of the newly acquired American heritage on the Pacific.

ARRIVAL OF "THE EMPIRE BUILDERS"—THE "MORMON" PIONEERS

After the departure of Fremont nothing more of importance happened in Salt Lake valley, except the passage through it of the several companies bound for California— already sufficiently noticed—until the arrival of the "Mormon" Pioneers. Their arrival of course marks the great modern epoch, not only of Salt Lake valley, but of the entire intermountain west. These "Mormon" Pioneers were not men of the wilderness, subsisting upon the game and such voluntary vegetable growths as would sustain life; nor did they come to identify their lives with the lives of the native tribes; they were not seeking for new hunting and trapping fields; nor were they merely a company of emigrants in transit for remoter objective points—Eldoradoes of human dreams; nor were they explorers for routes of travel, nor moved by interest in scientific knowledge. They came to Salt Lake and adjoining Rocky Mountain valleys as the objective point of their journey, to find a refuge for their people from the storm and stress of religious persecution, which had so pitilessly beat upon them in the western states of the American Republic. Their fellow exiles will come by tens of thousands to found homes, in which they hope to find peace; and communities in which they hope to find security and religious freedom. They will bring with them their women and children; their ploughs and spinning wheels and weaving looms, as the first Pioneers of 1847 did. They will be "Empire Founders," the true, and immediate benefactors of man. Their Pioneer company has arrived on the shores of "America's Dead Sea;" and their leader has said, "This is the place." It is for the author to write down the history of their empire-founding work.

NOTES

The adventure of Provot, referred to in the text of this History, was as follows: While encamped with his party near the mouth of the stream which ever since the adventure—1824—has borne his name, the Provo river, Provot was visited by the Snake-Ute chief, Mauvaise Gauche, meaning, "the man with the bad left hand," a suggestive name conferred upon him by the French Canadian trappers of the Wasatch region many years before." Gauche received a cordial welcome at Provot's camp, and later proposed a treaty of friendship; for doubtless the Provot party was regarded as intruders into the trapping fields of the fur companies Gauche served. It was further proposed that the treaty be ratified by smoking the peace pipe. In the midst of this ceremony, however, Gauche appeared ill at ease, and in explanation of his restlessness stated that his guardian spirit was angry because their was "iron" in their midst at the peace talk, and proposed that each party divest themselves of their arms and then resume the pipe of peace ceremony. In this the chief and his men set the example by divesting themselves of their arms; an example which, to humor the chief's supposed superstition, Provot and his men followed. No sooner was the smoking resumed, however, than Gauche gave a signal at which the Indians with tomahawks and knives they had concealed under their blankets attacked the white trappers. So sudden and unexpected was the attack that seventeen of Provot's party were killed before any successful defense or escape could be effected. Provot, being strong and active, escaped, with four others to the mountains, and the following year joined General Ashley in Green River valley. [^42]

264

"In 1852 Lieutenant E. C. Beckwith visited portions of the Great Basin in charge of a government expedition. He was impressed by the distinctness of the old beach lines, and correctly concluded that the Salt Lake had stood at a higher level. He says: 'The old shore lines existing in the vicinity of the Great Salt Lake present an interesting study. Some of them are elevated but a few feet (from five to twenty) above the present level of the lake, and are as distinct and as well defined and preserved as its present beaches.'" (The Great Salt Lake Past and Present, by Dr. James E. Talmage, professor of geology, University of Utah, 1900).

264Quoting Pacific Railroad Reports (Beckwith, Vol. II, p. 67) Talmage continues: "But high above these diminutive banks of recent date, on the mountains to the east, south, and west, and on the islands of the Great Salt Lake, formations are seen, preserving, apparently, a uniform elevation as far as the eye can extend,—formations on a magnificent scale, which, hastily examined, seem no less unmistakably than the former to indicate their shore origin. They are elevated from two or three hundred to six or eight hundred feet above the present lake; and if upon a thorough examination they prove to be ancient shores, they will perhaps afford (being easily traced on the numerous mountains of the basin) the means of determining the character of the sea by which they were formed," etc. (Ibid, p. 99).

To this Dr. Talmage also adds: "Careful examination furnishes evidence at once abundant and conclusive that this ancient lake extended southward over the Sevier desert, and probably over the Escalante desert also, nearly to the Arizona line; westward over the Great desert into Nevada; and northward to the upper limit of Cache valley and therefore 25 miles beyond the Idaho boundary. It formed the largest of the many flooded Pleistocene lakes of the basin region. * * * When at its highest level, Lake Bonneville had an extreme north and south length of 300 miles, a greatest east and west extent of 180 miles; it presented an area of 19,750 square miles. The lake reached from 42 degrees 30 minutes to 37 degrees 30 minutes north latitude, and was divided almost equally by the line of 113 degrees west longitude." [^43]

The description is really Irving's, from data by Bonneville. The noted author says: "Captain Bonneville gives a striking account of the lake when seen from the land. 'As you ascend the mountain about its shores,' says he, 'you behold this immense body of water spreading itself before you, and stretching further and further, in one wide and farreaching expanse, until the eye, wearied with continued and strained attention, rests in the blue dimness of distance, upon lofty ranges of mountains, confidently asserted to rise from the bosom of the waters. Nearer to you, the smooth and unruffled surface is studded with little islands, where the mountain sheep roam in considerable numbers. What extent of lowland may be encompassed by the high peaks beyond, must remain for the present, matter of mere conjecture; though from the form of the summits, and the breaks which may be discovered among them, there can be little doubt that they are the sources of streams calculated to water large tracts, which are probably concealed from view by the rotundity of the lake's surface. At some future day, in all probability, the rich harvest of beaver fur which may be reasonably anticipated in such a spot, will tempt adventurers to reduce all this doubtful region to the palpable certainty of a beaten track. At present, however, destitute of the means of making boats, the trappers stand upon the shore, and gaze upon a promised land which his feet are never to tread.'"

265One can well doubt if the above description is given by one who had seen the lake from its eastern side. Irving, one would judge, was not very sure of the captain's description, for he adds: "Such is the somewhat fanciful view which Captain Bonneville gives of this great body of water. He has evidently taken part of his ideas concerning it from the representations of others, who have somewhat exaggerated its features. It is reported to be about one hundred and fifty miles long, and fifty miles broad. The ranges of mountain peaks which Captain Bonneville speaks of, as rising from its bosom, are probably the summits of mountains beyond it, which may be visible at a vast distance, when viewed from an eminence, in the transparent atmosphere of these lofty regions." [^44]

The following description of the lake is from the very carefully prepared work of Dr. James E. Talmage.

266(a) Area and Altitude: "The Great Salt Lake is the largest inland water body existing within the United States west of the Mississippi valley. It lies in the north central part of the state of Utah, between the parallels of 111.8 degrees and 113.2 degrees longitude west from Greenwich, or 34.7 degrees and 36.1 degrees west from Washington, and between 40>.7 degrees and 41.8 degrees north latitude.

266Owing to the frequent and great fluctuations in volume incident to climate variations and other conditions of change, its area is in-constant, and the recorded surveys of the water surface show great discrepancies. In general terms its present dimensions have been recorded as follows: Average length, 75 miles; greatest width, 50 miles; extent of surface, 2,125 square miles. The altitude of the lake surface is 4,210 feet above the sea level." * * *

266(b) Islands: "Rising from the water surface are precipitous islands, appearing in their true character of mountain peaks and ranges, the lower part of their masses being submerged. Of these water-girt mountain bodies, Antelope and Stansbury islands are the largest; and the others are Carrington. Fremont, Gunnison, Dolphin, Mud, and Hat or Egg islands, and Strong's Knob. The islands appear as continuations of the mountain ranges which diversify the contiguous land area, and an examination of their structure confirms this inference."

266(c) The Lake Water: "The first recorded determination of the solids dissolved in the lake water is that of Dr. L. D. Gale, published in Stansbury's report. Gale's results together with those of later examinations are presented here.

266Solid contents and specific gravity of water taken from the Great Salt Lake:

266

267The composition of the solid matter existing in the lake water is a subject of importance. Some results of analyses are here given.

267Analyses of Salt Lake Water, acids and bases theoretically combined; expressed in percentage of weight of samples:

267

267(d) Life in the Lake: Of animals but few species have been found in the lake, but of these two are represented by swarming numbers. Among the animal forms already reported as common to the lake, Verril; (2) the larvae of one of the Tipulidae, probably Chironomous oceanicus, Packard; (3) a species of Corixa, probably Corixa decolor, Uhler; (4) larvae and pupae of a fly, Ephydra gracilis, Packard. * * * Of the lake animals, the Artemia fertilis (or Artemia gracilis) commonly known as the brine shrimp, exists in greatest numbers. They may be found in the lake at all seasons, though they are most numerous tween May and October." [^45]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These are always the emblems of this ordinance except on rare or special occasions, when wine is used. At an early date—August, 1830—in the development of the Latter-day work, it was revealed to Joseph Smith that water would be acceptable in this ordinance, (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvii). And under this divine sanction this practice has obtained in the church with the exceptions noted above.
[^2] Woodruff's Journal, entry for July 25, 1847.
[^3] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, entry for July 25th, 1847
[^4] Ante, this History, ch. lxxii.
[^5] Woodruff's Journal, entry July 26, 1847.
[^6] "I ascended a hill north of the city site, which I named "Ensign Peak." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, journal entry for July 26, 1847). This is all he says of the incident.
[^7] See a pamphlet, Brigham Young: Patriot, Prophet, Pioneer, published as late as June, 1929.
[^8] For justification of these suggestions, see entry in Woodruff's Journal detailing remarks of President Young on the evening of 28th of July, 1847, and Thomas Bullock's Journal for same date. Other Journals make mention of the same matters.
[^9] October 22, 1911; published in the Deseret Evening News of November 4, 1911.
[^10] The lecture was published in the Atlanta Georgian of February 17, 1908.
[^11] Referred to in footnote 7, this chapter. It is sometimes said that Wilford Woodruff is authority for the statement that the United States flag was raised on Ensign Peak and the book Wilford Woodruff, History of His Life and Labors as Recorded in His Daily Journals, by M. F. Cowley, is cited. Referring to the incident of visiting Ensign Peak, Mr. Cowley, not Wilford Woodruff, says. "Here they unfurled the American flag, the Ensign of liberty to the world." There is nothing in Wilford Woodruff's Journal of the date here referred to or of any other date in his Journals that warrants any such a statement as this. What Elder Woodruff wrote in his Journal on the 26th of July, 1847, is already quoted in a previous paragraph in this chapter and is sufficient contradiction to Mr. Cowley's statement, based on the journal entry of the 26th of July, 1847.
[^12] The Women of Mormondon, Tullidge, 1877, chapter xxxviii. For the author's arrival in Salt Lake valley, see Biography in L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, pp. 693-697.
[^13] Speech against the Ashley bill to dismember the territory of Utah, house of representatives. (Congressional Globe of Feb. 25, 1869).
[^14] Revelation xi, 15; also Daniel ii and vii.
[^15] Woodruff's Journal, entry for May 29th, 1847.
[^16] Isaiah, ii:2, 3.
[^17] Ibid, xi:11, 12.
[^18] Ibid, xviii:3.
[^19] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 1st, 1847. Some years later this "Zion's Standard" idea inspired Parley P. Pratt:
[^20] The Mormons, Gunnison.
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 528.
[^22] "We all bathed in salt water, which is fully saturated with salt: its specific gravity is such as to buoy us in a remarkable manner. (Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for July 27th, 1847). "The waters of the ocean bear no comparison to those of the lake, and those who could not swim at all," says Erastus Snow, speaking of this first bath, "floated upon the surface like a cork, and found it out of their power to sink." (Snow's Journal, entry July 27th, 1847. See Note 4, end of chapter lxxxi).
[^23] Orson Pratt's Journal, entry for July 28th, 1847. These are streams on the east side of Salt Lake valley.
[^24] History of Brigham Young, Ms., July 28th, 1847.
[^25] Ibid. It should be remembered that Brigham Young's conviction on this head was held because of a "vision" he had beheld of the saints settled in Salt Lake valley, which "vision" was described by Elder Erastus Snow in the following terms: "Brother Woodruff informed the people yesterday [July 24, 1880, Snow's discourse was delivered Sunday, the 25th] how President Young as he emerged from the mouth of Emigration canon, lifted himself up in his bed and peered out of his wagon which overlooked the valley, the cottonwoods on the creek, and the camp on the east side of the creek in fair view, and as Brother Woodruff told you yesterday, that President Young said then, and afterwards to all the camp, that this was the place he had seen long since in vision; it was here he had seen the tent settling down from heaven and resting, and a voice said unto him: "Here is the place where my people Israel shall pitch their tents." The same Providence that directed the Pioneers, led by our late honored president, has encouraged and directed the labors of the people from that time to the present." (Utah Pioneers, 1880, p. 47.)
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July 28th. This was before the survey of the city was made. Wilford Woodruff of the event writes: "We walked from the north camp to about the center between the two creeks [forks of City Creek], when President Young waved his hands and said, 'Here is the forty acres for the temple (we had conversed upon the subject of the location of the temple previous to this), and the city can be laid out perfectly square north and south, east and west'," (Woodruff's Journal, entry for July 28th, 1847).
[^27] The reader will recognize that this plan of city-building is nearly identical with that given by Joseph Smith for the city of Zion in Jackson county, Mo. (See this History, ch. xxv). It is observed also in this same chapter that the general plan of building "cities of Zion" was followed in laying out all the settlements of the saints in the inter-mountain west; and will doubtless always be followed, except where the nature of the site will render it impracticable. (See Note, end of this chapter, on the "City of Zion").
[^28] Woodruff's Journal, entry July 28th, 1847.
[^29] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, entry for July 28, 1847: I am following throughout in this account of founding the city, the Journals of President Young, Wilford Woodruff and Orson Pratt, with which the other annals generally agree, but where slight differences occur, I accept the above named as authority.
[^30] Journal of Orson Pratt, entry for July 31st, 1847, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 180.
[^31] From Geo. W. Dean's observations in 1869, taken at the Temple Block, the results were lat. 40 46' 2"; long. 111 53' 30". Rept. Coast Survey. 1869-70. In taking lunar distances for longitude, it is usual to have four observers, but Orson Pratt had no assistant: hence probably the slight discrepancy. (Bancroft's History ofr Utah, p. 264, note.)
[^32] It is claimed, and it is doubtless true, that Father De Smet passed through and even explored a considerable portion of Salt Lake valley in 1841. "Under date of January 19th, 1858, in a letter addressed to the Editor of the Precis Historiques Bruxells, and following a description of the Great Salt Lake Basin, Father De Smet says: 'In 1841 I traversed much of this valley in my rambles in the Rocky Mountains'." But, according to Dean Harris, "there appeared in De Smet's writings no exhaustive or detailed account of his visit to Salt Lake." And as the only thing that could give importance to his visit to Salt Lake valley, viz., that his glowing description of the valley decided Brigham Young to lead his people there for settlement, which claim has been disposed of adversely in these pages, ante, ch. lxxiii, Note 1—it is not necessary to say more of it that is here written. Reference has also been made in former chapters to the passage of some emigrating companies that passed through the Salt Lake valley, en route for California, such as Captain Bartleson's company, 1841; and later companies led by Hastings and Reed (see this History, ch. lxxix, Note 7). Further reference to these matters, as connected with events in Salt Lake valley previous to the advent of the "Mormon" Pioneers, will not be necessary.
[^33] The mountaineers assumed to make light of Fremont's maps of the regions with which these men professed such an intimate knowledge. Several Journals kept by the "Mormon" Pioneers report that Bridger said "he was ashamed of the maps of Fremont, for he knew nothing about the country only the plain traveled road, that he could correct all the maps that had been put out about the western world." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for June 28th, 1847). The answer to this complaint against Fremont's maps is that Bridger and the mountaineers generally were not competent judges of maps. Captain R. B. Marcy states that "Bridger was an illiterate man, tall, thin, wiry, with a complexion well bronzed by toil and exposure with an independent, generous, open cast of countenance, indicative of brave and noble impulses." (Thirty Years of Army Life, p. 400.) Fremont's topographical maps were chiefly the work of Mr. Charles Preuss, who accompanied Fremont on both the expeditions he reported to the government, and who had been "professionally educated" in topographical science. Of him Fremont says: "To his extraordinary skill, supported by the pleasure he felt in the execution of his duties I am indebted for the continuous topographical sketches of the region through which we passed, and which were never interrupted by any extremity of fatigue or privation." (Fremont's Report, Preface, p. 5).
[^34] Fremont's First and Second Expedition, p. 151, U. S. Report. More or less sport has been made of this account of Fremont's first view of the Great Salt Lake, especially as to his reference to Balboa. "Fremont," says Bancroft, "likens himself to Balboa discovering the Pacific; but no one else would think of doing so. He was in no sense a discoverer, and though he says he was the first to embark on that 'inland sea' (Fremont's U. S. Report, p. 155) he is again in error, trappers in skin boats having performed that feat while the 'Pathfinder' was studying arithmetic." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 32). This is unjust to Fremont. His reference to Balboa is in respect to a matter of "enthusiasm," not to "first discovery." In another passage of his Report, Fremont expressly concedes that white trappers had visited Salt Lake's shores before him: "Hitherto," he writes, "this lake had been seen only by trappers who were wandering through the country in search of new beaver streams and cared very little for geography; * * * and no instrumental observations or geographical survey of any description, had ever been made anywhere in the neighboring region. (Fremont's U. S. Report, p. 132). Fremont was mistaken, perhaps, in supposing that his boat was the first to be launched upon the lake's waters; and he the first white man to visit an island in the lake: but he certainly does not represent himself as the first white man to discover this salt sea of the Great Basin. For Bonneville's description of the Lake, given for the sake of completeness in these early accounts of America's Dead Sea, read Note 3, end of this chapter.
[^35] Fremont had expected to find the mountain islands of the lake fertile, but in this he was mistaken. "In the first disappointment we felt from the dissipation of our dream of the fertile islands," he writes, "I called this Disappointment Island" (Report, p. 156). Because of the castle-like appearance of its summit, when approached from certain quarters, the "Mormon Pioneers" called it for a time "Castle Island;" but later, when Stansbury made his topographical survey of the Lake he named it Fremont Island. "I deemed it but due to the first adventurous explorer of this distant region," he writes in explanation, "to name it after him who first set foot upon its shores." (Stansbury's Report, pp. 159, 160).
[^36] Fremont's U. S. Report, p. 157.
[^37] History of American Fur Trade, vol. ii, p. 794.
[^38] Bancroft puts this event in 1826. (See Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 20 and note).
[^39] History of American Fur Trade, pp. 794-5.
[^40] Ibid, p. 796.
[^41] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 20, note. For description of the lake see Notes 2, 3 and 4, end of this chapter.
[^42] The story is related in Chittenden's American Fur Trade, vol. 1, p. 276, as well as by Dean Harris, Catholic Church in Utah, pp. 260-261. It will be found also in the Letter-Book of Superintendent of Indian Affairs, St. Louis, Mo., now in possession of Kansas Historical Society, and confirmed on the authority of Jedediah S. Smith, David E. Jackson, and Wm. Sublette. (Chittenden, vol. i, p. 276).
[^43] The Great Salt Lake, Present and Past, Talmage, pp. 100-101.
[^44] The Adventures of Captain Bonneville, Irving, 1837, pp. 234-5.
[^45] The Great Salt Lake, Present and Past, chapters v and vi.
