B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

268CHAPTER LXXXII

268THE FIRST CHRISTIAN SABBATH—INITIAL "EXPLORATIONS"—"ENSIGN PEAK"—THE FOUNDING OF SALT LAKE CITY

268THE day following the arrival of President Brigham Young in Salt Lake valley was the Lord's Day—the Christian Sabbath. Accordingly religious services were held both in the forenoon and in the afternoon; and a number of the apostles addressed the assembled Pioneers. The sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered, the emblems used being broken bread and water. [^1]

FIRST DISCOURSES: LAND, WATER AND TIMBER LAW PROCLAIMED

The burden of the discourses seems to have been expressions of gratitude that the Lord had led them to so goodly a land. Not a single death had occurred, and only a very few of their cattle or horses had been lost. "The brethren were exhorted," says Wilford Woodruff, "to hearken to counsel, do away with selfishness, live humbly, and keep the commandments of God, that they might prosper in the land. * * * There was a universal feeling of satisfaction with the valley from the men that spoke upon the subject; said they were joyfully disappointed, that the whole appearance was altogether better throughout the valley than they had anticipated, or even dreamed of. At the close of the meeting President Young, though feeble, addressed the assembly for a few moments, and informed the brethren that they must not work on Sunday, nor hunt, nor fish on that day; and there should be no person dwell among us who would not observe these rules: they might go and dwell where they pleased but they should not dwell with us. [^2] In a word, the law proclaimed in the Salt Lake valley that day, was the law of God; and men were admonished to keep that law. The ten commandments and the Christian ethics were practically proclaimed to be in force in the new home of the saints. It was upon this occasion also that Brigham Young proclaimed the "land law" of the community, namely, that—

"No man should buy or sell land. Every man should have his land measured off to him for city and farming purposes, what he could till. He might till it as he pleased, but he should be industrious and take care of it." [^3]

269The principle of this first "land law" of Utah will be recognized as identical with that which actuated the great leader at Garden Grove, when he said there, in effect, that no man should hold more land than he could cultivate; "and that if a man would not till his land, it should be taken from him." [^4]

Subsequently it was announced there would be no private ownership in the water streams; that wood and timber would be regarded as community property. It was also determined that only "dead timber" should be used as fuel, thus hoping to foster the growth of timber as its scarcity was the most serious obstacle then in view to the settlement of the valley. On these three laws or regulations, the prevention of monopoly in land; community ownership of the water, and of the timber, rested the prosperity of the early colonies in Utah. It was a necessary act of justice under the circumstances, this "land law," and the other regulations mentioned. There was a community of nearly 20,000 Latter-day Saints on the banks of the Missouri river and en route across the plains; they were engaged in a common purpose; they were united as exiles by the same decree of eviction from their homes—from their country. To permit the Pioneers, or the advanced companies of such a community to seize upon and monopolize the resources of the valleys to which they were migrating, would be a manifest injustice, hence these mandates issued from their wisest men take on the nature of statesmanlike measures, wholly justifiable and absolutely necessary to safeguard the interest of all.

LOCAL EXPLORATIONS: ENSIGN PEAK

The day following the first Christian Sabbath in the Salt Lake valley found the Pioneers anxious to explore the country surrounding their first encampment. But as all the activities of the camp proceeded in orderly manner, ten men, including all the members of the twelve present—eight—were designated to make explorations. Some went into the canons on the east side of the valley in search of timber. John Brown and Joseph Mathews crossed the "Utah Outlet" and went to the west range of the mountains which they reported as some fifteen or sixteen miles distant, and the plain between the outlet and the mountains "covered with wild sage (artemisia) and destitute of fresh water."

270President Young in company with several of the twelve and others went northward and visited both the hot and warm springs, the former about five miles, and the latter less than two miles distant from their encampment. Several miles north of their encampment they ascended a peculiarly shaped, mound-like mountain for the purpose of getting a view of the valley that might reveal more of the general character of it than several days of exploring journeys might give. And this indeed was the case; for from its summit they noted the "Utah Outlet" (i. e. now the Jordan river) from the point where it enters the valley at the south to where it empties its waters in the Salt Lake a little to the northwest of their view point. After noting this Elder Woodruff adds: "We also had a good view of the Salt Lake through our glasses, and many rivers and creeks running through the valley." [^5]

THE UNITED STATES FLAG FICTION OF "ENSIGN PEAK"

Before leaving the mound-like summit of the mountain on which they stood, someone suggested that here would be a good place "to raise an ensign to the nations," whereupon Brigham Young named the mountain "Ensign Peak." [^6] Because of the mountain being so named it was claimed in later years that the Pioneers on that day raised upon "Ensign Peak" the national flag of the United States, the stars and stripes; holding that this was the signficance of "Ensign." There is no evidence that they did any such thing. Had such an event happened it certainly would have been recorded in the Journals of some of the men present. Brigham Young gave the mountain its name, and makes an entry of that fact in his Journal, but says nothing of any flag incident. Neither does Wilford Woodruff, who was given to recording details in his Journal. He relates the incident of naming "Ensign Peak" in his Journal at length:

271"26th, Monday. * * * We * * * went north of the camp about five miles, and we all went on to the top of a high peak in the edge of the mountain, which we considered a good place to raise an ensign. So we named it "Ensign Peak", or "Hill". I was the first person that ascended this hill, which we had thus named. Brother Young was very weary in climbing to the peak, he being feeble (had not yet recovered from effects of mountain fever). We then descended to the flat, and started north to visit some hot sulphur springs."

Considering the circumstance under which the little company of the Pioneers ascended this mount, it becomes utterly impossible that they should raise the flag of the United States upon it. They did not leave their encampment that morning of July 26th with any intent to climb that or any other mountain. They started out to examine the nature of the Salt Lake valley—the plains northward of their encampment. The ascent of the mount they named "Ensign Peak," as above described, was an unintended incident that developed after they started on their exploring trip. There is no likelihood, and certainly no evidence that they took with them a United States flag. What need had they of one? Then if they had taken one with them folded up—they did not take one with them flying from a staff—how would they have raised it that day? Not even a brush grows on "Ensign Peak." It is a bald mount. It is also usually coupled with this fiction of raising the United States flag that the Pioneers took possession of the country in the name of the United States. [^7] Of course they did no such thing. They did not know at that time that they were not on territory possessed by the United States. And smarting under the sense of injustice and wrong permitted if not inflicted under quasi-sanction of the United States, they were in no mood to be over-zealous or officious in taking possession of territory of a neighboring republic to annex it to the country which, from their viewpoint, and in effect, had expatriated them. [^8] This fiction of the flag-raising on "Ensign Peak" has been used, if in the first place it was not invoked, to plead the cause of "Mormon" loyalty and devotion to the United States; and even "grave and reverand" senators—if not "seniors" repeat the fiction for that purpose, without care of investigation, in public addresses. A Utah United States senator, for instance, at a great public meeting held in the Salt Lake tabernacle, says:

272"Seeking homes in this barren wilderness (Salt Lake valley), then Mexican territory, * * * the first thing they (the Utah Pioneers) did on landing here was to raise the stars and stripes upon yonder peak (meaning Ensign Peak), determined that this land should be part of the United States." [^9]

There are a variety of forms in which the fictitious incident is stated. In a public lecture delivered in Atlanta, Georgia, a prominent elder and mission president, stated the fiction thus:

273"The second day after they [i. e., The Pioneers] arrived in Salt Lake valley, then Mexican soil, President Brigham Young selected the highest peak on the bordering hills and planted 'Old Glory' upon it in demonstration of the love and loyalty of the 'Mormon' people for the government of the United States." [^10]

273No later than June 1, 1928, celebrating the anniversary of the birthday of Brigham Young, the fiction of the "flagraising" on Ensign Peak "the second day" after the arrival of the Pioneers in the Salt Lake valley, was reenacted by raising the flag by a descendant of the great Pioneer, illustrated by a newspaper cut and the usual repetition of the fiction. On the same anniversary in 1929 the public was regaled by another and an emphasized revamping of the same thing in a radio address, done into a pamphlet under the alliterative title of "Brigham Young: Patriot, Pioneer, and Prophet." The form it takes here is:

273"Brigham's first act was to set up the American flag on Ensign Peak and thus take possession of the surrounding territory in the name of the United States government." [^11]

273And thus the unwarranted and pious fiction lives on and on by the force of parrot-like iteration and re-iteration ad nauseam.

As to the alleged incident of raising the United States flag on Ensign Peak being a testimony of the loyalty of the Latter-day Saints, it is enough to say that their loyalty to their country rests upon a foundation so broad and deep, as we shall see in subsequent chapters, that it does not need fiction to sustain it. They early honored their country's flag also; for before the close of the year, 1847, it was raised within the "fort" erected on the present site of Salt Lake City, and the "Mormon" poetess, Eliza R. Snow Smith, later celebrated it in her Ode to the Flag. Eliza R. Snow arrived with one of the first companies following the Pioneers, and entered Salt Lake valley in September or October. "Soon after our arrival in the valley," she relates that "a tall liberty pole was erected, and from its summit (although planted in Mexican soil), the stars and stripes seemed to float with even more significance, if possible, than they were wont to do on eastern breezes." Then follows the "Ode," though doubtless not written until some years later, probably 1865, and after the successful close of the "Civil War."

ODE TO THE FLAG "I love that flag! When in my childish glee— A prattling girl, upon my grandsire's knee— I heard him tell strange tales, with valor rife, How that same flag was bought with blood and life. And his tall form seemed taller when he said, 'Child, for that flag thy grandsire fought and bled!' My young heart felt that every scar he wore, Caused him to prize that banner more and more. I caught the fire, and as in years I grew, I loved the flag; I loved my country too. * * * * * * * There came a time that I remember well— Beneath the stars and stripes we could not dwell! We had to flee; but in our hasty flight We grasped the flag with more than mortal might; And vowed, although our foes should us bereave Of all things else, the flag we would not leave. We took the flag; and journeying to the West, We wore its motto graven on each breast." [^12]

275As the flag was raised most likely as early as October, 1847, and the treaty of peace which closed the war of the United States with Mexico was not signed at the village Guadalupe Hidalgo until Feb. 2nd, 1848, the Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake valley did raise the United States flag upon Mexican soil. "Well do I know the spot," said Wm. H. Hooper, Utah's delegate to congress, 1869, "where the first 'liberty pole' was raised, and from the top of which floated the stars and stripes, while yet the country was known as Mexican territory." [^13]

275"The Ensign" that these Latter-day Saint Pioneers had in mind, and of which they had frequently spoken en route, was something larger and greater than any national flag whatsoever; and what it was meant to represent was greater than any earthly kingdom's interest, and I speak not slightingly of earthly kingdoms either; but this "Ensign" in the minds of the "Mormon" Pioneers concerned not one nation, but all nations; not one epoch or age, but all epochs and all ages; not nationality but humanity, is its scope and concern. It was the sign and ensign of the Empire of the Christ; it was a prophecy of the time to come when the kingdoms of this world would become "the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and forever." [^14]

275On the occasion of calling the Pioneers' camp together for reproof and instruction while yet on the Platte river, on the memorable 29th of May, President Young referred to this "Ensign" or "Standard of Zion." Wilford Woodruff after relating how President Young addressed himself to the few non-members of the church present in the camp, and how they would be protected in their rights,—but they must not introduce wickedness into the camp, "for it would not be suffered"—

276"He then spoke of the 'standard' or 'ensign' that would be reared in Zion to govern the kingdom of God, and the nations of the earth, for every nation would bow the knee and every tongue confess that Jesus was the Christ; and this will be the standard—'The Kingdom of God and His Law.' * * * And on the standard would be a flag of every nation under heaven, so there would be an invitation to all nations under heaven to come unto Zion." [^15]

276This was the significance of naming "Ensign Peak" on that 26th day of July, 1847. It was the gathering of Israel out of all nations to the "Standard of Zion" that the pioneers were thinking of, as is evidenced by many subsequent sermons in which the texts were—

276"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, * * * and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." [^16]

276"And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people. * * * And he shall set up an Ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the out casts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth." [^17]

276"All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye when he lifteth up an Ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye." [^18]

276These and other texts from Isaiah were woven into discourse by Orson Pratt the Sunday following, viz., August 1st. [^19]

GUNNISON'S COMMENT ON "ENSIGN PEAK"

Lieutenant J. W. Gunnison, who spent the winter of 1849-50 in Salt Lake, refers to this idea prevalent among the saints at that time:

277"To the north of temple block, and close by, towers up and overlooks the temple city, the Ensign Mound. It terminates the great spur, and is conspicuous in approaching the city, from every quarter. On this mountain peak there is soon to be unfurled the most magnificent flag ever thrown to the breeze, constructed out of the banners of all peoples. Joined in symbolical unity, 'the flag of all nations' shall wave above the sacred temple; and then shall they verify the decree given by the Prophet Isaiah: 'All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an Ensign on the mountains; (Isaiah XVIII:3). * * * 'And he will lift up an Ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly: (Isaiah V:26).'

277* * * 'And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. (Isaiah ii:2).'" [^20]

Even in Nauvoo days and before the martyrdom of the Prophet this "Standard of the Nations" was the "Ensign" under which Joseph Smith proposed to defend the city of Nauvoo. The following is from his Journal:

278"June 22, 1844: * * * At 7 p. m. I instructed General Dunham [of the Nauvoo Legion] to cause the regiments of the 2nd Cohort to turn out tomorrow and work by turns three or four hours each with intrenching tools, and to take the best measures in case of attack. I also gave orders that a standard be prepared for the nations." [^21]

WESTERN EXPLORATION OF SALT LAKE VALLEY

On the 28th of July Brigham Young and the main exploring party crossed the "Utah Outlet" (now the Jordan river), which they found to be a slow, meandering stream, not so clear as the streams issuing directly from the mountains. It was three feet deep "at the ford," (i. e. where the Donner train had crossed the year before), and about six rods wide. The party followed the California wagon trail to the south end of the Salt Lake, to a point afterwards called Black Rock, taking the name from a large rock of ebony hue that rises abruptly from the clear waters of the lake. Here the company took their first bath in the lake and were surprised at the buoyancy of the water. [^22]

Turning the point of the western mountain range (the Oquirrh range)—fifteen miles west of their encampment—the explorers came into a valley opening southward, which they judged to extend twelve miles; and beyond, still southward, a narrow opening into another valley or plain. Returning to their noon encampment at the point of the mountain range, they spent the night, and the next day moved southward along the east base of the mountain where they had camped, but found no water. Orson Pratt ascended a rise of ground some three miles beyond where the rest of the company stopped, and was rewarded with a view of Utah Lake and valley, which he judged to be twenty miles distant. "The number of streams putting into the 'Utah Outlet' from the east, between the lakes," he writes, "appeared to be about nine, while several other streams, from one to two miles in length, appeared to put into these nine, all of which afforded a fine opportunity for irrigating the valley east of the 'outlet'." [^23]

279Meantime the two brethren, Joseph Hancock and Lewis Barney, sent eastward into the mountains to look for timber returned after a two days tour and reported "an abundance of good timber, principally pine, balsam fir, and a little cottonwood; access to the same very difficult." [^24]

CHOICE OF SITE AND FOUNDING OF "GREAT SALT LAKE CITY"

These brief exploring expeditions seemed to have convinced President Young that the best possible site for the beginning of a settlement had been chosen by the advanced company of Pioneers; for on his return to the encampment in the afternoon of the 28th, he at once inaugurated measures for the founding of a city. "Some of the brethren talked about exploring the country further for a site for a settlement; I replied that I was willing that the country should be explored until all were satisfied, but every time a party went out and returned I believed firmly they would agree that this is the spot for us to locate." [^25]

280Late in the afternoon, accompanied by Elders Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Amasa Lyman, Ezra T. Benson, all members of the apostles' quorum, and all the apostles then in the valley, accompanied also by Thomas Bullock, the president's secretary, Brigham Young "designated the site for the temple block between the forks of City Creek, and on motion of Orson Pratt it was unanimously voted that the temple be built upon the site designated." [^26]

280The apostles at the same time decided to lay out the city in blocks of ten acres with streets eight rods wide running at right angles; with twenty feet on each side given to sidewalks. The blocks were to be divided into lots containing one and one quarter acres in each. It was decided also to build but one house on a block, and that twenty feet back from the line and in the center of the lot—"That there might be uniformity throughout the city." One of the advantages of this plan, it was urged, would be the security of the city from fire in the event of fire breaking out at any one point. It was further determined that "upon every alternate block four houses were to be built on the east, and four on the west sides of the square, but none on the north and south sides. But the blocks intervening were to have four houses on the north and four on the south, but none on the east and west sides. In this plan there will be no houses fronting each other on the opposite sides of streets, while those on the same side will be about eight rods apart having gardens running back twenty rods to the center of the block." [^27]

281"It was moved and carried that there be four public squares of ten acres each laid out in various parts of the city for public grounds." "Let every man," said President Young, "cultivate his own lot and set out every kind of fruit and shade trees and beautify the city." [^28]

281The city was first named, "City of the Great Salt Lake." Temple square was the initial center for naming the streets, and the streets around the temple block were called, respectively, North, South, East and West Temple Streets; the others to be named as required, First North, Second North, First West, Second West, and so following on all sides.

281This plan of laying out the city was submitted to the whole camp in a sort of "town meeting" held in the evening on the site designated for the temple; and as each proposition making up the general plan had been submitted to vote in the council of the apostles, so now was each proposition presented to the camp, which "passed all of the above votes unanimously, as they are recorded." [^29]

281On the 31st of July, Orson Pratt began the survey of the city. "The latitude of the northern boundary of the temple block," he writes, "I ascertained by meridian observations of the sun, to be 40 deg. 45 min. 44 sec. The longitude, as obtained by lunar distances, taken by the sextant and circle, was 111 deg. 26 min. 34 sec., or 7 hours, 25 min., 46 sec. west of Greenwich. Its altitude above the level of the sea was 4,300 feet, as ascertained by calculations deduced from the mean of a number of barometrical observations taken on successive days." [^30]

282The base line of Orson Pratt's survey was on the south-east corner of the temple block, and government officials afterwards adopted it as the base meridian line. [^31]

282Subsequently blocks of land for farming and pasturing purposes were laid off outside the city limits in five, ten and twenty acre plots respectively, the smaller plots lying nearest the city boundaries, the others following in the order of their size. All this, of course, to prevent monopoly, and possible attempts at speculations in town lots or near by farming lands.

282From time to time modifications were made of this general plan; as, for example, before the survey of the city was completed it was decided that it would be "more convenient" to have the temple block ten rather than forty acres, in area, and it was reduced accordingly. Also as the city extended into the sharp hills on both sides of City Creek, it was found that the ten acre blocks, with their one and one quarter acre lots, were inconvenient because of the broken nature of the land in that part of the city; and the blocks were reduced to two and a half acres. Also in the matter of having but four houses built on one side of a block, and these on alternating sides was in time given up; but very generally the first plan was adhered to in the early decades of the city's history, and even now gives a uniqueness to the city that distinguishes it from other American cities, and very much contributes to that air of spaciousness and breadth of conception in the ground plan of it that prophesies its coming greatness, and is at the same time a testimony of the largeness of the ideas of those who were its founders.

282

NOTE

THE CITY OF ZION

Reference to chapter xxv of this History wherein the "City of Zion" is described and which is cited in footnote 26, of this chapter, contemplates not so much one immense city as a succession of cities of moderate size, throughout the land, and together considered as one city: "It is supposed," said Joseph Smith, when sending the plat of the "City of Zion" to the brethren at Independence, in June, 1833—"It is supposed that such a plat when built up will contain fifteen or twenty thousand population, and that they will require twenty-four buildings to supply them with houses for public worship and schools." The plat was to be surrounded with, and to include lands adequate to supply, this population. "When this square is thus laid off and supplied," said the Prophet, "lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days, and let every man live in the city, for this is the city of Zion"—that is, a succession of cities of moderate size of which the one to be erected at Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, is to be the center place. This brings up the question of the relative advantage of, and the consequent desirability of, the large and the small city. In that controversy, on the side of the small city, is Mr. Ebenezer Howard, an English authority on city-planning. He places the maximum population of the ideal city at about 32,000, depending somewhat on the size of the component families. Increase in population should be provided for, he thinks, by building another city near by, which is in perfect harmony with the above instructions of the Prophet. Mr. Howard's ideal city covers 6,000 acres, of which about half is cultivated, the other half being occupied by streets and buildings. This we learn from a paper by Professor J. R. Smith, of the University of Pennsylvania, reprinted in Engineering and Contracting (Chicago, July 28, 1915). The editor of Engineering and Contracting emphatically agrees with Mr. Howard in his conclusions as to the undesirability of large cities. He asserts that the idea of the great city as a permanent construction is itself an error.

Footnotes

ZION'S STANDARD Lo! the Gentile chain is broken, Freedom's banner waves on high; List, ye nations! by this token, Know that your redemption's nigh. See, on yonder distant mountain, Zion's standard wide unfurled, Far above Missouri's fountain, Lo! it waves for all the world. Freedom, peace and full salvation Are the blessings guaranteed, Liberty to every nation, Every tongue, and every creed. Come, ye Christian sects, and pagan, Pope, and Protestant, and Priest, Worshipers of God or Dagon, Come ye to fair freedom's feast. Come, ye sons of doubt and wonder, Indian, Moslem, Greek or Jew, All your shackles burst asunder, Freedom's banner waves for you. Cease to butcher one another, Join the covenant of peace, Be to all a friend, a brother, This will bring the world release. Lo! Our King! the great Messiah, Prince of peace, shall come to reign; Sound again, ye heavenly choir, Peace on earth, good will to men. (Latter-day Saint Hymn Book, p. 102).

---
Notas:
[^1] Woodruff's Journal. Ms., entry for 29th July. Also Erastus Snow's Journal, entry for 28th of July. 1847.
[^2] See this History, ch. lxxxvii.
[^3] Journal History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July 31st, 1847. These grains and vegetables did not mature: "Although," writes Parley P. Pratt. "there were obtained for seed a few small potatoes from the size of a pea upward to that of half an inch in diameter. These being sound and planted another year produced some very fine potatoes, and finally, contributed mainly in seeding the territory with that almost indispensable article of food." (Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography. 1874, p. 401).
[^4] Erastus Snow's Journal, entry August 1st, 1847. A number of Indians were in the Pioneer camp when this resolution was passed: and whether they learned the import of it or not, during the night they left and visits from them became less frequent. (Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 1st). The Utes are referred to as apparently friendly "and not disposed to steal, though they have a bad name from some of the mountaineers." (Ibid, entry for July 28.)
[^5] Ante, this History, ch. lxxviii.
[^6] The Baptisms began on the 6th of August. Brigham Young was the first to receive the rite; then Heber C. Kimball and all the rest of the twelve. "At night I was baptized by Elder Kimball, and then baptized Elders Kimball, Richards, etc." * * * who were confirmed at the water's edge, and set an example to the church. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 6th of Aug., 1847.) This quotation is given because some writers reverse the order, and say President Young first baptized his associates. All received the ordinance of confirmation, and in connection therewith had sealed upon them the holy apostleship "with all the keys, powers and blessings belonging to that office." "We considered this a duty and a privilege," writes Wilford Woodruff, "as we had come into a glorious valley to locate and build a temple, and build up Zion—we felt like renewing our covenants before the Lord and each other." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 6th) on the 7th—Saturday—55 brethren were baptized. Sunday, when the proposition was presented to the congregation, 224 responded, making a total of 268.
[^7] "In the afternoon the twelve went on to the temple block and picked out their inheritances. President Young took a block east of the temple, and running southeast to settle his friends around him. Brother Heber C. Kimball took a block north of the temple, and will settle his friends on the north. (President Young says Kimball's block was N. E. of the temple—History of Brigham Young, Ms., bk. 3, 1847, entry Aug. 7th.) O. Pratt south of the temple, joining the temple block and runs south. W. Woodruff took a block cornering on the temple lot, at the southwest corner, joining O. Pratt's block and will settle his friends on the south. Amasa M. Lyman took a block 40 rods below or west of Woodruff's block, and runs southwest of the temple [on which] to settle his friends. Geo. A. Smith took a block joining the temple on the west and runs due west. It was supposed Bro. (Willard) Richards would take his inheritance on the east, near Bro. Young. None others of the twelve were present in the camp. Bro. Benson had gone back to meet the camps, [then en route for the valley] and three of the quorum were in Winter Quarters" (Woodruff's Journal, entry 7th of August). After this there were some slight changes made in the first selection of blocks, chiefly, however, in extending the blocks into tiers of blocks in the direction of the side from which they respectively started from the temple, and these to be subdivided among the immediate friends of the apostles making choice of said tier." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 13th Aug.)
[^8] See city plat this volume.
[^9] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 11th and 21st respectively.
[^10] Woodruff's Journal, entries for 14th and 22nd August, respectively.
[^11] This to distinguish it from the Jordan of the east, Palestine. It was doubtless the case, though nothing is said of it in the Journals of those days, that the similarity of physical features of the Salt Lake Valley and Palestine led to calling this "outlet" "Western Jordan." Palestine has its Dead Sea, so called because it has no outlet, no life abounds in its waters, and its shores are desolate. Upwards of sixty miles northward is the fresh water lake, or Sea of Galilee, from which flows the Jordan river to the Dead Sea. It will be observed that in Utah the salt sea is in the north, the fresh water lake in the south, and the connecting stream flows northward; whereas in Palestine these similar natural features are reversed in location; but the fact of their existence, though in reversed order, would be sufficient to suggest naming the connecting stream between the bodies of fresh and salt water the "Western Jordan."
[^12] Since called "Emigration" and "Parley's Canon Creek," respectively, the latter named after Parley P. Pratt.
[^13] Woodruff's Journal, entry of July 22nd, 1847.
[^14] Ira Vinda Exene and Ira Minda Almarene were twin sisters.
[^15] Elizabeth (Brown) Crow was born in South Carolina, 1795, and died in California in 1893. (Fifty Years Ago Today, the date for this collection of events was compiled for the publishers, for the most part by Franklin D. Richards, church historian, at the time, 1897; and by John Jaques and Milton A. Musser, assistant church historians. See Addenda to compilation of July 24th, 1897).
[^16] Deseret Evening News, March 17, 1892.
[^17] Woodruff's Journal, entry Aug. 14.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry Aug. 16. Bancroft gives date of starting as the 17th of Aug.
[^19] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 1st, 1847. Some years later this "Zion's Standard" idea inspired Parley P. Pratt:
[^20] "The grass is getting dry and not much substance in it, and our horses are failing upon it. I am thoroughly convinced that oxen are far preferable to either horses or mules for such a journey." (Woodruff's Journal, entry for 5th Oct., 1847. Other Journals passim to the same effect).
[^21] Richard's Narrative, Ms., p. 13-14.
[^22] Ibid, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 265, note.
[^23] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 1st and 2nd.
[^24] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for August 26th, 1847.
[^25] Woodruff's Journal, entry 4th Sept., 1847.
[^26] In order to disclose the spirit in which these men wrought, I here subjoin Elder Pratt's account of the culmination of this affair: "I was charged with neglecting to observe the order of organization entered into under the superintendence of the president before he left the camps at Winter Quarters; and of variously interfering with previous arrangements. In short, I was severely reproved and chastened. I no doubt deserved this chastisement; and I humbled myself, acknowledged my faults and errors, and asked forgiveness. I was frankly forgiven, and, bidding each other farewell, each company passed on its way. This school of experience made me more humble and careful in future, and I think it was the means of making me a wiser and better man ever after." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 400, 401.)
[^27] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Sept. 4th, 1847.
[^28] Life of John Taylor, p. 190.
[^29] History of John Taylor, ch. xxi.
[^30] Woodruff's Journal, entries for Sept. 8th and 9th, 1847.
[^31] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 21st, 24th and 25th Sept., 1847.
