B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

284CHAPTER LXXXIII

284ARRIVAL OF PUEBLO DETACHMENT OF THE MORMON BATTALION—PIONEER WOMEN—RETURN OF PIONEERS TO WINTER QUARTERS

284IT will be remembered that Elder Amasa M. Lyman was sent from Fort Laramie early in June, in company with three others, to meet the battalion detachments en route from Pueblo to join the Pioneer company. On the 27th of July he rode into the Pioneer encampment at Salt Lake, and reported that these detachments of the battalion, under command of Captain James Brown, together with the company of Mississippi saints, were now within two days' march of Salt Lake valley. President Young and the twelve, with some others, two days later, July 29th, formed a mounted company and met these Battalion and Mississippi companies at the mouth of Emigration canon. There were about 140 of the battalion; 100 of the Mississippi saints; these with the Pioneers already arrived, swelling the number in Salt Lake valley to about 400 souls. These last arrivals altogether had about 60 wagons, 100 head of horses and mules, and 300 head of cattle. [^1]

PROBLEM OF THE PUEBLO DETACHMENT OF THE BATTALION

The detachment of the battalion presented a problem to the council of the twelve. The battalion members were under orders to march to California, but the term of their enlistment had expired on the 16th of July. Did the officers in command have the right to muster them out of service? What would be the moral effect in the United States if these detachments were mustered out of service here in Mexican territory without other authority than the "Mormon" officers in command? It was finally determined, after being considered in council, that the battalion should be mustered out of service, and Captain James Brown and a small company piloted by Mr. Samuel Brannan, should go to California and report to the United States army officials there, taking with them a power of attorney from each member of these detachments of the battalion to collect the balance of pay due for his services. That Captain Brown made his report and drew the pay as agreed upon by the members of the battalion will appear later. [^2]

A "BOWERY:" A COMMUNITY CENTER

The day after their arrival in the valley the battalion contributed to the community service by erecting a bowery 40x28 feet under which to hold religious worship on the ensuing Sabbath day—and a grateful shade it must have been from the constant glare of the sunshine in that transparent atmosphere, where no forest temple presented solemn depths of shade for that holy purpose. Also, during this first week in the valley, Colonel Stephen Markham reported that thirteen plows and three harrows had been stocked, and three lots of ground broken up and one lot of thirty-five acres planted in corn, oats, buckwheat, potatoes, beans and garden seed." [^3]

Three days after the arrival of the Pioneers their camp was visited by Indians located in the valley. There were two tribes, "Utes," or "Utah's" and "Shoshones." The visits grew in frequency and with constantly increasing numbers. On one occasion within the first week, when representatives of both tribes were in the Pioneer camp, a Ute stole a horse from a Shoshone and rode up the valley with his prize. He was followed by the Shoshone, however, who killed him and returned to the Pioneer camp with the stolen horse. The frequency of these Indian visits with their begging and persistent efforts to trade for guns, ammunition, and clothing, was likely to become a great inconvenience to the colony, and therefore at the public meeting held on the second Sunday in the valley a resolution was adopted "to trade no more with the Indians except at their own encampment;" and to hold out no inducements to their visiting the Pioneer camp. [^4]

RENEWAL OF COVENANTS BY BAPTISM

President Young must have taken quite seriously such irregularities of the camp of the Pioneers as we have already noticed in a former chapter; [^5] for he now proposed to them a solemn renewal of their covenants to righteousness, a new avowal of their acceptance of the gospel of Jesus Christ by baptism, President Young himself to set the example. [^6] This was first proposed to the twelve and their immediate associates, then to the camp, now more properly, perhaps, to be considered as a colony.

The proposition was joyfully and very generally accepted by the saints. This procedure, however, must not be regarded as casting any doubt upon the validity of their original baptism, or repudiation of it as a sacrament. It was only to make more solemn the renewal of covenants with God.

On the 7th of August a selection of blocks within the city survey was made by the twelve for themselves and their immediate friends. [^7] It was also decided that one of these ten acre blocks should be inclosed by building houses of logs or adobes—sundried bricks—in the form of a fort, as a protection against possible Indian assaults. There were to be gateways on opposite sides of the enclosure; the buildings to be 8 or 9 feet high, 14 feet wide and 16 or 17 feet long; the chimneys were to be made of adobes, the hearths of clay. All openings were to be on the inside of the enclosure, except such port holes on the outside as might be judged necessary for observing the approach of an enemy. The block selected for this enclosure was four blocks south and three blocks west of the temple site, long afterwards called the "Old Fort," then "Pioneer Square," now a public park and playground for children. [^8] Work upon the fort began on the 11th of August; and by the evening of the 21st Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball moved into their "houses," being the first to do so. [^9] Meantime the name for the city occupied the attention of the council of the apostles. It was decided first to call it "The City of the Salt Lake, Great Basin, North America." This in the council of the apostles on the 14th of August. [^10] On Sunday the 22nd, the name was presented to the congregation and accepted. At the same time names were adopted for local streams. The "Utah Outlet," which carried the overflow from Utah, or Timpanogos Lake, to the Great Salt Lake, was called "Western Jordan." [^11] The stream running through the site surveyed for the city was called "City Creek." Two creeks coming out of the next two considerable canons were called "Little Canon and Big Canon Creek," [^12] respectively; and the larger stream beyond these was named Mill Creek.

288The first name given to the city founded by the Pioneers—"City of the Salt Lake"—was changed when the city received its charter of incorporation—1851—to "Great Salt Lake City." Subsequently the "Great" was dropped and the name became as it still remains—"Salt Lake City." "Western" soon went into disuse as a descriptive pre-fix to "Jordan," and "The Jordan" became and remains the name of the "Utah Outlet." The Canon Creeks, Little and Big, shortly became "Emigration" and Parley's Canon Creek," respectively.

LIFE AND DEATH IN THE VALLEY

The fact of human life and death was early asserted in the Salt Lake colony. A daughter was born to one of the battalion families which had wintered at Pueblo. The 9th of August was the date, a tent on temple square the place. The father and mother were John and Catherine Campbell Steel, and the child was named "Young Elizabeth Steel," being named for President Young and Queen Elizabeth of England. A second child was born on the 15th of August, in the family of Geo. W. Therlkill, one of the families of the company of saints from Mississippi, which had wintered at Pueblo and joined the Pioneers from Winter Quarters at Fort Laramie on the first of June, and journeyed with them to Salt Lake valley. An examination of the roster of Orson Pratt's advance company will disclose the fact that quite a number of this Mississippi contingent was enrolled in that company.

289This second child was also a daughter and was named Hattie A. Therlkill. It was in the family of Geo. W. Therlkill also that the angel of death struck down his first victim in the valley. A child three years old, a boy, playing on the banks of City Creek fell in and was drowned. His body was found in the creek about 5 p. m. of the 11th of August. The occurrence threw a gloom over the colony, which President Young sought to dispel on the following Sunday by a discourse on the sureness of the salvation of children. [^13]

THE PIONEER WOMEN IN THE COMMUNITY

In connection with these incidents in the Therlkill family, the mother of which would be so affected by this birth and death in her household, separated only by four days, it is but proper to say that the women of this Mississippi company of saints who entered Salt Lake valley with the Pioneers have been quite generally overlooked. Much has been written of the three noble women who accompanied the Pioneers from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake valley, so much, in fact, that the idea quite generally prevails that they were the only women who entered the valley with the Pioneer company. That, however, is not the case. In the advance company of seventeen Mississippi saints which joined the Pioneer company from Winter Quarters at Fort Laramie, on the first of June, six of them were women and girls, viz.:

Elizabeth Crow, Ira Vinda Exene Crow,

290Harriet Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, [^14]

290Elizabeth J. Crow, Martilla Jane Therlkill.

290These women from the state of Mississippi, sharing the hardships and toils of the journey; braving the uncertainties and dangers of pioneer life; sacrificing the conveniences and even luxuries of their southern homes—for they were among the well-to-do planter families of the south—their names and sacrifices and toils and sufferings for the gospel's sake, and in opening a new place of settlement for the church, no less than their sister Pioneers from Nauvoo and Winter Quarters, are worthy a place in song and story,—and in the Pioneer history of the Latter-day Saints. Elizabeth Crow was an aunt of John Brown's, the latter the daily companion of Orson Pratt in the last stages of the Pioneer journey. Elizabeth's father "was Captain Benjamin Brown, brother of Bishop John Brown, and served through the war of the American Revolution." The other five women of this group are thought to be her daughters. [^15]

With the arrival of the invalided battalion detachments, and the families that had wintered with them at Pueblo, and the families that made up the balance of the Mississippi company, all of whom arrived in the Salt Lake valley on the 29th of July—only five days after the advent of Brigham Young—the number of Pioneer women, of course, was very greatly increased; and these were still further augmented by the large companies which arrived in the valley between the middle of September and the 10th of October, 1847; by which time, 2,095 souls had arrived in the valley, in which the number of women exceeded that of the men.

291Doubtless the most sympathetic and thoughtful appreciation of the women Pioneers of the "Mormon" community, and of their class in all colony planting, was expressed in an address by Dr. Charles William Elliott, at the time—1892—President of Harvard University. This address was delivered before a very large gathering in the "Mormon" tabernacle at Salt Lake City, on the evening of the 16th of March of the year above given. The detention of the Doctor's train in the wilderness of the Rocky Mountains led to reflections upon the Pioneer journey through that wilderness, and the "planting" of the first colony in Utah, which he characterized by the terms "superb" and "Christian." Then:

291"Did it ever occur to you what is the most heroic part of planting a colony of people which moves into a wilderness to establish a civilized community? You think, perhaps, it is the soldier, the armed man or the laboring man. Not so; it is the women who are the most heroic part of any new colony (Applause). Their labors are the less because their strength is less. Their anxieties are greater, their dangers greater, the risks they run are heavier. We read that story in the history of the Pilgim and Puritan colonies of Massachusetts. The women died faster than the men; they suffered more. Perhaps their reward was greater too. They bore children to the colony. Let us bear in our hearts veneration for the women of any Christian folk going out in the wilderness to plant a new community." [^16]

291It can also be said that in this movement of the church to the west both as to these first Pioneer companies and in all Pioneer companies that followed them, the "Mormon" women, in all that makes for heroism, patient endurance, silent suffering, tender sympathy, issuing from love's fountain, calm courage, and clear, soul-inspiring faith,—were not one whit behind their brothers. In all things the men and women of this movement were worthy of each other.

EXPLORATIONS NORTH AND SOUTH

Meantime exploration had been pushed as far north as Cache and Bear river valleys, and as far south as Utah Lake. The exploring party of four who had gone north had accompanied Captain James Brown and Samuel Brannan's party which started for California via Fort Hall on the 9th of August. Returning on the 14th these explorers of the north valleys brought cheering news to the Salt Lake colony. "The messengers," writes Wilford Woodruff, "bring a glorious report of Cache valley and the country between us and there,—that is, rich soil and well watered, and well calculated for farming purposes. Also Bear river valley for stock grazing." The party called on Miles Goodyear, at the mouth of Weber canon, where he had a small garden picketed—"corn and vegetables doing well," [^17] was the report. The expedition to Utah Lake and valley had for its object the securing of fish, and ascertaining to what extent the fish of the lake could be counted upon as a source of food supply. In this the exploration was not very successful.

RETURNING PIONEERS TO WINTER QUARTERS

With so much accomplished, preparations began for the return of some of the Pioneers to Winter Quarters to arrange for the migration of the body of the church to the new home that had been selected. There were also a large number of the battalion men anxious to return to their families; accordingly, on the 16th of August, a company of Pioneers and battalion men were organized and rendezvoused at the mouth of Emigration canon for the return journey. [^18] There were 24 of the Pioneers and 46 of the Mormon Battalion; 34 wagons; 92 yoke of oxen; 18 horses; and 14 mules. The company's teams being principally made up of oxen, it is spoken of in our annals as the "ox train of returning pioneers;" and being so made up it was thought this company would need a week or ten days in advance of a company intending to start later, in which there would be no ox teams. Rather to the annoyance of the horse and mule train, however, they did not overtake the ox train, though the latter waited for them five days on the Platte; during which time they had killed and dried the meat of 30 buffalo cows. It was demonstrated both on the outgoing and returning journey that, all in all, oxen, unless horses and mules were grain-fed en route, made the better team for crossing the plains, as they would make from 15 to 25 miles per day and often gain in strength with no other feed than the grass of the plains and the brouse and grass of the hills. [^19]

293The "ox train" was under the captaincy of Shadrach Roundy and Tunis Rappely, though Lieutenant Wesley Willis was in command of the battalion members of the camp. [^20]

293Ten days later, August 26th, the second company of Pioneers and battalion members started on the return journey. There were 107 persons; 71 horses, and 49 mules. [^21] The company was unable to take with it any ample stock of provisions, as what had been brought by the Pioneer company was necessary and none too plentiful, for those who must remain. Accordingly the returning companies would depend chiefly upon the game and fish that might be taken en route to Winter Quarters, supplemented by such provisions as could be spared by the immigrating companies they would meet.

"Father John Smith," so he was familiarly called by "all Israel," uncle of the Prophet Joseph, and a very worthy man, was left in charge of the colony at Salt Lake, as Brigham Young then and even after the reorganization of the first presidency, made it part of his administrative policy to have with him, or within easy call, a majority of the twelve apostles. Seven members of that council started with President Young on this return journey, while Ezra T. Benson, the other member of the group of eight apostles who made the westward journey, had been sent with three companions from the colony on the 2nd of August, to meet the companies of saints then en route [^22] from Winter Quarters, with the glad tidings that the place for settlement had been located, seeds planted, the site for a temple chosen, and the work of laying out the city begun—good news indeed for exiles now in the second year of camp life with no certain abiding place.

294On leaving the colony at Salt Lake, as he and Heber C. Kimball mounted their horses, Brigham Young rose in his stirrups and shouted—

294"Good-bye to all who tarry! I feel well!" [^23]

294and so departed.

294Four days out they met their fellow apostle Elder Benson and companions returning from their visit to the approaching nine companies of saints. He brought to the Pioneers letters from their friends and families both en route and at Winter Quarters, as also news from the outside world. Benson returned eastward with his fellow apostles, while his companions went on to the valley with their precious mail and news of the whereabouts of the approaching companies, and the probable time of their arrival.

On Big Sandy river the returning Pioneers met the first of the westbound companies of the saints, the fifties of Parley P. Pratt and Peregrine Sessions, this is on the 4th of September. Some disarrangement of plans had occurred with reference to the organization and order of marching of these companies—plans worked out by President Young and his associates before they left Winter Quarters for the Pioneer journey.

CONFUSION OF PROCEDURE—REPROOFS

It will be remembered that two members of the apostles' quorum had just arrived from England on the eve of the departure of the Pioneer camp, Elders Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor. They had not had the advantage of associating with the rest of the quorum in projecting and maturing these plans of the journey, and yet as ranking officers in the church, after the departure of all the rest of the presiding council, they were very naturally looked upon as the directing and presiding authority in forming and marching the camp. Besides the disarrangement of the order of procedure, there had been manifested en route some disorder in the companies, some bickering and jealousies as to rights of precedence in the order of march, a thing not to be wondered at when the number—more than fifteen hundred people—are taken into account. For disarranging the plans projected by the majority of the apostle's quorum—"also governed by revelation," remarks Elder Woodruff—and for some disorder in the companies, the two apostles, Elders Pratt and Taylor, were taken sharply to task before the council at this meeting with the first companies. Elder Pratt was the ranking apostle of the two, and had taken the lead in these matters, and upon his head fell the burden of reproof. "Brother Young chastized him for his course," writes Wilford Woodruff, "and taught us principle."

"He said that when we set apart one or more of the twelve to go and do a certain piece of work they would be blessed in doing that, and the quorum would back up what they did; but when one or more of the quorum interfered with the work of the majority of the quorum, they burn their fingers and do wrong. When the majority of the quorum of the twelve plant a stake of Zion, and establish a president over the stake, and appoint a high council then has the minority of the twelve, one or more, any right to go and interfere with those councils? No; unless they [the councils] should get corrupt and do wrong. Then it would be the duty of any one of the quorum of the twelve to show them their error and teach them what was right; and should the majority of those councils get corrupt and try to lead astray the people, it would then be the duty of any one of the twelve to disannul those councils and call upon the people to sustain him and appoint a new one; but while the councils are trying to do right, it would be the duty of the twelve who might be with them, to assist them in carrying out those views that the majority of the twelve had established." [^24]

296The council sustained President Young's reproof; and although Elder Pratt was not at first disposed to accept it, he finally yielded and acknowledged his error and was forgiven. [^25] President Young took occasion to refer to the burden he felt he was carrying, writes Wilford Woodruff, and declared that "he would chastize brother Parley or any other one of the quorum as much as he pleased, when they were out of the way, and they could not help themselves; but he did it for their good, and only did it when constrained to do it by the power of God."

296Elder Kimball followed Brother Young, the account is from Woodruff's Journal: He said he wanted Brother Young "to rest as much as possible, and let his brethren bear his burdens." He said he wanted Brother Young to save himself, for he was wearing down. "I feel tender towards you—I want you to live; and if I or my brethren do wrong, tell us of it, and we will repent." Brother Brigham Young said there was not a better set of men on earth than the twelve, and he intended to chastize them when they need it that they might be saved and love him and stick to him. [^26]

"We all felt it good to be there, for the Lord was with us," is the concluding sentence of Elder Woodruff's account. Two days later, on the Sweetwater, the returning company met Elder Taylor's and Joseph Horne's companies. Several inches of snow had fallen. Snow! and this early in September! The incident occasioned some anxiety among the saints concerning the climate of the mountain region to which they were moving. Elder John Taylor turned the incident into a theme of merriment, bade them be of good cheer, and proposed to insure the lives of the whole company "at $5 per head." [^27]

A BANQUET IN THE DESERT

These camps made a feast for the returning Pioneers. It was in the nature of a surprise. While the twelve and other prominent elders were engaged in council meetings, the sisters had prepared a feast worthy of their guests. One hundred and thirty sat down to the meal which was royally served. [^28]

297Several improvised tables of uncommon length covered with snow white linen, and fast being burdened with glittering tableware, gave evidence that a surprise was in store for the weary Pioneers. Game and fish were prepared in abundance; fruits, jellies and relishes reserved for special occasions were brought out until truly it was a royal feast.

297Moreover, though the place selected for the spread was adjacent to the camp, it was successful as a surprise. The Pioneers knew nothing of what had taken place until they were led by Elder Taylor through a natural opening in the bushes fringing the enclosure, and the grand feast burst upon their astonished vision. If for a momen rising emotions at this manifestation of love choked their utterance and threatened to blunt the edge of appetite, the danger soon passed under the genial influence of the sisters who waited upon the tables and pressed their guests to eat; in the end they paid a full and hearty compliment to the culinary skill of the sisters.

298Supper over and cleared away, preparations were made for dancing, and soon was added to the sweet confusion of laughter and cheerful conversation, the merry strains of the violin, and the strong, clear voice of the prompter directing the dancers through the mazes of quadrilles, Scotch-reels, French-fours and other figures of harmless dances suitable to to guileless manners and the religious character of the participants. Dancing was interspersed with songs and recitations. "We felt mutually edified and blessed," writes Elder Taylor, "we praised the Lord and blessed one another." So closed a pleasant day, though the morning with its clouds and snow looked very unpromising. [^29]

298On the 9th of September the returning Pioneers met the last company of westward bound saints for that year. It was led by Jedediah M. Grant. He brought the Pioneers news from the east. He told them of the continued warm friendship of Colonel Kane, and of the inveterate opposition of Senator Benton of Missouri. During the night about fifty head of horses were stolen by the Indians. Thirty from the Pioneer's camp, twenty from Grant's. Horsemen were sent out in pursuit of the stolen animals, but only succeeded in bringing back five of the missing horses. This loss materially weakened both encampments. [^30]

ATTACK BY INDIANS—SIOUX DUPLICITY

Nothing further happened of note on the return trip of the Pioneers except an attack on the camp on the morning of the 21st of September by a war band of Sioux Indians. The attack was made just as the order had been given to bring in the horses preparatory to starting on the day's drive. The Indians charged simultaneously on the camp and on the herders in the hope of throwing all into confusion. In this, however, they were disappointed, as the brethren acted with great promptness and bravery, quickly arming themselves, and some of them mounting such horses as were at hand, they dashed into the very midst of the attacking party and secured most of the horses they had frightened and were attempting to steal. Eight or ten horses, however, in spite of all that could be done, were run off by the Indians.

299Thwarted in their full design on the camp, the chief at the head of his two hundred warriors tried to explain the matter away by saying they were good Sioux, friends of the whites, and had mistaken the encampment of the white men for a camp of Crow or Snake Indians, with whom they were at war. Some of these Indians were those whom the Pioneers had fed on the outward journey; and finally the chief proposed that if the white chief (Brigham Young), would go to his encampment, they would smoke the peace pipe and return the horses run off that morning. It was not thought prudent for President Young to accept this proposal; but three of the brethren, viz., Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and Stephen Markham volunteered to go in order to secure the horses, though the whole Pioneer camp knew that the chief's claim of mistaking the Pioneer camp for an encampment of Indians was a mere subterfuge. The Indian camp proved to be some six or seven miles distant, and all told there were over a hundred lodges, and about 500 or 600 people, with 1,000 horses. The pipe smoking ceremony over, the three Pioneers were permitted to pick out their seven or eight head of horses, not an easy task, from a band of nearly one thousand. They also saw very many of the fifty head that had been stolen on the 9th inst., and spoke to the chief about returning them, and he gave them some encouragement to believe that he would return them at Fort Laramie.

At Fort Laramie a plan was devised to get back the horses that was decidedly adventurous. Ten men were to go to the Indian encampment to negotiate for the return of the horses, followed an hour later by twenty-five men to be close at hand in the event of an emergency. The first company under command of Colonel Stephen Markham; the second under E. T. Benson. The expedition had not proceeded far, however, when they learned that the Indian camp had been warned from the fort to "cache up their horses," as this expedition had started to recover those belonging to the Pioneers. Of this circumstance Erastus Snow writes: "Mr. Bordeaux [in charge at Fort Laramie] at first promised to send an interpreter with our messengers and to use his influence in our favor; but the next day when we had made up a company well armed and mounted for the expedition, Mr. Bordeaux refused to send an interpreter, or rather stated that his men refused to go. He also spoke very discouragingly of the expedition and said the Indians would secrete our horses and our efforts would be unavailing. Whether he was sincere in his counsel and advice or whether he was afraid of injuring his influence and trade with the Sioux, or whether he was leagued with them in their robberies, is more than I can determine." [^31]

300At Fort Laramie the Pioneers were overtaken by Commodore Stockton and about forty men returning from San Francisco Bay to the eastern states. Elders Young and Kimball dined with the commodore at the fort.

300After leaving Fort Laramie the journey down the Platte was slow and monotonous. The teams were constantly growing weaker, and food in the camp was often exhausted, and only intermittently replenished by the killing of game en route.

On the 18th of October a company of sixteen men with three wagons from Winter Quarters, led by Hosea Stout, Geo. D. Grant, and James W. Cummings, met President Young's camp. They had come to render such assistance as might be necessary to enable the Pioneers to reach Winter Quarters. A second company of about twenty wagons, led by Bishop Newel K. Whitney and others, met the returning camp at the Elkhorn, bringing with them food and grain in abundance.

301A mile from Winter Quarters the Pioneer camp was drawn up in regular marching order, addressed by President Young, and dismissed to go to their homes on arriving in the city. [^32] As they drove into the city, the streets were lined with the people who welcomed them with handshaking, exclamations of thanksgiving for their safe return, and with smiles through tears. The journey of the returning Pioneers was completed.

301COMPLETION OF THE EMIGRATION TO SALT LAKE VALLEY FOR 1847

301Omitting the Pioneer and Mississippi companies, as already sufficiently accounted for in these pages, the other eleven companies of 1847, all arrived in Salt Lake valley by the tenth of October. The companies are listed by Thomas Bullock, secretary to Brigham Young, and one of the historians of the Pioneer camp, as follows:

301"Brigham Young's Pioneer company, 148; Mississippi company, 47; Mormon Battalion, 210; Daniel Spencer's company, 204; Parley P. Pratt's, 198; A. O. Smoot's, 139; C. C. Rich's, 130; George B. Wallace's, 198; Edward Hunter's, 155; Joseph Horne's 197; J. B. Noble's, 171; Willard Snow's, 148; J. M. Grant's 150.

301Making a total of 2,095 for the year."

To appreciate the heroism of this Latter-day Saint movement to the west, one must contemplate the chances taken by these companies which followed the Pioneers. It was late in the season when they started from the Elkhorn—the latter part of June—too late for them to put in crops that season even if they stopped far short of the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains. They barely had provisions enough to last them eighteen months and then if their first crop failed them in the new mountain home selected, starvation must follow for they would be from eight to ten hundred miles from the nearest point where food could be obtained, and no swifter means of transportation than horse or ox teams. It was a bold undertaking, this moving over two thousand souls into an unknown country, and into the midst of tribes of savages of uncertain disposition, and of doubtful friendship. Had it not been for the assurance of the support and protection of God, it would have been not only a bold but a reckless movement—the action of madmen. But as it was, the undertaking was a sublime evidence of their faith in God and their leaders.

302There is no question but these men had laid their all upon the altar of their faith in the providences of God, including their wives and children, who must share their hardships and their fate. They must succeed or perish in the wilderness to which they had come; and with a faith that has never been surpassed, they placed themselves under the guidance and protection of God, and we shall see in the sequel that they trusted not in vain.

THE FIRST STAKE OF ZION IN THE VALLEY

On Sunday the 3rd of October, a conference was held at the Salt Lake colony as arranged previous to the departure of the returning Pioneer leaders. At this conference "Father John Smith," who had been left in charge of the colony by the twelve, was chosen as the president of the Salt Lake stake of Zion, with Charles C. Rich and John Young (brother of President Brigham Young) as counselors. President Young and all the apostles were sustained as presiding over the church, except Lyman Wight, then in Texas. Action in his case was suspended until he could appear before the saints in person to render an account of his proceedings. A high council was chosen for the Salt Lake stake, whose names follow: Henry G. Sherwood, Thomas Grover, Levi Jackson, John Murdock, Daniel Spencer, Lewis Abbott, Ira Eldridge, Edison Whipple, Shadrach Roundy, John Vance, Willard Snow and Abraham O. Smoot.

303Charles C. Rich who had been in charge of the artillery company while crossing the plains and the mountains was now elected military commander of the colony, under the direction of the stake authorities. Albert Carrington was elected clerk, historian and deputy postmaster for the city of Great Salt Lake. John Van Cott was elected marshal of the city. This the crude beginning of civil government in the Salt Lake valley.

303The one block selected for inclosure by the Pioneer leaders for homes was found inadequate for the number who made their way into the valley that fall; and as soon as this was apparent additions were made of one block adjoining it on the north and another on the south, called the north and south forts, respectively. They were connected with the "old fort" by gates, and each of the latter forts had gateways to the outside for separate ingress and egress. [^33] The houses on these additional blocks, as on the first one, were built solidly together of adobes or of logs, the highest wall on the outside, the shed-formed roof sloping inward. Acting both upon reports of the climate and the dryness of the soil in the valley, the people made the roofs of these houses, consisting of poles, brush, and earth, too flat, with the result that when the winter and early spring rains fell they leaked badly, much to the discomfort of the people. [^34]

304Fortunately the first winter in the valley was a mild one; it would have been disastrous had it been severe. [^35]

LIGHTS AND SHADOWS OF THE FIRST WINTER

Notwithstanding all discouraging circumstances the high spirits of the colonists never failed them. Religious services were regularly held; the gathering of Israel, the redemption of Zion, the hope of eternal life in celestial glory to such as love Jehovah, obey his law, and seek his honor and his glory—the assurance of God's approval in all this, voiced to their souls by the consciousness of the uprightness of their own intentions and efforts—kept hope bright in their humble lives. Joy and gladness were in their midst, "thanksgiving and the voice of melody." Again, as throughout their nearly two years sojourn in camps through Iowa, en route across the plains and over the mountains, the laughter of children was heard, woman's tender ministrations were in evidence, anniversaries of births and weddings were celebrated; there were wooings and weddings; there were dances and merriment; and where these are, privations, the hardships of pioneer life, scarcity of food and clothing, can never break down the spirit of man and make him hopeless.

Footnotes

All hands were raised. President Young continued:

"I feel to bless you in the name of the Lord God of Israel. You are dismissed to go to you own homes." (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. 18, p. 327).

---
Notas:
[^1] Such the statement of Orson Pratt. (General Epistle to the Saints in Great Britain, Millennial Star, vol. x, pp. 241-7.) In the same document quoted above he also remarks: "A great, extensive, and rich tract of country has also been, by the providence of God, put in possession of the saints in the western borders of Iowa. This country is also at some distance from all other settlements, there being none on the west, north or east; and on the south it is some forty or fifty miles to the thinly scattered settlements of Missouri. This country is called the "Pottawattomie country;" it was inhabited by a tribe of Indians by that name, until last season, when they were removed by the United States government, leaving the saints as the sole occupiers of the soil. This land is not yet in market. When it comes into market, the saints, being the first settlers, will, by law, have certain pre-emption rights, and the first chance of purchasing the land at about 5s.—$1.25—per acre." (Ibid, p. 242).
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, p. 11.
[^3] The county was called Pottawattomie. The officers were: Isaac Clark, judge of probate; George Coulson, Andrew H. Perkins and David Yeardsley, county commissioners; Thomas Burdick, county clerk; John D. Parker, sheriff; James Sloan, district clerk; Evan M. Greene, recorder and treasurer, Jacob G. Bigler, William Snow, Levi Bracken and Jonathan C. Wright, magistrates. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, pp. 18-25. Also History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 5). Cannon's History throughout this period is but a reproduction of President Young's Ms. History, very slightly changed, the Ms. being written in the first person which Cannon changes to the third.
[^4] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, p. 11.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, pp. 18-25. Also History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xviii, p. 361.
[^6] History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xviii, p. 373; also History of Brigham Young Ms., bk. iv, pp. 18-25, year of 1848.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, p. 11. Cannon's History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 5.
[^8] The Frontier Guardian was a four-paged super-royal sheet, issued semi-monthly, edited for three years and one month by Orson Hyde. It was then sold to Jacob Dawson, a non-"Mormon," and issued as a weekly under the combined title of The Frontier Guardian and Iowa Sentinel, March 4th, 1842.
[^9] The first number was published Feb. 7th, 1849.
[^10] See Prospectus, first issue of the Guardian.
[^11] See Frontier Guardian, issue of April 4th, 1849, Springer's Speech.
[^12] "The legislature has adjourned," said the Guardian of April 4th, 1849, "and up to the last hour the Democracy strove to pass the Pottawattomie Bill (the bill to disorganize the county was so called). But a motion to suspend a rule required three-fourths of the members present and the senate stood ten Democrats to four Whigs, 'good and true'—Springer, Cook, Wright and Sproot. Our readers may forget as soon as they can, the injustice which the Democrats sought to do us. Indeed the sooner the better; but never forget that four Whig members of the senate stood by your interests to the very last hour—manfully defended them, and defeated your oppressors."
[^13] See Springer's speech against the disorganization of Pottawattomie county, Frontier Guardian of April 4th, 1849; also letters of Orson Hyde of 18th and 21st of September, 1848, to the Missouri Republican (reproduced in the Guardian of May 2nd, 1849); also letter of Almon W. Babbitt to the Iowa Statesman, of October 23, 1848, (reproduced in the Guardian of Feb. 21, 1849, with Introductory comments by Orson Hyde).
[^14] Speech of Mr. Springer, Burlington Hawk Eye, March, 1849, copied into the Frontier Guardian of April 4th, 1849. See also editorials same issue of Guardian.
[^15] The communication in extenso will be found in the Guardian, Feb. 21, 1849, editorial, and Babbitt's letter of April 4, 1849.
[^16] Frontier Guardian, Feb. 21, 1849, editorial and Babbitt's letter.
[^17] Guardian, May 30th, 1849. Hyde and Babbitt were finally reconciled before church tribunals, and it was so announced in the Guardian, issue of Nov. 28, 1849.
[^18] Frontier Guardian, Nov. 14, 1851.
[^19] Millennial Star, vol. xiv, p. 27.
[^20] Kanesville was originally known as "Miller's Hollow" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1848, p. 3), "a small valley" down which flowed Indian Creek; and it was at the mouth of this "valley" or "hollow" that Kanesville—now Council Bluffs—arose (see Liverpool Route, pp. 78, 79).
[^21] Richard's Narrative, Ms., p. 13-14.
[^22] Ibid, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 265, note.
[^23] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Aug. 1st and 2nd.
[^24] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for August 26th, 1847.
[^25] Woodruff's Journal, entry 4th Sept., 1847.
[^26] In order to disclose the spirit in which these men wrought, I here subjoin Elder Pratt's account of the culmination of this affair: "I was charged with neglecting to observe the order of organization entered into under the superintendence of the president before he left the camps at Winter Quarters; and of variously interfering with previous arrangements. In short, I was severely reproved and chastened. I no doubt deserved this chastisement; and I humbled myself, acknowledged my faults and errors, and asked forgiveness. I was frankly forgiven, and, bidding each other farewell, each company passed on its way. This school of experience made me more humble and careful in future, and I think it was the means of making me a wiser and better man ever after." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 400, 401.)
[^27] Woodruff's Journal, entry for Sept. 4th, 1847.
[^28] Life of John Taylor, p. 190.
[^29] History of John Taylor, ch. xxi.
[^30] Woodruff's Journal, entries for Sept. 8th and 9th, 1847.
[^31] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 21st, 24th and 25th Sept., 1847.
[^32] President Young's address, including a brief resume of the Pioneer journey, according to his own record, was as follows: "Brethren, I will say to the Pioneers, I wish you would receive my thanks for your kindness and willingness to obey orders. I am satisfied with you—you have done well. We have accomplished more than we expected. Out of one hundred and forty-three men who started, some of them sick, all of them are well. Not a man has died; we have not lost a horse, mule or ox but through carelessness. The blessings of the Lord have been with us. If the brethren are satisfied with me and the twelve please signify it by uplifted hands."
[^33] During the spring and early summer another block was evidently added to the three already described, since in a general epistle, issued after President Young arrived in Salt Lake valley in the summer of 1848, it is said: "On our arrival in this valley we found the brethren had erected four forts, composed mostly of houses, including an area of about forty-seven acres. (Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 228).
[^34] "The roofs of the houses were made rather flat. The result was that nearly every house leaked during the first winter, and umbrellas, where such a luxury as an umbrella was owned, were frequently in demand to shelter those engaged in cooking and even in bed persons would be seen sitting or lying under an umbrella." (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 59).
[^35] "Neither their food nor their clothing was of such a character as to enable them to endure cold weather. Many were without shoes, and the best and only covering they could get for their feet was moccasins. Their clothing, too, was pretty well exhausted, and the goat, deer, and elk skins which they could procure were most acceptable for clothing, though far from pleasant to wear in the rain or snow." (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 60.) "The winter was mild and pleasant," writes Parley P. Pratt, "several light snows and severe frosts; but the days were warm, and the snows soon melted off. The cattle did well all winter in the pastures without being fed. Horses, sheep and cattle were in better order in the spring than when we arrived, I mean those which were not kept up and worked or milked, but suffered to live where there was grass. Early in March the ground opened and we commenced plowing for spring crops." (Letter of Parley P. Pratt to Orson Pratt, Sept. 5th, 1848, Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 22).
