B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

321CHAPTER LXXXV

321LAND CLAIMS OF THE SAINTS ON THE MISSOURI—POLITICAL CONTROVERSY IN IOWA

321THERE were about 1,500 saints located on the Pottawattomie lands at this time. "Their settlements extended some fifty or sixty miles along the east bank of the Missouri river, reaching back to the east side of said river some thirty or forty miles." [^1] The soil of this tract of land was fertile; and the face of the country though hilly was not mountainous, and it was far healthier than the level plains of Illinois. The tract had not yet come into market and such rights as the saints held upon it were known as "squatters' rights;" but these gave them the right of occupancy and the privilege of improving and cultivating the lands pending their coming into market. Their "squatters' claims," gave them the first right of purchase at the government price ($1.25 per acre) when thrown upon the market, and if others purchased the land the squatter's improvements must be paid for at a fair valuation.

POTTAWATTOMIE LANDS—AND CIVIL GOVERNMENT

It will be seen then that the occupancy of these lands had become a valuable asset to the Latter-day Saints; and that in consequence of their numbers, and the fact that they, for the most part, were American citizens, with all the rights and privileges of citizenship intact, including the elective franchise, they loomed large upon the political horizon of the state of Iowa. The Iowa legislature of 1847 provided for the organization of counties out of the Pottawattomie lands, under the supervision of the judge of the 4th judicial district of Iowa, whenever said judge "should decree that the public good requires such organization. [^2] As the saints occupying these lands were anxious to acquire and to be able to dispose of preemption claims and improvements, they called meetings early in January and petitioned both for a post office at Kanesville and also a county government. Andrew H. Perkins and Henry W. Miller were sent to Iowa City, then the seat of government for the state, with these petitions. They learned that Judge Carolton of the 4th judicial district had already appointed a Mr. Townsend to organize Pottawattomie county, as already provided by the previous legislature. The post office at Kanesville was established in March, Evan M. Greene, a member of the church, being made postmaster. A county organization was effected about the same time. [^3]

The "Mormon" delegation was graciously received by state officials; they were introduced to the secretary of state who expressed a great desire that the saints should stay in Iowa and improve the country. "Iowa politicians" comments President Young on the return of these delegates, "were very anxious to have a state road laid off, bridges built and a post route established for the convenience of the inhabitants of the Council Bluffs country. The Whig and Democratic parties were nearly equally balanced in the state, and both appeared very solicitous for the welfare of our people; they wanted us to vote at the next August election." [^4] That was a presidential as well as a state election.

THE "BID" OF THE WHIGS FOR POLITICAL SUPPORT

Soon after the visit of the delegation from Kanesville to Iowa City, two delegates, Sidney Roberts and Winsor P. Lyon, were selected by the Whig central committee of Iowa to go to Kanesville and hold a caucus with the people and present to them an address drawn up by the central committee making an appeal to them to unite politically with the Whig party of the state. Lyon, on account of sickness, could not appear in person at the caucus, but he sent a very earnest letter seconding the appeal made to the saints in the central committee's address. Sidney Roberts at the caucus presented both his own and Mr. Lyon's credentials and also the address. Needless to say it was full of fair promises. It reviewed at length the persecutions heaped upon the saints in Missouri, the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Illinois and the cruel expulsion of the saints from that state. "The address also dwelt feelingly," says Brigham Young, "upon the deception and treachery of the Democrats for asking favors so often from, and as often heaping neglect, abuse, and persecution upon the saints, depriving them from time to time of civil and religious liberty and the inalienable rights of freemen." "And hearing," to come to the language of the document itself, "that the greedy cormorants of Locofocoism [a name at times applied in disparagement of the Democrats by their opponents] were at their heels," and had "commenced a systematical plan to inveigle them into the meshes of their crafty net," the Whig central committee had delegated Messrs. Roberts and Lyon to visit them and lay before them the national polity of the Whigs and solicit their political co-operation; assuring them that their party was "pledged to them and the country to a firm and unyielding protection to Jew, Gentile and Christian of every name and denomination, with all other immunities rightfully belonging to every citizen of the land." [^5]

324Mr. Lyon went even beyond this in his letter, and suggested that in carrying out the great emigration scheme which would remove the Latter-day Saints and secure them in peaceful possession of some remote part of the country, "where you can worship according to your own creed, where you may grow in the arts and sciences," etc., etc., would be through the aid, of the general government, best secured, as Mr. Lyon conceived the matter, by that government purchasing a tract of country commensurate with their present and prospective wants. Following is his verbatim deliverance upon that head:

324"To avoid these difficulties [i. e. probable conflicts with the Indians] and for the better security of your valuable enterprise, the first step preliminary to a general movement westward, to any given point upon a large scale, should be to secure the protection of the general government; and the most efficient way of doing this would be for the United States to purchase a tract of country of sufficient extent to accommodate a population commensurate with your present and prospective wants, and which would enable you, with confidence to concentrate your people once more, and to reorganize them into the social compact, under a guarantee of protection from the savage scalping-knife. This will follow as a natural consequence, growing out of the purchase."

"That General Taylor [the Whig candidate] will be the next president," he went on to say, "there is scarcely any remaining doubt. By casting your influence in favor of the 'old hero,' you would be gratefully remembered by him; and by securing Whig senators and representatives to congress from this state, through your influence, your claims for consideration would be placed in the most favorable light, and which could not fail to secure to you those advantages, privileges and immunities to which your enterprising spirit would so justly entitle you." [^6]

REACTION OF THE SAINTS TO WHIG ADVANCES

To all this, a statement was drafted and adopted, by certain members of the church, which set forth at great length the persecutions and proscriptions endured by the saints, and ended with a resolution declaring that if the "Whigs of Iowa would lift up their hands towards heaven and swear by the eternal Gods that they would use all their powers to suppress mobocracy, insurrection, rebellion and violence, in whatever form or from whatever source such might arise against the Latter-day Saints and the citizens of Iowa, even to the sacrifice of all their property, and their lives, if need be, and that a full share of representative and judicial authority should be extended to the saints, then the saints would pledge themselves to unite their votes with the Whigs of Iowa at the elections of the current year and would correspond with the Whigs as solicited." [^7]

THE FRONTIER GUARDIAN

The agreement was carried into effect and the saints very generally voted for the Whig ticket, state and national. Orson Hyde also established the Frontier Guardian, [^8] which, though its first number was too belated to give any service in the political campaign of 1848; [^9] and while it disclaimed in its Prospectus any intention to "enter the field of political strife," beyond reserving "the right and privilege of recommending such men to the suffrage of the people as the editor may think will prove true and faithful guardians of the national peace and honor, and of the persons and property of its citizens" [^10]—yet during the three years of its continuance under Elder Hyde's editorship, it was a steadfast adherent of Whig policies.

THE INEVITABLE RESULT OF THE "CHURCH" IN POLITICS

The course followed embittered the Democratic party of Iowa against the saints. Nationally the Whigs were successful, but in Iowa the Democrats carried the state by about 1,500 majority; [^11] and at the assembling of the legislature they introduced a bill for the disorganization of Pottawattomie county. It passed the lower house but failed of passage in the senate. [^12] The justification offered for this attempt at the destruction of a county in order to deprive its people of political and civil rights was a charge of "corruption" against the voters of that county, in that they were bribed by the Whigs to support that party's candidates, state and national. [^13] Also they were declared to be "fanatics and outlaws." Feeling ran very high during the discussion in the legislature; the senator from Davis and Appanoose counties, Mr. Selman, who was also the president of the senate, declared his willingness "to put himself at the head of a mob and drive them [the Latter-day Saints] from the state by the hands of violence." [^14] In appointing the 27th day of April as a day of fasting and prayer, among the several persons to be prayed for was this same Dr. Selman, president of the Iowa senate. "Ask the Lord," said the communication of Elders Hyde, Smith and Benson—constituting the presidency at Kanesville,—"Ask the Lord to make him ashamed of his hard speeches made against a people that never injured him, neither wish to." [^15]

327The controversy created dissension also among the saints. Elder Almon W. Babbitt's resentment against the course pursued by Elders Hyde et al, was such that he was disfellowshiped by a conference of seventies with which body of priesthood in the church he was connected. [^16] Elder Hyde referred his own course to the presidency at Salt Lake for vindication, but the only reply he received on that head was:

327"In regard to politics and political papers we care little about them, and you are at liberty to do as you please concerning these matters while you tarry." [^17]

ABANDONMENT OF KANESVILLE

The fact was that Kanesville, notwithstanding the valuable claims held by the saints in the Pottawattomie lands, the natural richness of the soil, and the importance of the place as a starting point for the emigration to the west, was looked upon by the authorities in Salt Lake valley merely as a temporary place of habitation for their people, and they evidently did not regard these political affairs as very important. It had been demonstrated over and over again that peaceful relationship between the saints and the people of the western states of the union, was out of the question, of which this political flurry in Iowa was only another but convincing evidence; and therefore the saints in that place were urged from time to time to remove to the mountains. In September, 1851, a particularly insistent letter was addressed to them at Kanesville, announcing the appointment of Ezra T. Benson and Jedediah M. Grant to assist them to remove to Salt Lake valley the following season—1852.

328"We desire you to give heed to their counsel in all things, and come to this place with them next season, and fail not. * * * What are you waiting for? Have you any good excuse for not coming? No! * * * Arise and come home. * * * We wish you to evacuate Pottawattomie, and the states, and next fall be with us." [^18]

328On the strength of this letter to the saints in Pottawattomie, and a general epistle in the same spirit to all the church on the gathering, issued a day later, the saints in the British Mission were counselled not to emigrate, "except such as have money and faith sufficient to take them through to the valley (i. e. Salt Lake) the same season." [^19] That is, there was to be no more stopping over on the Pottawattomie lands.

328The result of this policy was that Kanesville and the surrounding country was within the next year practically deserted by the saints. The desirable lands and all the settlements fell into other hands; the Frontier Guardian was sold early in the following year—February, 1852—to Mr. Jacob Dawson; the name of the principal settlement—"Kanesville" [^20]—was soon changed to "Council Bluffs," and everything that marked the vicinity as a resting place of the exiled and gathering saints, was in a few years obliterated.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] UTAH'S STATE FLOWER "To many it may be interesting to know what portion of the valley was first fenced," writes Geo. Q. Cannon, and then gives the following description: "On the north, the line of fence commenced at a steep point in the bluffs just south of the Warm Springs—a little east and south of the present Bath House—and ran directly from there to the northwest corner of the fort; it then started from the southeast corner of the fort and bore east to some distance beyond Mill Creek, and then east to the bluffs at the foot of the mountains. * * * The land designed for agriculture extended from the north fork of City Creek—which at that time ran through the temple block and through what is now known as the 17th and 16th wards—to one mile south of Mill Creek; on the east it was bounded by the bench and on the west by the east line of the fort. In this space there were 5,133 acres taken for tilling." (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol xix, p. 89).
[^2] THE SEA GULL MONUMENT ON TEMPLE SQUARE SALT LAKE CITY Elder John Taylor in a letter to the saints in Great Britain under date of Dec. 7th, 1847, reports 2,000 acres of wheat sown, "and great numbers of plows are incessantly going." Also he speaks of the colony having put in 2,000 bushels of wheat, "all of which has been drawn a distance of from 1,300 to 1,500 miles;" also mentions the intention to put in about 3,000 acres of corn and other grain with the opening of spring. (Millennial Star, vol. x, p. 324, et seq.). Cannon says that at "the beginning of March, 872 acres were sown with winter wheat; * * * the balance of the land, 4,260 acres, was designed for spring and summer crops." (History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 89. See also letters quoted by Richards, Millennial Star, vol. xi, pp. 8, 9).
[^3] TREATMENT OF CALIFORNIA EMIGRANTS BY MORMONS: A SLANDER REFUTED Cannon's History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 68.
[^4] In one instance "it was so tough," that in sawing the joints Elder Taylor suggested that it would be necessary "to grease the saw to make it work!" (Horne's Migration, Ms., p. 26, quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 275, note).
[^5] Cannon's History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 68. "Bulk is as necessary as nutriment to food," he remarks. "To have the stomach full was an agreeable sensation, even if the contents were only thistle tops. People thrived better on a much smaller quantity of flour with plenty of greens than they did on flour alone."
[^6] See Stansbury's Report to United States Government On the Survey of the Great Salt Lake, 1852, pp. 160, 208.
[^7] See Note 1, end of chapter.
[^8] The incident is well attested in all our annals. See Answers to Questions, 1869, by Geo. A. Smith, church historian, 1854-1875, p. 17. Geo. Q. Cannon, an eye witness of the event, after describing the descent of the crickets upon the fields, writes: "At the time when the prospects began to appear most gloomy, and all human power seemed useless, the sea gulls came in flocks, visited the fields, pounced upon the crickets and devoured them. They killed and ate until they were filled, then vomited and ate again. On Sunday the fields were deserted by the people, who devoted the day to worship. This was a feast for the gulls—they devoured without let or hindrance. On Monday morning, on visiting the fields, the people found on the edges of the water ditches, the place where the crickets were always the most numerous, pile after pile of dead crickets which had been eaten by the gulls, and then vomited when they were full." (History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 100).
[^9] See Laws of Utah for 1897, p. 97. The incident is commemorated by the erection of the Sea Gull Monument on temple square, Salt Lake City. (See Note 2 end of chapter).
[^10] On August the 9th, the members of the twelve in the valley wrote: "Our wheat harvest is over, the grain is splendid and clean, but being mostly in shock and stack, we cannot state the number of bushels; however, we are all agreed that the wheat crop has done wonderfully well, considering all the circumstances, and that we can raise more and better wheat to the acre in this valley, than in any place any of us ever saw; and the same with all other grains, vegetables, etc., that we have tried. * * * Green peas have been so plentiful for a long time that we are becoming tired of them; cucumbers, squashes, beets, carrots, parsnips, and greens are upon our tables, as harbingers of abundance in their respective departments," etc. (Millennial Star, vol. x, p. 370). An excerpt from a letter of Parley P. Pratt's to his brother Orson says: "We are greatly blessed in gardens, in wheat, in corn, and in all things I have set my hands unto. I have raised some sixty bushels of good wheat without irrigation; a few bushels of rye and oats, and my corn in the field looks as well as any corn I ever saw in the states. The wheat crop has exceeded all expectation; oats do better than in the states—say sixty bushels to one of sowing on sod ground; every kind of vegetable suited to the northern latitude does well." (Ibid).
[^11] A less enthusiastic report of this first harvest is to be found in an epistle of the first presidency's, written after their arrival in the valley, Oct. 1848. Their report of the harvest is as follows: "Most of their early crops were destroyed, in the month of May, by crickets and frost, which continued occasionally until June; while the latter harvest was injured by drought and frost, which commenced its injuries about the 10th of October, and by the outbreaking of herds of cattle. The brethren were not sufficiently numerous to fight the crickets, irrigate the crops, and fence the farm of their extensive planting, consequently they suffered heavy losses; though the experiment of last year is sufficient to prove that valuable crops may be raised in this valley by an attentive and judicious management." (Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 228).
[^12] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 406, also Life of John Taylor, p. 199. Cannon mentions also "the firing of cannon, music and dancing and loud shouts of 'Hosannah to God and the Lamb,' in which all present joined." (History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 100).
[^13] History of Brigham Young, Ms., postscript entry for Oct. 12, 1848, p. 70.
[^14] "There is, however, at this time (March 9, 1849) a scarcity of breadstuffs, and there will be a scarcity till harvest which we hope for early in July." (Letter of the twelve in the valley to Orson Pratt, under date of March 9th, 1849, Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 244, et seq.). A census was taken in February and the amount of breadstuffs computed which disclosed that there would be "upwards of three-fourths of a pound per head per day from then till harvest, besides fifteen hundred bushels of seed wheat, and several hundred bushels of corn." (Ibid).
[^15] "This winter has been a cold and snowy one, nearly equal to the climate of New York. The snow covered the ground to some depth, for nearly three months, and finally disappeared, from parts of the valley, the latter end of February; since that time cold winds have prevailed, and light snows are frequent, which disappear immediately; the ploughs are beginning to move." (Ibid, p. 245).
[^16] Letter of the twelve to Orson Pratt, Ibid, p. 245.
[^17] "Great preparations are being made for farming the coming season, and more than ten thousand acres will be enclosed and cultivated this summer." (Letter of the twelve to Orson Pratt. (Ibid, p. 245).
[^18] General Epistle of the First Presidency to the Saints Scattered Throughout the Earth, Oct. 12, 1849, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 118, et seq. The grain crops in the valley have been good this season; wheat, barley, oats, rye, and peas, more particularly. The late corn and buckwheat, and some lesser grains and vegetables, have been materially injured by the recent frosts; and some early corn at Brownsville, [i. e. Ogden] forty miles north, a month since; and the buckwheat was severely damaged by hail at the Utah settlement, sixty miles south about three weeks since; but we have great occasion for thanksgiving to him who giveth the increase, that he has blest our labors, so that with prudence we shall have a comfortable supply for ourselves, and our brethren on the way, who may be in need, until another harvest."
[^19] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry 19th October, 1849. "Captain Dan Jones with a goodly number of Welsh saints were included in Geo. A. Smith's company. This company did not leave the Missouri until the 14th of July. (See Frontier Guardian, July 25th, 1849); the result was they experienced inconvenience and suffering from cold in the mountains. On the 2nd of October, when on the Sweetwater, west of the rocky ridge, they were overtaken by a furious wind and snow storm which "continued through thirty-six hours. The snow drifted in every direction, in many places being three or four feet deep, and freezing on every thing it touched." A number of cattle perished from the cold, fifty-two in all, and some strayed away. Many pigs, chickens and even dogs perished in the storm. The cattle of these companies during the journey manifested a disposition to stampede on slightest provocation, and in one such instance a sister Hawk in Allen Taylor's company was trampled to death. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 19th October, 1849).
[^20] Letter of the presidency to Orson Hyde, dated July 20th, 1849, Millennial Star, vol. xi, pp. 337-8.
