B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

329CHAPTER LXXXVI

329LIFE IN SALT LAKE VALLEY—CRICKETS AND SEA GULLS—ADVENT OF GOLD SEEKERS

329THE spring months of 1848 were full of anxiety for the Latter-day Saint colony in Salt Lake valley. By dint of untiring industry during the fall and winter of 1847-8, they had constructed, notwithstanding the scarcity of material for that purpose and the distance it had to be brought out of the mountains, 3,638 rods, or nearly twelve miles of fence. This made one inclosure of more than five thousand acres, and included in it the chief part of the then city plat. [^1] Within this enclosure about 2,000 acres of fall wheat was sown; and as the winter had been mild, and open so that plows could be kept running through part of every month of the winter, much more land was prepared for spring sowing and planting, variously estimated at between 3>,000 and 4,000 acres. [^2]

This was the crop planted for the harvest of 1848. But meantime provisions were running low in the colony, and there were those who were already destitute; and of course there was always the haunting fear that the crop planted would fail as so many of the mountaineers met en route had predicted it might.

THE COMMUNITY PLACED ON RATIONS

In this emergency a public meeting was held and the proposition made that the whole camp be put on rations, that those who were already destitute might be supplied with food. This was agreed to and bishop Edward Hunter and Tarlton Lewis were appointed to act in behalf of the destitute, and see that they did not suffer. [^3] Beef was scarce as the cattle must be kept for work teams and the cows for milk. The few "beef" that were killed were poor and their meat tough. [^4]

330Prevailing hunger drove many in search of the earliest vegetation that made its appearance. This was the hardy thistle, native to the valley, the tops of which were gathered and used for "greens," and pronounced excellent; [^5] the roots of the thistle were also cooked and eaten. The sego root was used as an article of food, the colonists in this but following the custom of the native Indians. [^6] Some deaths occurred from eating poisonous roots, chiefly the wild parsnip that grew in the valley.

THE SEGO LILY: UTAH STATE FLOWER

Of these roots early used as food, the sego is of special interest; not so much as a food as on account of the beautiful flower it bears. The plant is classified by Stansbury as Calochortus lutens; by others as Calochortus Nuttallii (see Century Dictionary), a bulbous root varying in size, from small onions to walnuts, very palatable and nutritious. It abounds on hill sides and in stony ground in great quantities. It bears a beautiful white, lily-like flower, with rich gold and purple markings at the base of the petals, and is now the flower, emblem of the state of Utah, chosen, perhaps, as much out of sympathetic recollection of the uses made of it for food in the early days of the Salt Lake colony, as for its rare beauty.

331The Sego Lily was constituted the state flower by a legislative enactment of 1911, the shortest bill ever passed by a Utah legislature, it is said. It was introduced by Senator W. N. Williams of Salt Lake City, and was finally approved on March 18, 1911, upon which date Governor Wm. Spry affixed his signature to the bill and it became a law. The enactment, which constitutes chapter 97 of the Revised Statutes of the state of Utah for 1911, reads:

331"Be it enacted by the legislature of the state of Utah:

331Section I. Utah State Flower: That the Sego Lily is hereby selected as, and declared to be, the Utah state flower." [^7]

THE CRICKET WAR

Meantime March and April passed, and May came on. The colonists noted with joy that their grain which sprouted early promised a strong and healthy growth. Its color was rich, it stooled well, and barring frosts, late and early, the harvest would be a bounteous one. But before May passes an unlooked for pest makes its appearance. The Pioneers when entering the valley, it will be remembered, noted that in the foot hills there were great numbers of large, black crickets, which then excited but a passing remark. Now, however, in this month of May, they came swarming from the foot hills literally by millions, and descended upon the new-made fields of grain. They devoured all before them as they came to it. Their appetite never abated. They were cutting and grinding day and night, leaving the fields bare and brown behind them. There seemed to be no end to their numbers. They could not fly, their only means of locomotion was by clumsily hopping a scant foot at a time—hence, once in the fields, the difficulty of getting them out; and they came in myriads, increasing daily. Holes were dug and for the radius of a rod the pests were surrounded by women and children, and driven into them and buried—bushels of them at a time; and this was repeated again and again; but what was the use? This method seemed not to affect the numbers of the pests. Then the men plowed ditches around the wheat fields, turned in the water and drove the black vermin into the running streams and thus carried them from the fields and destroyed them by hundreds of thousands—all to no purpose; as many as ever seemed to remain, and more were daily swarming from the hills. Fire was tried, but to no better purpose. Man's ingenuity was baffled. He might as well try to sweep back the rising tide of the ocean with a broom as prevail against these swarming pests by the methods tried. Insignificant, these inch or inch and a half long insects separately, but in millions, terrible. The incident illustrates the formidableness of mere numbers. Since the days of Egypt's curse of locusts there was probably nothing like it. The failure to destroy these pests spelled famine to these first settlers of Salt Lake valley. It meant starvation to the companies of thousands of women and children then en route across the plains. Small wonder if the hearts of the colonists failed them. They looked at each other in helpless astonishment. They were beaten. That is something awful for strong men to admit, especially when beaten by units so insignificant. Meantime the ceaseless gnawing of the ruthless and insatiable invader went on. The brown patches of the wheat fields grew larger. Soon all would be bare and brown, and hope of food and life would disappear with the recently green wheat fields.

332

THE MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE

Then the miraculous happened. I say it deliberately, the miraculous happened, as men commonly view the miraculous. There was heard the shrill, half scream, half plaintive cry of some sea gulls hovering over the wheat fields. Presently they light and begin devouring the crickets. Others come—thousands of them—from over the lake. The upper feathers of the gull's wings are tinted with a delicate grey, and some of the flight feathers, primaries, to be exact, are marked with black, but the prevailing color is white; and as they came upon the new wheat fields, stretched upward and then gracefully folded their wings and began devouring the devourers, to the cricket-vexed colonists they seemed like white-winged angels of deliverance—these gulls. They were tireless in their destructive—nay, their saving work. It was noted that when they were glutted with crickets they would go to the streams, drink, vomit and return again to the slaughter. And so it continued, day after day, until the plague was stayed, and the crops of the Pioneers saved. [^8]

333Is it matter for wonder that the lake sea gulls were held as sacred by the early Utah settlers, and that later they were protected by legislative enactments. [^9]

333THE "HARVEST HOME"—1848

The reports of the harvest of 1848 vary somewhat, doubtless influenced by the view point of the narrator. To many of the colonists on the ground, who had felt the pinch of hunger, the vegetables and grains seemed abundant, and the fruitfulness of the soil phenomenal; [^10] while to those who regarded the harvest as to its real results only, and without having hungrily waited for it, are less enthusiastic. [^11] The harvest, however, was accepted by all as a successful experiment, and demonstrated the feasibility of raising vegetables and grains, and perhaps fruit, of the temperate zones in the Salt Lake valley.

335A public "harvest feast" celebrated the ingathering of the first crop. It was held on the 10th of August, and there was food in abundance. "Large sheaves of wheat, rye, barley and other productions were hoisted on poles for public exhibition," writes Parley P. Pratt; "and there was prayer and thanksgiving, congratulations, songs, speeches, music, dancing, smiling faces and merry hearts. In short, it was a great day with the people of these valleys, and long to be remembered by those who had suffered and waited anxiously for the results of a first effort to redeem the interior deserts of America, and to make her hitherto unknown solitudes 'blossom as the rose'." [^12]

THE RETURN OF BRIGHAM YOUNG FROM WINTER QUARTERS

President Young, returning from Winter Quarters with the company he was leading across the plains westward for the last time, arrived in Salt Lake City on the 20th of September of this memorable year in the great Pioneer's life. He had rendezvoused his company from Winter Quarters in the last days of May, on the Elkhorn, at a point about thirty miles west of Winter Quarters; and early in June started for the Salt Lake valley. His company consisted of 1,229 souls, and 329 wagons. A few days later Heber C. Kimball, now the first counselor in the first presidency with Brigham Young, followed with a company of 662 souls, and 226 wagons. Following him a few days later, from the same point of departure on the Elkhorn, came Dr. Willard Richards, the second counselor in the first presidency with a company of 526 souls, and 169 wagons. In that marching order these great companies crossed the plains, separated by a few days from each other and in like manner entered into Salt Lake valley. Elder Amasa M. Lyman also led "a large company" of emigrants across the plains that year, arriving in Salt Lake valley on the 10th of October, [^13] but neither the number of souls comprising his company, nor the number of wagons can be ascertained. These companies comprised the emigration of the Latter-day Saints into Salt Lake valley that year, and increased the population by the addition of nearly two thousand five hundred souls. The journey across the plains and over the mountains was a very prosperous one and attended with but little sickness and with but few casualties of death and accidents; especially was this true in the company led by Brigham Young.

THE RISE OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT FROM SOCIETY

On his arrival in Salt Lake valley, Elder Young renewed his activities and leadership with increasing vigor; his influence had been enhanced both with the people and the leading brethren of the priesthood, by the fact of his having been chosen to be the president of the church, made also its official prophet, seer and revelator, this presidency and these other offices to be heartily ratified by the unanimous vote of the saints (as they were) at the forthcoming conference held within the fort on Sunday the 8th day of October. In the forenoon of the Sunday following his arrival he preached to the people, that was September the 24th. Meantime Elder Kimball had arrived and he preached in the afternoon of the same day. These two were appointed at the meeting to apportion off the city lots to applicants. It was also decided that the time had come when the people might leave the "forts" with safety, and build individual homes on their city lots. This permission was therefore granted. It was stipulated that all houses should be placed twenty feet back from the inner line of the side walks. The vote for it was unanimous. A sort of land office was instituted for recording land allotments. One dollar to be paid for surveying and fifty cents for recording the land. The farming lands immediately surrounding the city, divided off into lots of five and ten acres respectively, were to be obtained by the casting of lots. By the action of the high council of the stake that had been organized it was voted that liberty be granted to cut down trees, dry or green, within a radius of thirty miles of Salt Lake City, except in City Creek Canon. Also it was voted that Charles Crismon, who had erected a gristmill for grinding wheat should be allowed to increase his toll for grinding wheat and other grains from one sixteenth to one tenth per cent of the amount ground. Thus—in the absence of a civil government in these regulations suggested for the most part by their leader—their wise man—their "can-ing man" (Carlyle), and accepted and approved by the people, was civil government arising from society, and from society in one of its primitive forms.

337THE HARVESTS OF 1848-9 INADEQUATE

Notwithstanding the fairly good harvest of 1848, the large increase in the population by the immigration of that year—amounting as we have already seen to two thousand souls—kept the people upon short allowance of food and finally made necessary the repetition of putting the community on rations, [^14] and those having plenty dividing with those who had little or nothing, and resorting again to the use of thistles and sego roots in the spring. The hardships of the colonists were also increased this year because of the severity of the winter. [^15] Prices of grain were reported to be, corn, two dollars per bushel; wheat, from four to five dollars a bushel, "and little to be had at that." [^16]

The second harvest was better than the first, the acreage greatly increased, [^17] and the injury from drought and frost much less, (although there was a heavy fall of snow on the 23rd of May, followed the next day "by a severe frost")— [^18] yet notwithstanding the better harvest and the increased acreage brought under cultivation, the supply of breadstuff and other food supplies fell below the needs of the community because of the influx of the population. The immigrating saints in the year 1849, came in five companies, of about five hundred wagons, and 1,400 people; led by Elders Orson Spencer, Allen Taylor, Silas Richards, George A. Smith, and Ezra T. Benson. [^19] But besides these companies of saints, the "California gold seekers" began to arrive about the middle of July. "Since which time," writes the presidency of the church to Orson Hyde at Kanesville, "our peaceful valley has appeared like the half-way house of the pilgrims to Mecca, and still they come and go, and probably will continue to do so till fall." [^20] And so indeed they did, and by thousands; but it is impossible to state the number with any assurance of accuracy. [^21] The numbers, however, were large enough to be a source of anxiety to the leaders among the colonists. "Several hundred of the emigrants," writes President Young, on the 8th of October, "arrived too late in the season to continue their journey on the north route, and many of them contemplated wintering with us. So large an accession of mouths, in addition to those of our own emigration, threatened almost a famine for bread." [^22]

THE COMPANY OF DEATH VALLEY EMIGRANTS—CAPTAIN JEFFERSON HUNT

To relieve this situation, Jefferson Hunt, who had been captain of Company "A" of the Mormon Battalion, proposed to guide California emigrants over the southern route that season, and thus avoid the danger of a rigorous winter journey over the Sierras. A company of about one hundred wagons accordingly formed and started southward with Captain Hunt as guide. With them went Elder Addison Pratt, returning to his mission in the Society Islands of the Pacific Ocean, accompanied by Elders James Brown and Hiram H. Blackwell. Elder Charles C. Rich also traveled in this company in order to join Elder Amasa M. Lyman in the presidency of "Western California," to which station Elder Lyman had been sent to preside in the month of April of that year.

340Near Beaver Creek, about 200 miles south of Salt Lake, the California emigrants of Hunt's company abandoned his leadership, and went off with a "Captain Smith" in charge of a pack train bound for California, who had maps and charts of the so-called "Walker's cut-off," and persuaded the California emigrants to go that way. Hunt insisted that the route advocated by Smith was not a safe one; but all to no purpose; and by the time the company reached the "rim of the basin," the most of them withdrew from Hunt's leadership and followed Smith, leaving the former leader with a small company of but seven wagons. He, however, continued his journey and arrived near the coast on the 22nd of December.

340Most of those who took the "cut-off," after wandering for a time in the mountains with very insufficient grass or water, turned back and followed the southern route. "Captain Smith and some others continued to struggle westward, and a few of them, after much suffering and disaster, arrived on foot in California." [^23]

The experience of this party who withdrew from the leadership of Captain Hunt was most distressing, and in suffering was second only to the Donner party, of 1846, so many of whom perished in the snows of the Sierras. The party that left the leadership of Captain Hunt, suffered however in a different way; for whereas the Donner party were caught and locked in by the deep snows amid the summits of the Sierras, many perishing from cold and starvation, and some from cannibalism, the party leaving the Hunt guidance was lost in the sand ridges and doons of the western desert, where many died from thirst and the desert's heat. All suffered from lack of food and water and most of their stock perished. This was the party that lingered so long and suffered so much in what they named "Death Valley" in what is now the south central part of the state of Nevada.

341The story is told by one who survived the awful experience, one William Lewis Manly, under the title Death Valley in 1849, The Autobiography of a Pioneer. It was published at San Jose, California, 1894. Though unpretentious in its structure this is a valuable contribution to western pioneer literature.

341Of the formation of this company at Salt Lake, to be led by Captain Hunt, Mr. Manly says:

341"There was gathered in the camp for the southern route to California one hundred and seven wagons, a big drove of horses and cattle, perhaps five hundred in all. The train was divided into seven divisions and each division was to elect its own captain.

341The division of the company which occurred near the Mountain Meadows, was occasioned by the arrival of another company commanded by a Captain Smith. They had a map, made by one Williams of Salt Lake, a mountaineer who was represented to know all the routes through all the mountains of Utah, and this map showed a way to turn off from the south route, not far from the divide which separated the waters of the 'basin' from those which flowed toward the Colorado, and pass over the mountains coming out in what they called Tulare valley, much nearer than Los Angeles [i e., to the gold mines].

341Hunt said of this route: 'Young men who had no families could possibly get through and save time even if the road was not as good as the Los Angeles road. But, if you [meaning all] decide to follow Smith, I will go with you, even if the road leads to hell." [^24]

341It is a thrilling picture which our author, Manly, gives of Captain Hunt's course in the issue that arose between this company and himself where they separated.

When the division of the wagons was made and only seven adhered to the Los Angeles route, Hunt stood at the forks of the road as the wagons went by and said to them: 'Good-bye friends. I cannot, according to my agreement, go with you for I was hired for this road [i. e. to Los Angeles] and no other was mentioned. I am in duty bound to go even if only one wagon decides to go.' [i. e., on the Los Angeles road and there were seven who so decided.] When the last wagon had passed him he stood talking with several who had chosen the new way and told them they were taking a big risk, for they did not know very much about the route, and he had been thinking that they might find it pretty rough and hard to get over the first time." [^25]

342Three days later their troubles began. The party "felt much inclined to attribute all their troubles to the advice of the Mormons." "Some said that the plan was thus to wipe so many more of the 'hated Gentiles' out of the way, and wishes were deep and loud that the 'Mormons might all be buried out of sight in the Great Salt Lake.' [^26] They overlooked the advice of the 'Mormon' Captain John [Jefferson] Hunt, their late guide, not to take the route called the 'cut-off'," says Manly. They were finally rescued by a relief party from the California settlements, brought to them by two of their own number who had bravely gone in quest of help and found it.

342Mr. Manly thus describes the circumstances of their leaving their "Death Valley" encampment: "Just as we were ready to leave and return to camp [after having climbed a ridge near their camp where they overlooked the Mohave desert] we took off our hats, and then overlooking the scene of so much trial, suffering, and death, spoke the thought uppermost, saying: 'Good-bye, Death Valley!' Then faced away and made our steps toward camp. Ever after this, in speaking of this long, narrow valley over which we had crossed into its nearly central part, and on the edge of which the lone camp was made for so many days, it was called 'Death Valley.' Many accounts have been given to the world as to the origin of the name, and by whom it was thus designated, but ours were the first visible footsteps; and we the party which named it, the saddest and most dreadful name that came to us first from its memories." [^27]

WINTER SAINTS

Notwithstanding the opportunity afforded the California emigrants to reach their destination, some concluded "to stay in the valley for the winter anyway," remarks President Young, "and a few of them embraced the gospel." [^28] Of those who thus accepted the faith of the Latter-day Saints both in this year, 1849, and the several years immediately following, the most of them were really converted, and were honest people; but not a few of those who professed the faith did so merely to secure more surely and more abundantly—as they supposed—the hospitality of the saints; which hospitality they sometimes abused and betrayed in the most shameful manner; from which circumstance arose the contemptuous term "winter saints," which "we understand to mean," wrote the editor of the Deseret News, "those who have been baptized just to have the privilege of serving the devil more perfectly, while they winter with the saints, or thieve their way to the mines."

343This on the 18th of January, 1851, on the occasion of a conference of seventies excommunicating eleven men and women en block, "for conduct unbecoming the character of saints;" and to whom the president of the conference had applied the, by then, opprobrious title, "winter saints." One of the most reprehensible abuses of hospitality referred to above was that of winter-bound gold seekers marrying young women only to desert them in the spring; and so often did this happen that it was the cause of much bitterness in those early years, and of suspicion long years afterwards towards transients and emigrants passing through the territory.

THE FIRST "CIVIL GOVERNMENT" JURY TRIAL

The transgressions of some of these "winter saints" brought on the "first jury trial" under the judiciary established by the provisional state government the colonists had founded. A special session of the "Great Salt Lake county court" was called on the 3rd of January, 1851, before which some of these transient church members were tried and convicted of stealing, and sentenced to hard labor for various terms; but after serving part of their sentence they were pardoned by the executive, Brigham Young, and departed for California, "the place of their original destination."

344"This was the first jury trial there had been in the state of Deseret [of which more in a subsequent chapter] since its organization," remarks Brigham Young, "and the first occasion for the empaneling of a grand jury. It is supposed that about three hundred emigrants who quartered in the valley the past winter, have left for the gold mines this spring. Many emigrants on arriving at this place heard the gospel, believed, and were baptized, and thus far proved their sincerity by their works; while some professed to believe and were baptized, but their works have made manifest their hypocrisy, and their sins remain on their own heads. Had it not been for such kind of characters, no jury would have been needed in Deseret to this day." [^29]

In the same epistle the presidency of the church sought to lessen the burdens of the Salt Lake colony by recommending that the California emigrants go via Fort Hall. Salt Lake City had recently obtained its charter and proposed to make provision against the inconveniences occasioned by trespasses of the California emigrants. The epistle said: "Hitherto, California emigrants have been accustomed to leave their sick on our hands, at a heavy expense, and depart without notice; to turn their teams loose in our streets, and near our city, which has caused much destruction of crops and grass, so that if we wanted a load of hay, we have had to go from ten to twenty miles to procure it, and drive our cattle a still greater distance to herd the succeeding winter; but since the organization of a municipality, quarantine has been introduced, and no animals are permitted to roam within the corporation, which extends to some six or eight miles square; and when the surrounding lands are fenced, the accommodations in our vicinity, for those who travel by multitudes, will be small indeed; and we believe it will be more convenient for the great mass of travelers to the mines to go by Fort Hall, or some route north of this, saving to themselves the expense and hindrance of quarantine, and other inconveniences arising from a temporary location near a populous city, where cattle are not permitted to run at large."

THE ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF A NATIONAL HIGHWAY STATION

The passing of this California emigration through Salt Lake valley had both its beneficial and disastrous effects upon the Latter-day Saint colonies. In the first place, it brought to the settlements of the saints very many earnest and sincere people who accepted the faith of the New Dispensation of the gospel, and some equally respectable who did not accept that faith, but remained, nevertheless, to make their homes in Salt Lake City. Both these classes became permanent and desirable elements in the then forming civil society. But there were also bad and lawless elements in that migrating host, some of whom became the "winter saints" of preceding paragraphs, and some who did not, but yet remained in the Salt Lake valley to vitiate society, corrupt community life, and give a dash of lawlessness to the times, from which circumstance the reputation of the Latter-day Saints suffered not a little, for that they were held responsible for all that happened of a lawless or disreputable nature in their community.

The saints also gained and lost through the reports that were sent to the east by those in the migrating hosts who chose to furnish the press with their descriptions and impressions of the "Mormon" settlements and their people. In some cases they were inordinately praised, and their achievements exaggerated; and by others as severely censured, misjudged and condemned; until in the annals of those times the fanatical saints of today, and the bitterly prejudiced anti- "Mormons," can each find material in support of his unstinted praise or bitter denunciation. [^30]

346Even on the side on which the passing migration is supposed to have been, and was, the most beneficial—its contribution to the material prosperity of the saints—it had its drawbacks since it created restlessness among the people, delayed the plans of colonizing adjacent valleys, and made it more difficult for the church authorities to hold the people to the achievement of those purposes to which the church was consecrated, viz., (1) the proclamation of the gospel to every nation, tongue and people under the whole heavens; (2) perfecting the lives of those who accepted her message, to this end gathering together her converts.

TEMPTATIONS OF THE GOLD MINES

Gold RushHCIn the mad rush of the world for the gold fields, one of the main streams of which was passing through their settlements, it is one of the marvels of those times, and will be in all time to come, that the Latter-day Saints could be held to those ideals of their faith which led them in large measure to give no heed to the madness for riches which possessed those thousands of emigrants who passed through their settlements, and derided their contentment with the humble lot of pioneering settlements in a semi-desert region, when the rich gold fields of California were so near to them, and of such easy access. Besides their brethren, people of their own faith, had been prominent factors in both the discovery and early development of the gold mines—why not participate in the harvest to which all the world was hastening?

Gold RushHC347Brigham Young and his associate leaders in the Church of the Latter-day Saints rose to sublime heights in those days. Under date of September 28th, 1849, the following is recorded in his History, Ms.:

Gold RushHC347"Fourteen or fifteen of the brethren arrived from the gold country, some of whom were very comfortably supplied with the precious metal, and others, who had been sick, came back as destitute as they went on the ship Brooklyn in 1846. That there is plenty of gold in western California is beyond doubt, but the valley of the Sacramento is an unhealthy place, and the saints can be better employed in raising grain and building houses in this vicinity, than in digging gold in Sacramento, unless they are counseled so to do.

Gold RushHC347The true use of gold is for paving streets, covering houses and making culinary dishes; and when the saints shall have preached the gospel, raised grain, and built up cities enough, the Lord will open up the way for a supply of gold to the perfect satisfaction of his people; until then, let them not be overanxious for the treasures of the earth are in the Lord's storehouse, and he will open the doors thereof when and where he pleases." [^31]

347COLONISTS vs. GOLD SEEKERS

347And to this view Brigham Young and his associate leaders in the church adhered throughout the gold-fever period, and held their people to the higher duties of their lives as Latter-day Saints. Under date of March 9th, 1849, "the twelve in Salt Lake valley to the saints in the British Isles," said: "There are some rebellious and disorderly spirits here, who are generally now for the gold mines instead of Warsaw, Quincy, and St. Louis; but those who are on the Lord's side will stay at home and raise grain, etc., until sent abroad on heaven's errand," [i. e. to preach the gospel]. [^32]

347In 1850, referring to the maintenance of an emigration fund to assist the poor in the world to gather to the church, in the mountains, President Young said:

"I am going to bring before the people the necessity of keeping up the fund for the immigration of the poor. I declare openly and boldly, there is no necessity for any man of this community to go to the gold mines to replenish the fund; we have more property and wealth than we are capable of taking care of. If a man is not capable of improving one talent, what is the use of his getting more? He is like the foolish child, that could hold but one apple in both his hands, and in reaching for more, he lost what he had. If men only knew how to control what they have and were satisfied, they would do much better.

348I will commence at the north and go to the south settlements, and pick out twenty-five of our inhabitants as they average; and another man may take fifty of the gold diggers, off hand, and they cannot buy out the twenty-five who have taried at home. Before I had been one year in this place, the wealthiest man who came from the mines, Father Rhodes, with $17,000 dollars, could not buy the possessions I had made in one year! It will not begin to do it; and I will take twenty-five men in the United States, who have staid at home and paid attention to their own business, and they will weigh down fifty others from the same place, who went to the gold regions; and again, look at the widows that have been made, and see the bones that lie bleaching and scattered over the prairies." [^33]

348So the president continued through the troubled years of the gold fever to encourage and admonish his people to stay at home and be attentive to their work of building up "the kingdom of God," wherein dwelleth righteousness.

348Of course it is not claimed here that none of the saints went to California in search of gold. A few did go; but quite generally they were persuaded to remain in Utah, and continue the work of colonizing in the interest of the church. Linn, grossly misrepresents Latter-day Saint history in this respect. He says: "Naturally in this rush for sudden riches, many a Mormon had a desire to join. A dozen families left Utah for California early in 1849; and in March, 1851, a company of more than five hundred assembled in Payson, preparatory to making the trip. Here was an unexpected danger to the growth of the Mormon population, and one which the head of the church did not delay in checking." [^34]

348This company of "five hundred," however, were not bound for the gold mines, but to "southern California" to make a settlement near the Cajon Pass. Following is Brigham Young's account of it:

349"Elders Amasa M. Lyman and C. C. Rich, with some 20 others, having received my approbation in going to southern California, they were instructed by letter to select a site for a city or station, as a nucleus for a settlement, near the Cajon Pass, in the vicinity of the sea coast, for a continuation of the route already commenced from this to the Pacific; to gather around them the saints in California, to search out on their route and establish, as far as possible, the best location for stations between Iron county and California, in view of a mail route to the Pacific; to cultivate the olive and manufacture olive oil, and also to cultivate grapes, sugar cane, cotton and any other desirable fruits and products; to obtain information concerning the 'Tehuantepec route,' or any other across the Isthmus, or the passage around Cape Horn with a view to the gathering of the saints from Europe; to plant the standard of salvation in every county and kingdom, city and village, on the Pacific and the world over, as fast as God should give the ability."

349It is admitted that too many were willing to go to California on this mission to suit the feelings of President Young, for he continues:

349"Elders Lyman and Rich's company, however, had swelled to above 570 persons with 152 wagons, most of whom had become so enamored of the California 'paradise' that they had determined to try their fortune there. We held meetings at Payson on the 23rd, President Heber C. Kimball and Elders C. C. Rich, Amasa M. Lyman and R. McBride addressed the people. I was sick at the sight of so many of the saints running to California, chiefly after the God of this world, and was unable to address them. * * * We organized the companies with Andrew Lytle, captain of the hundred [i. e. wagons] and Joseph Mathews and David Seely captains of fifties." [^35]

REMARKABLE PROPHECY FULFILLED—"STATES GOODS" CHEAPER THAN IN NEW YORK

As already remarked the most beneficial effect this migration to California's gold fields had upon the affairs of the "Mormon" colonists was its contribution to the material prosperity of the saints. In a public meeting at Salt Lake City, in 1848, in the midst of a great scarcity of food and clothing, and indeed of all the necessities of life, Elder Heber C. Kimball startled the congregation by declaring that within a short time "states goods would be sold in the streets of Salt Lake City cheaper than in New York, and that the people could be abundantly supplied with food and clothing." "I don't believe a word of it," said Elder Charles C. Rich, who was present on the occasion; "and he but voiced the sentiment of nine-tenths of those who heard the astounding declaration," remarks Elder Kimball's biographer. Even Elder Kimball himself doubted of the fulfillment of his own prediction, and as he took his seat remarked to the brethren about him that he was "afraid he had missed it this time." "But they were not his own words" writes his biographer, "and he who had inspired them knew how to fulfill." [^36]

The prediction was fulfilled in a most remarkable manner. Many of the overland gold seekers of 1849 conceived the idea that there would be a big demand for merchandise in the gold fields of California, and therefore loaded their 'wagons to capacity limit with various kinds of merchandise to be sold, as they hoped, at enormous profit. In some cases the teams were so heavily loaded with merchandise that the men walked and even women and children could not find room in the wagons. [^37] A number of St. Louis merchants fitted out whole trains laden with merchandise such as was supposed would be in demand in the mining camps. The overland journey, however, was attended with more difficulties than was anticipated, and the progress much slower. A few weeks on the journey and property began to be sacrificed to haste. What was the profit in a load of merchandise in comparison of the profits in rich gold diggings if one were only there? And so there were frequent loadings and reloadings, usually attended by a sacrifice of some portion of the owner's effects. When a heavy laden wagon would break down it was often left in the road where it stood; teams weakening, a wagon would now and then be abandoned and the teams doubled on other wagons to make more haste, until the overland trail was literally strewn with merchandise and broken down and abandoned wagons, for hundreds of miles. [^38] In addition to these circumstances by the time some of these wagon trains reached Salt Lake City word was received of ships loaded with merchandise arriving in the Bay of San Francisco; also that coast-wise vessels were plying between the Isthmus of Panama and San Francisco, carrying goods that were shipped by pack trains across the Isthmus by companies organized in New York, Charleston and New Orleans, [^39] which dispelled the dreams of the overland merchants of fabulous prices. Moreover, in Salt Lake City, gold dust from the California mines was current in trade and on exhibition, [^40] and this, in connection with the other circumstances mentioned, so increased the enthusiasm of the gold seekers, and their impatience to reach California, that they were ready to dispose of all they had for fresh stock with which to make the journey. "Pack mules and horses," says one account, "that were worth twenty-five or thirty dollars in ordinary times, would readily bring two hundred dollars in the most valuable property at the lowest prices. Goods and other property were daily offered at auction in all parts of the city. For a light, Yankee wagon, sometimes three or four great heavy ones would be offered in exchange, and a yoke of oxen thrown in at that. Common domestic sheeting sold from five to ten cents per yard by the bolt. The best of spades and shovels for fifty cents each. Vests that cost in St. Louis one dollar and fifty cents each, were sold at Salt Lake for 'three bits,' or 37 1/2 cents. Full chests of joiners' tools that would cost $150 in the east, were sold in that place for $25. Indeed, almost every article, except sugar and coffee, is selling on an average, fifty per cent below wholesale prices in the eastern cities." [^41]

Still another account says:

"The emigrants the past summer brought many things with them which they found to be superfluous upon their arrival at the valley, and were glad to give them in exchange for horses, oxen, etc., besides there were many small merchants who brought from two to ten thousand dollars worth of goods with them who found it indispensably necessary to sell out in the valley, owing to the loss of teams, and pack from thence to the mines. The Messrs Pomeroy of Missouri, with about fifty thousand dollars worth were of the number who found it impractical to proceed." [^42]

353This unlooked for arrival and sacrifice of goods in such abundance was certainly a fulfillment of Elder Kimball's prediction, and of material benefit to the Latter-day Saint colonists. It relieved them of many hardships, contributed to their progress, and hastened the development of the country in the eastern valleys of the Great Basin beyond all expectation.

NOTES

OUR SEGO LILY By John W. Pike When Flora, gracious Queen of Flow'rs, First saw these hills and vales of ours, She strew'd the rugged landscape o'er With treasures from her floral store, Then plucked from out her chaplet rare The fairest flow'r that nestled there, And bade it bloom for evermore Where flower had never bloomed before! "Bloom, thou," she said, "that men may see How wondrous fair a flower can be! Thy outer robe of spotless white Shall rival snow on yonder height; Thy breast, which my fond tear bedews, Shall radiant be with rainbow hues; And men shall ever speak of thee As, 'Beauty, robed in Chastity!'" And here it blooms—as fair a flow'r As ever bloomed in Southland bow'r Where never winds blow rude or chilly! Yet here, beside the lasting snows, It rears its head, and fairer grows, And mutely shows, what man can see, That Beauty's charm is Chastity! Thus, O belov'd, bloom on and on, Till all thy gracious work is done; And Time shall leave thee, passing o'er Still more beloved and yet still more!— Our own, our mountain, Sego Lily! Salt Lake City, February, 1916.

The Sea Gull monument which commemorates the Cricket and Gull incident narrated in the text of this chapter is the work of Mahonri M. Young, a grandson of the great Pioneer, Brigham Young. Mr. Young studied abroad. The granite base, of the monument weighing twenty tons, rests upon a concrete foundation, surrounded by a miniature fish moat fed from a fountain. From the base rises a round column of granite fifteen feet high, surmounted by a granite globe.

354Two sea gulls of bronze rest upon the granite ball. The birds weigh about 500 pounds and the stretch of the wings, from tip to tip, is eight feet.

354The unveiling ceremony took place on Wednesday, October 1st, 1913.

354The tablets are thus described by the author of this History.

354"The graceful Doric column of the monument surmounting the base, is fifteen feet high and is topped by a granite sphere, on which two gulls are seen in the act of lighting upon it—a most graceful thing in itself—and Mr. Young, the sculptor, has caught the action of it true to life.

354On three sides of the high base, in relief sculpture, the Sea Gull story is told. The tablature on the east tells of the arrival and early movements of the Pioneers. In the left foreground of the rugged Wasatch Mountains there is a man afield with ox team, plowing the stubborn soil, aided by the boy driver, followed by the sower. In the right foreground is the wagon home, women preparing the humble meal while an Indian sits in idle but graceful pose looking upon all this strange activity that is to redeem his land from savagery and give it to civilization.

354The second tablature—on the south—tells the story of the threatened devastation from the crickets' invasion.

354A point of mountain and a glimpse of the placid, distant lake is seen. The settler's fight with the invading host is ended—he has exhausted all his ingenuity and his strength in the fight. He is beaten—you can see that in the hopeless sinking of his figure to the earth, his bowed head and listless down hanging hands from which the spade has fallen.

354Despair claims him and laughs. With the woman of this tablature it is different. She is holding a child by the hand—through it she feels throbbing the call of the future—the life of a generation of men and women yet to be.

354Strange that to woman—man's complement—is given such superior strength in hours of severest trial! Where man's strength and courage and fighting ends, woman's hope and faith and trust seem to spring into newness of life. From her nature she seems able to do this inconsistent yet true thing—to hope against hope, and ask till she receives.

I do not know in what school of psychology the sculptor studied his art, but he has certainly been true to the great psychological difference between man and woman. But to return to this woman of the second tablature—she, too, is toil_worn, and there is something truly pathetic in her body-weariness. But her head is raised,—raised to what until now has seemed the pitless skies; but now they are filled with the oncoming flocks of sea gulls. Does she watch their coming with merely idle curiosity or vague wonderment? Or does her soul in the strange gull cry hear God's answer to her call for help? God's answer to her they were, these gulls, in any event, as the gulls soon proved by devouring the destroyer.

355The third tablature commemorates the Pioneers' first harvest—worthily, too. In the background rises Ensign Peak.

355In the middle background the log house home stands finished; in the foreground, harvesting the golden grain is in progress, both men and women take joyous part. To the right, a mother half kneeling holds to her full breast a babe, who 'on the heart and from the heart' receives its nourishment; and about her knees another child plays in happy, childish oblivion of toil and care, O, happy scene of life and joy, 'where plenty leaps to laughing life, with her redundant horn.'

355On the fourth tablature is the title of the monument. Fortunately it is simple, and not explanatory—the work of the sculptor tells the story—tells it well and eloquently. Too much narration would have marred it—this is the inscription:

355SEA GULL MONUMENT, ERECTED IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF THE MERCY OF GOD TO THE MORMON PIONEERS." [^43]

The following document drawn up by the leaders of the first companies of the "gold seekers" to pass through Salt Lake City—arriving there on the 16th of June, 1849—will illustrate in part the statement of the text respecting misrepresentations that sometimes obtained against the saints. It is taken from the History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of June 24; and which he introduces as follows:

355"I introduce the following testimony concerning the treatment of emigrants to California by the people in the valley:—

355G. S. L. City, June 25, 1849.

This is to certify that we, the undersigned, members of the Delaware Mining Company, from Ohio, when passing by the south side of the Platte river, met Jacques Rouvel Brunnette, a resident of Fort Laramie, about 180 miles east of his said fort, who informed us that the Mormons had instigated the Indians to be unfriendly to all emigrants on the south side of said river, and that they were bad men. But we found the Indians friendly, and we firmly believed his statement to be false; and as he said he should report it to government, we sign this in favor of the 'Mormons' in Salt Lake Valley, from whom we have received universal kind treatment.

356Andrew McIlvain P. Knight Gualt

356L. B. Harris A. C. Moses

356Daniel Plotmer E. L. Coldren

356A. G. Hinton E. R. Moses

356James A. Barnes James Hinkle

356Simpson Laid James Edelman

356Joshua D. Breyfogel Evan Evans

356Josephus McClead Jed L. Allen

356John C. Murphey John F. Stimmel

356Simeon Badly Daniel A. High

356Israel Breyfogel Irwin Boynton

356R. Cadwalader Robert Cunningham

356 Samuel High."

Footnotes

"Such are the general extracts" [i. e. from letters], says Thomas Bullock, which are abundantly confirmed by men who have lived in the valley; amongst other things, they report, that Elder Levi Hancock sowed eleven pounds weight of California wheat on the 14th of April, and reaped twenty-two bushels the latter part of July; he sowed half a bushel of English common wheat, on an acre and a half, and reaped upwards of twenty bushels; one grain of seven-eared wheat produced seventy-two ears. Barley that was sowed, ripened and was reaped, and carried off,—the land then irrigated, and produced from the roots a fresh crop, four times the quantity of the first crop. Oats that were sown produced a good crop, were cut down and cleared, the roots again sprung up and produced a beautiful crop. Peas first planted, a good crop ripened, gathered; then planted this spring, produced beets as thick as my leg which went to seed and yielded a great quantity. Cabbage seed planted this spring, produced seed again." (Ibid). In the same communication, Bullock reports 248 children born, by the 9th of August, 1848. (Letter of Thomas Bullock to Dr. Levi Richards in England, dated at the South Pass, Aug. 24th, 1848, Millennial Star, vol. x, pp. 369-70).

---
Notas:
[^1] See Note, end of chapter.
[^2] Tyler's Battalion, p. 286-7.
[^3] "Many of the latter [Fremont's troops] immigrants from the western states, were hostile and circulated among the Californians damaging reports on Mormon character; but it is probable that this enmity, especially that of Fremont himself, and the rumored threats to attack the camp and wipe the saints 'out of existence,' were seen through the glasses of prejudice. It is true that the Californians had formed in advance a very unfavorable opinion of the Mormons, but equally true that the latter by their conduct succeeded in almost entirely removing this feeling. In morals and general deportment they were far superior to other troops in the province, being largely under the control of their religious teachers. Church meetings were held often, and sermons were preached by Captain Hunt, the spiritual guardians Pettegrew and Hancock, or by Hyde, Tyler and others." (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 488). Tyler refers to the vindictiveness of the men of Fremont's command and reports that the Mexicans were told that cannabalism was common among the "Mormons." (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, p.276).
[^4] "On the 4th of May, an order was read from Colonel Cooke, giving the battalion the privilege of being discharged on condition of being reenlisted for three years as United States Dragoons; but under the circumstances the generous proposition could not consistently be accepted." (Tyler's Battalion, p. 280). General Kearney addressed the battalion on the 10th of May; "He sympathized with us in the unsettled condition of our people, but thought, as their final destination was not definitely settled, [in this of course his information was defective] we had better reenlist for another year, by which time the war would doubtless be ended, and our families settled in some permanent location. In conclusion he said he would take pleasure in representing our patriotism to the president, and in the halls of congress, and give us the justice our praiseworthy conduct had merited." (Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, pp. 282-3).
[^5] Colonel Richard B. Mason had been appointed governor and commander-in-chief of United States forces in California, by order of the president. (Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 583). That Stevenson acted under Governor Mason's instruction, see Bancroft's History of California, vol. p. 490, also History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 133.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 491.
[^8] Tyler's Battalion, p. 294.
[^9] I am following Tyler in the matter of the number that returned; his language is—"probably over half of the company returned, in accordance with the instruction from the twelve, to spend the winter in California" (Tyler's Battalion, p. 316). The number as given by others is forty. But if the number leaving Los Angeles for Salt Lake valley in July was 240, as stated by Bancroft (History of California, vol. v, p. 493), and only "a few" from this number remained at Sutter's Fort, when the main body resumed its journey over the mountains, and one-half of these returned to Sutter's Fort, the number returning must have been more than forty. The distribution of the battalion roughly stated, and that is all that may be done, is as follows: 150 in various detachments were sent to winter at Pueblo; 81 reenlisted at Los Angeles, in July, 1847 (Tyler's Battalion, p. 326-7); 3 from each of the companies were detailed to accompany General Kearney to Fort Leavenworth (Tyler's Battalion, p. 283, Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, p. 489): 3 were discharged or resigned, and 7 died. The following note from Bancroft's History of California (vol. v, p. 477), shows that some slight discrepancies exist as to the exact number of the battalion: "An official report, U. S. Govt. Doc., 31st Cong., 1st Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 24, p 228, gives the number mustered in as 15 officers and 468 men. There is apparently some error here, to say nothing of the fact that about 150 men did not reach California. Tyler gives the names of 506 men, including officers and the men left behind [516 men, and officers, see list of officers and men, Tyler's Mormon Battalion, pp. 118-125] Kane says there were 520 men. Other authorities speak of the number as about 500." In addition to these there were about fifteen families that expected to leave with the battalion, and a number of wives and children belonging to members of the command (see Tyler's Battalion, pp. 125-6). Which justified the remark of Colonel Cooke, that the battalion was enlisted too much by families for effective soldiering. (See ante, chapter lxxv).
[^10] Tyler's Battalion, chs. xvi, xvii.
[^11] This circumstance is noted in Governor Mason's report of October 7th, 1846, California and New Mexico Messages and Documents, 1850, p. 355; quoted by Bancroft, History of California, vol. v, p. 494 and note 25.
[^12] Bancroft, History of California, vol. vi, p. 26.
[^13] Their names given by Bancroft are as follows—I add the given names: Henry W. Bigler, Alexander Stephens, James S. Brown, James Barger, William Johnson, Azariah Smith, William Ira Willis, Sidney Willis, [brothers] William Kountze (History of California, vol. vi, p. 31, note). The brothers Willis and Kountze returned in September to work on Sutter's flour mill, so were not in the Coloma valley at the time of the gold discovery. (History of California, vol. v, p. 31, note).
[^14] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 33.
[^15] The following is a brief description of that great movement from a standard History of the United States.
[^16] Lossing's History of the United States, p. 497; also Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. iv, p. 636.
[^17] History of the United States, Morris, p.
[^18] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 32, note.
[^19] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 34.
[^20] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 56. He also cites Bigler's Diary, Ms., p. 19, for Brannan's action.
[^21] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 49.
[^22] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 50.
[^23] Ibid, vol. vi, p. 50.
[^24] Ibid, vol. vi, p. 51, note.
[^25] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 51.
[^26] Bancroft's History of California, vol. vi, p. 49.
[^27] Tyler's Battalion, ch. xl.
[^28] Tyler's Mormon Battalion, excerpt from Bigler's Journal, pp. 330-1. Bancroft follows Tyler as authority, History of California, vol. v, pp. 495-6.
[^29] California and New Mexico Messages and Documents, 1850; also quoted by Bancroft, History of California, vol. v, p. 492.
[^30] California and New Mexico Messages and Documents, 1850, p. 355. Also quoted by Bancroft, History of California, vol. v, p. 494, note.
[^31] Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, ch. xliv, also History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 133.
[^32] See this History, ch. lxxiv, where the matter is somewhat at length discussed.
[^33] Conquest of Mexico and California, Cooke, p. 159. The Gadsden Treaty added 45,535 square miles to the territory of the United States for which the government paid $10,000,000, this in addition to what had been obtained as a result of the war. (History of the United States, Morris, p. 326).
[^34] The official correspondence on this subject will be found in the Notes at the end of chapter lxxvi, this History.
[^35] The governor and the eleventh state legislature of Utah (1914) created "The State of Utah Mormon Battalion Commission" to select a proper site on the Capitol grounds and procure suitable designs for a monument to properly commemorate the historic march and achievements of the Mormon Battalion. Such a monument now (1930) graces the Utah Capitol grounds, erected at a cost of $200,000; raised conjointly and equally by an appropriation of the state legislature and voluntary subscription from the people, chiefly of the intermountain states. The legislature of Arizona also appropriated $2,000. The monument is a work of art of which the state is justly proud.
[^36] See Bancroft's History of California, vol. iii, p. 791.
[^37] The exact date is in controversy, some hold the declaration to have been made on the fourth of July. Lossing gives the 5th (History of the United States, p. 487); and Bancroft the 5th, though mentioning the claims for the fourth (History of California, vol. v, pp. 178-9).
[^38] See Letter of Secretary of War to Kearney, Executive Document No. 60, of June 3rd, 1846, delivered to Kearney by Colonel Kane.
[^39] Lossing's History of the United States, p. 487. Bancroft's History of California, vol. v, passim, but especially pp. 411-468.
[^40] "When they saw a few bags and kegs of gold dust that had been gathered and brought in by our boys [i. e. Mormon Battalion men] it made them completely enthusiastic." (Orson Hyde in Frontier Guardian, Sept. 15, 1849).
[^41] Frontier Guardian, Sept. 15, 1849, also Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 340, et seq. Bancroft in his History of California makes mention of this incident: "Many, indeed, tired and discouraged, with animals thinned in number and exhausted, halted at Great Salt Lake, accepting the invitation of the Mormons to stay through the winter and recuperate. The saints undoubtedly reaped a harvest in cheap labor, and by the ready exchange of provisions to starving emigrants for wagons, tools, clothing, and other effects, greatly to the delight of the leaders, who, at the first sight of gold from California, had prophesied plenty, and the sale of states goods at prices as low as in the east." (History of California, vol. vi, pp. 151-2.) In a footnote he names Kimball as having made the prediction.
[^42] Letter of John Taylor to the Frontier Guardian of Jan. 9, 1850. Elder Taylor calls attention to the fact that the goods destined for California, but disposed of in Salt Lake City, as described above, were largely men's ware, so far as clothing was concerned, and that the disposal of these goods did not prevent Messrs. Livingston and Kinkade of St. Louis, Colonel John Reese of New York, and other merchants who were carrying goods laid in especially for the "valley," from disposing of the goods and at "large profits." "So much so," he adds in addressing the editor of the Guardian, "that if you had been at Deseret (i. e. the Honey Bee State), you would have thought the ladies were bees and their stores the hives—though unlike in one respect, for the bee goes in full and comes out empty, but in this case it was reversed."
[^43] Utah: Its People, Resources, Attractions and Institutions, published by the Temple Square Bureau of Information, Salt Lake City, pp. 32-35.
