B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

357CHAPTER LXXXVII

357THE MORMON BATTALION IN CALIFORNIA—THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD—THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE BATTALION

357WE may now take up and complete the story of the Mormon Battalion, and take account of its contributions to the settlement of the west—Pacific coast and intermountain valleys.

IMPORTANCE OF THE BATTALION IN CONSOLIDATING PACIFIC COAST VICTORIES

The battalion by reaching the Pacific early in January, 1847, had arrived too late to participate in the immediate war-conquest of California; but it was useful in the performance of garrison duty at San Diego, San Luis Rey, and Los Angeles; and in connection, of course, with the New York volunteers, who arrived via Cape Horn in March, and the constantly increasing naval forces along the coast, assisted in making secure the conquest achieved. [^1]

357While in garrison many members of the battalion obtained permission to accept employment of the inhabitants of the towns at which they were stationed, such as making adobes, digging wells, building houses, and making bricks. The first burnt bricks in San Diego, and for matter of that in California, were made and burned by members of the Mormon Battalion. [^2] The battalion no less than other divisions of the camps of modern Israel kept up the reputation of the "Mormon" people for industry and frugality. They won golden opinions among the Californians for industry, honesty, and sobriety, notwithstanding the efforts of Missourians under Fremont's command to prejudice the people against them. [^3]

REENLISTMENT PROPOSED

As the expiration of the term of the battalion's enlistment drew near, which would be in July, 1847, strong efforts were made for their reenlistment by General Kearney, before departing for the east in May; [^4] by Colonel Jonathan D. Stevenson, of the New York Volunteers, who succeeded Colonel Cooke in command of the battalion, by being given command of the southern district of California, Cooke having accompanied General Kearney on his return to the east. Stevenson's efforts for the battalion's reenlistment were prompted by Governor Mason's instructions. [^5]

Stevenson represented among the advantages of the battalion's reenlistment, the privilege of choosing their own officers, "with the fact that the Mormon commander would be the third in rank among the officers of California, and might become first." [^6] The close of Stevenson's speech was most unfortunate, and gave offense. It is reported as follows: "Your patriotism and obedience to your officers have done much towards removing the prejudice of the government and the community at large, and I am satisfied that another year's service would place you on a level with other communities!" [^7] Very properly the remark was resented as an insult. [^8]

359The battalion's officers quite generally favored reenlistment, as the best means of aiding the work of the Lord and their absent families; but not so the men, who, under the leadership of Father Pettegrew, William Hyde, and Sergeant Tyler, were in favor of returning to their families and the body of the church.

359The result was that a company of eighty-one, officers and men only, reenlisted for six months, and performed garrison service at San Diego; while the rest of the battalion, on being mustered out of service, in July, began their march for the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains, going via Sutter's Fort, at the juncture of the American and Sacramento rivers, northeastward from San Francisco about seventy-five miles, and now the site of Sacramento, capital of the state. About one-half of these returning volunteers arrived in Salt Lake valley on the first of October.

BATTALION ADVISED TO REMAIN IN CALIFORNIA TEMPORARILY

The reason for not more than one-half of their number reaching Salt Lake valley that fall—they numbered about 240 when leaving Los Angeles—arose from the following circumstances: Arriving at Sutter's Fort, and finding opportunity for employment at good wages there, a number desired to take advantage of that opportunity, and accordingly, with the consent and approval of their associates, "a few" remained. On the sixth of September, when the returning volunteers were leaving the basin of Lake Tahoe, they met Samuel Brannan, leader of the Brooklyn colony, returning to California from his visit to Brigham Young. He gave them a doleful account of the semi-desert region where the church was settling, and predicted the final removal of the saints to California. He urged all, except those known to have families in Salt Lake valley, to return to California and work until spring; but without avail. The next day, however, the volunteers met Captain James Brown, ranking officer of the Pueblo detachment of the battalion, and a small party en route for California. He brought with him letters from many of the families of the battalion; also an epistle from the twelve apostles advising those who had no means of subsistence to remain in California and labor during the winter, and make their way to Salt Lake valley in the spring, bringing their earnings with them. About one-half of the volunteers thus encountered accepted this suggestion and returned to Sutter's Fort where they found employment. [^9]

360The rest of the company continued their journey to Salt Lake valley where they arrived at the time already stated.

361Captain Brown took with him to California the muster rolls of the Pueblo detachment of the battalion, and also had a power of attorney from all its members to draw their pay. The Pueblo detachment had drawn its pay per Captain Brown up to May at Santa Fe, at which time he received orders to resume the march to California, via Fort Laramie. The detachment arrived in Salt Lake valley on the 29th of July, where they were disbanded, since the term of their enlistment had expired on the 16th of that month. [^10] On the presentation of the claims for pay of this detachment to Governor Mason of California, they were allowed. "Paymaster Rich," says the governor, "paid to Captain Brown the money due to the (Pueblo) detachment up to that date, according to the rank they bore upon the muster rolls upon which the battalion had been mustered out of the service." [^11]

THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD

Gold RushHCOne thing more remains to be mentioned in connection with the Mormon Battalion—the part its discharged members took in the discovery of gold in California. As already stated a number of the Mormon Battalion members found employment at Sutter's Fort, with Mr. John Sutter himself, in fact, who was a rather enterprising Swiss; one "who had houses and lands, flocks and herds, mills and machinery." "He counted his skilled artisans by the score," says the account I am following, "and his savage retainers by the hundred. He was, moreover, a man of progress." [^12] Among his pressing needs and the needs of the country at large, was a sawmill. The flour mills he then had in course of construction needed timbers, and there would be large profit in shipping lumber to San Francisco. Accordingly, his foreman, a Mr. James William Marshall, a native of New Jersey, and then about thirty-three years of age, and a carpenter, took in hand the task of building a sawmill. After considerable exploration the requisite combination of water power, timber, and the possibility of easy access to the fort, was found in the Coloma valley, on the south fork of the American river, and about forty-five miles due east of Sutter's Fort.

Gold RushHC362In the latter part of August, or the first of September, Mr. Marshall with a party of about a dozen white men, nine of whom were discharged members of the Mormon Battalion, [^13] and about as many Indians, went to Coloma valley and began the construction of the proposed mill. A brush dam was built in the river and a mill race constructed along a dry channel, to economize labor. The largest stones were thrown out of this, and during the night the water would be turned in to carry off the dirt and sand. On the 24th of January "while sauntering along the tail race inspecting the work, Mr. Marshall noticed yellow particles mingled with the excavated earth, which had been washed by late rains." [^14] Sending an Indian to his cabin for a tin plate, Marshall washed out some of the soil and obtained a small quantity of yellow metal. During the evening he remarked to his associates of the camp that he believed he had found gold, which was received with some doubts, the expressions being, "I reckon not;" and, "no such luck!" But Henry W. Bigler, one of the battalion members, made the following entry in his Journal that day:

Gold RushHC362"Monday 24 [January]: This day some kind of metal was found in the tail race that looks like gold."

Gold RushHC362"Jan. 30: Clear, and has been all the last week. Our metal has been tried and proves to be gold. It is thought to be rich. We have picked up more than a hundred dollars worth this week."

362

Gold RushHC363That is the historical record of the event that turned the eyes of the civilized world to California. Which within a year started that mighty wave of western emigration from all parts of the United States, many parts of Europe, and even from Asia. [^15] It was to be a subject of the president's message to congress before the close of the year; [^16] within two years it would make California one of the sovereign states of the American Union, with a population of nearly one hundred thousand; in seven years it would result in adding nearly five hundred million dollars to the world's store of gold; [^17] and then as the gold from soil and sand was exhausted, and costly operations upon gold-bearing quartz ledges, and delving into the earth were required to secure the precious metal, many men who came to the mines turned their attention to agriculture and to horticulture and found in the grain fields, vineyards, and orchards of the Pacific slope, even a greater source of wealth than in the gold mines.

A "MORMON" DIARY DETERMINES THE DATE OF THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD

It is the "Mormon's" Journal which determines the date of the event which started all this. Usually the 19th of January is given as the date, but in his History of California, Bancroft discusses the subject as follows.

The 19th of January is the date usually given; but I am satisfied it is incorrect. There are but two authorities to choose between, Marshall, the discoverer, and one Henry W. Bigler, a 'Mormon' engaged upon the work at the time. Besides confusion of mind in other respects, Marshall admits that he does not know the date. "On or about the 19th of January," he says (Hutchings' Magazine, ii, 200); "I am not quite certain to a day, but it was between the 18th and 20th." Whereupon the 19th has been generally accepted. Bigler, on the other hand, was a cool, clear-headed, methodical man; moreover he kept a Journal, in which he entered occurrences on the spot, and it is from this Journal I get my date. If further evidence be wanting, we have it. Marshall states that four days after the discovery he proceeded to New Helvetia [Identical as to location with Sutter's Fort] with specimens. Now, by reference to another Journal, New Helvetia Diary, we find that Marshall arrived at the Fort on the evening of the 28th. If we reckon the day of discovery as one of the four days, allow Marshall one night on the way, which Parsons gives him, and count the 28th one day, we have the 24th as the date of discovery trebly proved. [^18]

364Later of Bigler and his Journal Bancroft says:

364"To me * * * he [Bigler] kindly presented an abstract of the diary which he kept at the time, with elaborations and comments and which I esteem as one of the most valuable original manuscripts in my possession. The version given in this diary I have mainly followed in the text [i. e., of his History of California] as the most complete and accurate account. The others wrote from memory, long after the event; and it is to be feared, too often from a memory distorted by a desire to exalt their respective claims to an important share in the discovery. But Bigler has no claims of this kind to support." [^19]

"SAM BRANNAN'S" ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD

For a time an effort was made to keep the discovery quiet, but gradually it became known, and the secret of the Sierras was revealed to the world, with the result already noted. San Francisco, however, was indifferent for some time, the final conversion of that town did not take place until Samuel Brannan, the leader of the Brooklyn colony of Latter-day Saints to California, came down from Sutter's Fort—where he had a store—to San Francisco in company with a number of others who had with them specimens of collected gold in both dust and nuggets. Brannan, holding in one hand a bottle of yellow dust, and with the other swinging his hat, passed down the street shouting, "Gold! Gold! Gold, from the American river!" This in May; and soon afterwards San Francisco was nearly deserted for the gold fields. [^20]

EXTENSION OF THE DISCOVERY—"MORMON" ISLAND

The spare time of the "Mormons" at Sutter's sawmill was devoted to washing out gold in the mill race and from the deposits of the sand bars along the river. Henry Bigler on the 21st of February wrote to members of the battalion at Sutter's Fort, telling them of the discovery of gold, but cautioned them to impart the information only to those who could be relied upon to keep the secret. They entrusted it to three other members of the battalion. Six days later three of the number, Sidney Willis, Levi Fifield, and Wilford Hudson, came up to the sawmill, and frankly told Mr. Sutter they had come to search for gold, and he gave them permission to mine in the tail of the mill race. The next day they began work and were fairly successful. Hudson picked out one piece of gold worth six dollars. After a few days, however, these men felt under obligations to return to the fort as they had given it out that they were merely going to the sawmill on a visit and a few day's shooting. Returning, Willis and Hudson followed down the stream for the purpose of prospecting. Fifield, accompanied by Bigler, followed the wagon road. About half way between the sawmill and the Fort, Hudson and Willis, on a bar opposite a little island in the river, found a small quantity of gold of not more than half a dollar in value; and while the smallness of the find filled the two prospectors with disgust, the other battalion members at the fort insisted upon being taken to the point where the gold had been found, that "together they might examine the place." "It was with difficulty that they prevailed upon them to do so," remarks Bancroft; but finally Willis and Hudson consented, "and the so lately slighted spot," continues the historian of California, "presently became famous as the rich 'Mormon Diggins;' the island, 'Mormon Island,' taking its name from these battalion boys who had first found gold there." [^21] But notwithstanding this new discovery by these members of the battalion, and notwithstanding their development of the discovery of Mr. Marshall, and the huge excitement which followed, and the fact that whenever they could get released a day from their duty to their employer they could usually obtain in gold several times over their day's wages, history has to record that they were true to their engagement to Mr. Sutter. "They had promised Sutter," says Bancroft, "to stand by him and finish the sawmill, this they did, starting it running on the 11th of March. Henry Bigler was still there. On the 7th of April, Bigler, Stephens and Brown presented themselves at the fort to settle accounts with Sutter." [^22]

366DUTY vs. MAMMON

The call of duty was also pressing the members of the battalion from another direction. And here it is the pleasure of the historian to record an incident of which in behalf of his people and their religion, he is truly proud. The instructions from the twelve, to the members of the battalion, as we have seen, were that they should remain in California during the winter, but make their way to the Salt Lake valley in the spring, bringing their earnings with them. Hence when settling with Sutter on the 7th of April, the preliminaries were arranged for this prospective journey to the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. The 1st of June was fixed upon as the time for their departure. Notice was given to Sutter accordingly, so that by that time he could replace the "Mormon" workmen in his employ by others. Horses, cattle and the seeds they intended taking with them were to be bought of him; also two brass cannon to be a defense against possible Indian attacks en route, and for defensive use against a like foe in Salt Lake valley. At first a company of eight went into the mountains to explore a route, but found the snow too deep for passage at that time. The constantly growing gold excitement, also, in consequence of its general unsettling of things, delayed their departure a month beyond the time fixed upon for starting. Meantime many of the battalion members availed themselves of the opportunity to search for gold. Bigler and two others of the battalion followed up the American river from Sutter's Fort about fifteen miles, finding gold as they went. Arriving at Mormon Island they came upon the seven members of the battalion mining there, who that day had taken out $250. [^23] Bigler and his associates mined for two months about one mile below the sawmill, dividing with Sutter and Marshall, who furnished tools and provisions. The land owners demanded one-half the product for a time; this was finally reduced to one-third. [^24] Brannan, as exercising a sort of presidency over the saints in California, urged the payment of ten per cent for tithing.

In the midst of this prosperous mining venture, and the daily growing gold fever, the mad rush from San Francisco and other parts of California, the members of the battalion sought out a rendezvous for the gathering of the saints preparatory to their journey across the mountains. The place of rendezvous was called by them Pleasant valley, near the present site of Placerville, a short distance up the south fork of the American river, and not far from the place where gold was first discovered on that stream. Parties came in one after another until the 3rd of July, when about forty-five men and one woman, the wife of one of the party, had assembled, bringing with them wagons, horses, cattle, and other effects. On the 3rd a start was made. "As the wagons rolled up along the divide between the American river and the Cosumnes, on the national 4th, their cannon thundered independence before the high Sierras." [^25] "Thus," as further remarked by the author, "amidst the scenes now every day becoming more and more absorbing, bringing to the front the strongest passions in man's nature, * * * at the call of what they deemed duty, these devotees of their religion unhesitatingly laid down their wealth-winning implements, turned their back on what all the world was just then making ready with hot haste and mustered strength to grasp at, and struggle for, and marched through new toils and dangers to meet their exiled brethren in the desert!" [^26]

368And this is the event to which the writer alluded to a moment since, as being proud of in behalf of his people—this placing of duty above gold by members of the Mormon Battalion, and of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. The fame of having discovered gold may not be claimed for members of the Mormon Battalion, that belongs to Mr. Marshall, unquestionably, though the "Mormons" in camp, when it was found, of white men, were doubtless in the majority, and the shovels in their industrious hands it was which threw up the gold-laden soil; and they were the first to extend the discovery and enlarge upon it; and theirs the honor to first chronicle the date and fact of the event that was to mean so much to the Pacific coast of America, and to the world. But while the honor of making the discovery of gold may not be claimed for them, nor the honor of making the conquest of California, that which is infinitely better than either of these achievements, or both of them combined, may be claimed for them, the honor of writing into the annals of California and of the word's history this example of fidelity to duty, detailed above, which is not over-matched in any of the records written by men.

THE WAGON ROAD CUT THROUGH THE SIERRAS

It was a difficult task to cut a wagon road through the lofty Sierras that faced these returning battalion men. A task of infinite toil and in the presence of great danger from the lurking savages. Three Pioneers who had insisted upon going in advance to blaze the route for the main company had been murdered by the Indians. These Pioneers were named Daniel Browett, Ezra H. Allen, and Henderson Cox. The main camp came upon their mutilated bodies at a spring which, because of this event, still bears the name, "Tragedy Spring." What numbers of these savages the main company would encounter, what their mood would be—murderous or friendly—of course could not be conjectured, it was of the dangers they must risk. By almost incredible toil and patience, however, this company of Mormon Battalion men conquered the ascent of the Sierras from the western side, hewing a roadway for their seventeen wagons through stony heights, and in like manner down steep declivities and narrow gorges, until the eastern sloping deserts beyond were reached and finally the valley of the Great Salt Lake,—about the first of October—to them, for the time, the place to which duty had called them.

The company that reenlisted at Los Angeles for six months beyond the battalion's original term of enlistment, served eight and then were mustered out of service. Some of these on being disbanded went by way of the coast to the mines or engaged in other industries in California for a time, but most of them finally made their way to Salt Lake valley in the course of one or two years, though a few remained permanently in California. A squad of twenty-five from this company, however, on being mustered out of the service, organized at once for the journey to Salt Lake valley, taking with them one wagon and a band of 135 mules. They went by way of what was called the "southern route;" hitherto, however, traveled only by packers, and the wagon of this battalion company was the first to make the journey over the pack trail. This company reached Salt Lake valley on the 5th of June. [^27]

REENLISTMENT OF "MORMON" VOLUNTEERS URGED

The best evidence that the service of the Mormon Battalion was honorable and appreciated by both the people of California and the United States government exists in the fact of the efforts that were made on the part of both the people and the government to prolong their service, some of which efforts have already been noted in these pages. As the time approached for the company to be mustered out of service that had reenlisted, and was called the "Company of Mormon Volunteers," the people of San Diego drafted a petition, begging the governor to use his influence to keep the company in the service. The petition was signed by everycitizen in town and Governor Mason tried hard to induce the company to remain in the service another year; failing in that, then to stay six months longer. [^28]

THE UNITED STATES AND CALIFORNIA ASK FOR A SECOND MORMON BATTALION

When the battalion proper was mustered out of service in July, 1847, efforts were set on foot to raise a second Mormon Battalion of which Captain Jefferson Hunt was to be given the command, with the office of lieutenant colonel, the office held by its first commander, Allen, and later by Colonel Cooke. It is learned from a report made by Governor Mason that the war department, and hence the national administration, sought the enlistment of this second battalion.

370In his report to the adjutant general of September 18th, 1847, Governor Mason says:

"Of the service of this battalion, of their patience, subordination, and general good conduct, you have already heard; and I take great pleasure in adding that as a body of men they have religiously respected the rights and feelings of these conquered people, and not a syllable of complaint has reached my ears of a single insult offered or outrage done by a Mormon volunteer. So high an opinion did I entertain of the battalion and of their special fitness for the duties now performed by the garrisons in this country, that I made strenuous efforts to engage their service for another year." [^29]

371The month following, after Governor Mason had met Captain Brown of the Pueblo detachment, and received his report, and paid off that division of the command; also after Captain Hunt, who had been for some time acting as Indian agent at Luis del Rey, was well on his way to Salt Lake valley to raise the proposed second battalion of Mormon Volunteers, Governor Mason wrote to Washington:

371"Captain Brown [after making his report and receiving the pay of the Pueblo detachment] started immediately for Fort Hall, at which place, and in the valley of Bear river he said the whole Mormon emigration intended to pass the winter. He reported that he had met Captain Hunt, late of the Mormon Battalion, who was on his way to meet the emigrants and bring into the country this winter, if possible, a battalion, according to the terms offered in my letter to him of the 16th of August, a copy of which you will find among the military correspondence of the department. In my letter I offered Captain Hunt the command of the battalion, with the rank of lieutenant colonel, with an adjutant; but I find, by the orders lately received, that a battalion of four companies is only entitled to a major and acting adjutant. I will notify Captain Hunt of this change at as early a moment as I can communicate with him. I am pleased to find by the despatches that in this matter I have anticipated the wish of the department." [^30]

371When, however, the subject of raising a second battalion was presented to Brigham Young, both through Colonel J. D. Stevenson, formerly of the New York regiment of volunteers, prompted by Governor Mason, also through Captain Hunt in person, the proposition was declined. Regarding the first enlistment from the standpoint alone of the sacrifices it involved, President Young saw no occasion to make further sacrifices. [^31]

372It is now (1929) eighty-three years since the Mormon Battalion was called into the service of the United States; we may, therefore, from this vantage ground of perspective contemplate the battalion's achievements while in the service of the United States, and what incidentally grew out of that service.

We now know that the call for the enlistment of the battalion was not a villainously-designed plot on the part of the administration of the government at Washington, in 1846, to destroy the exiled Latter-day Saints. Also we know that it was not designed as a test of "Mormon" loyalty to the government of the United States, in which it was anticipated that they would fail, by refusing to raise the battalion, and thus afford an excuse for turning loose upon them militia mobs from Iowa and Missouri to destroy them. Also we know that it was not a wicked, inhuman plot on the part of the administration to take from the camps of the saints the flower of their manhood—their effective fighting force—and thus leave them a helpless prey to hordes of savage tribes to wipe them out of existence. Unfortunately all these evil surmisings have been indulged against the administration then in power, not discerning between some evilly disposed and irresponsible individuals at Washington, who may have uttered idle threats and boastings of what they would do to the "Mormons" in certain eventualities, and the responsible officials of the administration. Contrary to all this we now know that the design on the part of the federal administration was intended to be helpful to the Latter-day Saint exiles, and was helpful to them, as we have seen, in many ways. [^32] As this eighty-three years of perspective corrects the misconceptions of the past with reference to the calling of the battalion, so also does it enable us to recognize the real importance and value of the incident, and the greatness of the achievements of this battalion of United States troops, for such they were; and the matter of their coming from the camps of the Latter-day Saints en route to the west, should not be allowed to obscure that fact.

373The battalion participated in four great movements that made possible the development of the west—the great intermountain region, and the Pacific slope. These were:—

373In all of these movements the battalion was an important factor. Let us consider these several items.

373The conquest of northern Mexico, including, of course, California and Utah, as well as Nevada, New Mexico, and Arizona, was brought about by the cooperation of the Pacific fleet of the American navy, and the Army of the West, the main division of which was under the command of General Stephen W. Kearney. The battalion's connection with and participation in the achievements of this Army of the West in its conquest of northern Mexico are officially recognized in the military order of the colonel commanding already quoted in these pages, and which is now on file as a government document at Washington. Also their participation in the opening of the highways to the west is acknowledged in the same document. Of this achievement Colonel Cooke commenting upon the battalion's march and the map he made of it, says:

"A new administration, in which southern interests prevailed, with the great problem of the practicability and best location of a Pacific railroad under investigation, had the map of this wagon route before them with its continuance to the west, and perceived that it gave exactly the solution of its unknown element, that a southern route would avoid both the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevada, with their snows, and would meet no obstacle in this great interval. The new 'Gadsden Treaty' was the result; it was signed December 30, 1853." [^33]

374In addition to the wagon road opened westward through southern New Mexico, Arizona and California, it was a detachment of twenty-five discharged members of the battalion which brought the first wagon through from the coast via Cajon Pass to Salt Lake, following what is now the general course of the San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad, and which became known in the early Utah-California times as the "Southern California Route to the Coast." Also, as we have seen, the battalion members returning from the gold fields of the American river region cut a new wagon road much of the way for their seventeen wagons and two cannons from the western side of the Sierra, across the summit of that lofty range, thence down to the eastern sloping deserts of Nevada and so to Salt Lake valley.

374The part of the battalion in the discovery of gold has already been detailed. Their connection with the commencement of the settlements in Salt Lake valley, and the results of that event, will receive attention in a later chapter.

374It has already been noted in part that the enlistment of the battalion gave the general encampment of the saints occupying Indian lands along the Missouri, in the vicinity of Council Bluffs, great advantage, since they could plead the absence of so many of their number in the service of the United States in justification of that occupancy, [^34] and later how that occupancy, as the lands later came into market, was changed into the acquirement of substantial preemption rights by many of the Latter-day Saints, an indirect benefit from the service of the battalion.

In addition to all this, the battalion reflected great credit upon the community of the Latter-day Saints by reason of the excellence of their conduct not only on the march to the Pacific coast, but also when doing garrison duty in southern California, of which the efforts to secure their reenlistment, and, failing that, the efforts to secure the enlistment of a second Mormon Battalion, were the open confessions of both California and federal officials—since both participated in such efforts—to the worth of these "Mormon" United States soldiers. "They religiously respected the rights and feelings of the conquered people of California; not a syllable of complaint of a single insult offered, or an outrage done by a 'Mormon Volunteer'," is the record of the battalion according to the report of them by Governor Mason. Such the reputation of the Mormon Battalion; of its officers, chosen from its ranks; and of its men, the rank and file. [^35]

THE SUBSEQUENT CAREER OF THE BATTALION OFFICERS

It may be of interest, and certainly it belongs to the history of the battalion, to say that its commanding officer and the two lieutenants of the regular army, his staff officers, rose to honorable distinction during the war between the states:

375Colonel Cooke: During that war Colonel Phillip St. George Cooke, though a Virginian served on the side of the Union army and rose through the grade of brigadier general (1861) to the rank of brevet major general (1865). His son, John Cooke, fought on the side of the confederacy, being in the engagements at Seven Pines, Fredericksburg, and Sharpsburg. He was wounded seven times. The daughter of General Cooke, Flora, married J. E. B. Stuart, the dashing cavalry officer of the Confederacy, and of course her sympathies were with the South; and thus was the "Mormon Battalion's" commanding officer's family divided in that unhappy conflict, daughter and son against the father!

375Lieutenant A. J. Smith: In the same war, Lieutenant Smith rose from the grade of commander of California volunteers to that of brigadier general of volunteers (1862); and to major general of volunteers (1864). In the battle of Nashville he commanded the sixteenth corps on General Thomas' right, and received the brevet of major general in the regular army for his services in that battle.

375Lieutenant George Stoneman: In 1861, Lieutenant Stoneman was in command at Fort Brown, Texas, with the rank of captain. Later he was in command of the Union cavalry in the Peninsula campaign. After the death of General Stephen W. Kearney at Chantilly, Stoneman took the command of the fallen general's division and commanded the Third Corps at Fredericksburg. At Chancellorsville he commanded the federal cavalry. In a raid upon Andersonsville, the object of which was to liberate the federal soldiers imprisoned there, he was captured by the confederates. After the war he was in command of one of the many military departments created by the government; and from 1883 to 1887 was governor of California.

SUBSEQUENT CAREER OF THE FIVE BATTALION CAPTAINS

Jefferson Hunt — Captain Company A. Jefferson Hunt was born in Kentucky, January 4, 1804, the son of Thomas Hunt and Martha Hamilton, his mother being a sister of General Hamilton of Revolutionary fame. He moved with his parents, in early childhood, to Edwards county, Illinois. There he met and married Celia Mounts in 1823. They embraced the "Mormon" faith in 1834. Later they joined the "Mormons" at Clay county, Missouri, and were driven from there to Caldwell county and shared in the persecutions of the "Mormons" at that place. They lived near Nauvoo until the exodus in the spring of 1846. During the Illinois disturbances, Jefferson Hunt was appointed a major in the Nauvoo Legion.

377In July, 1846, at Council Bluffs, when the call was made for the "Mormons" to enlist for service against Mexico, he joined the Mormon Battalion and was chosen captain of the first company. His two eldest sons, Gilbert and Marshal, also were members of that company, Marshal being the youngest member of the battalion. He was seventeen. The Hunt family was among those who accompanied the battalion as far as Santa Fe. Gilbert Hunt was sent with the detachment that conveyed the sick to Pueblo. He there married Lydia A. Gibson and came to Salt Lake valley in 1847.

377Captain Hunt, after making the march to California, with his son Marshal and others came back by way of Sutter's Fort and reached Salt Lake valley in October, 1847. That fall he went to California again with his sons and fifteen others to obtain provisions, cattle, seeds, and grain. They took the southern route, reaching what is now San Bernardino, Christmas day, 1847. With 200 head of cattle they returned to Salt Lake, reaching here in May, 1848. In the spring of 1849 he left Salt Lake and helped to settle Provo. There Captain Hunt remained until 1851, when he was called to go to California with Elder Amasa M. Lyman and C. C. Rich. He settled at San Bernardino, living there until 1857, when with the coming of Johnston's army he was called back to Utah. Captain Hunt was a member of the first legislature of California and erected the first sawmill in San Bernardino county.

377After his return to Utah he lived in Ogden valley, Huntsville being named after him. He also lived at Oxford, Idaho, where he died in 1879. Many of his children are still living.

377Jesse D. Hunter — Captain Company B. Jesse D. Hunter was a native of Kentucky, born in 1804. Little is known of his life previous to his becoming a member of the "Mormon" church. He is mentioned among the prisoners arraigned before Judge Austin A. King at Richmond, Missouri, in connection with Joseph Smith, and was, therefore, active in the stirring mob scenes enacted against the saints in that state. He removed to Nauvoo, Illinois, and was a major in the second cohort, fifth regiment, of the Nauvoo Legion. He joined the "Mormon" exodus from that city to Council Bluffs in 1846, where he accepted service with the Mormon Battalion volunteers, and was made captain of Company B. He was accompanied in the march to the coast by his wife, spoken of as a most "estimable lady," and who died at San Diego April 27, 1847, leaving a babe a few weeks old. Captain Hunter never came to Utah, but remained in California and was appointed Indian agent at San Luis Rey.

378During the gold excitement of 1848 he went to the mines but shortly returned to be again appointed Indian agent in the district where he had previously operated. He died in Los Angeles, 1877, at the age of seventy-three, leaving seven grown children with families. [^36]

378James Brown—Captain of Company C, and Founder of Ogden. James Brown when he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion left his family in tents on the Missouri river and was made captain of Company C. When the detachment of ill and disabled was sent from Santa Fe to Pueblo, he was placed in command of them. In the spring of 1847, Captain Brown's company made its way northward toward the "Oregon Trail" along the Platte river and so nearly overtook the advance guard of Brigham Young's party that they arrived in Salt Lake valley only five days behind them. He it was who went to California and obtained from government the pay of the Pueblo detachment of the battalion and returned with it to Utah.

379Early in 1848, Captain Brown with $3,000 in Spanish doubloons, bought the Goodyear Fort or old Spanish Mission from Miles Goodyear, this tract of land being the site of the city of Ogden. He immediately moved there.

379His death occurred in 1863 as the result of an accident that befell him as he was feeding sugar cane into a mill.

379Nelson Higgins — Captain Company D. Nelson Higgins was born in Saratoga, New York, September, 1806. When ten years old his father moved to Ohio, leaving the boy with a married sister. In the course of a year the sister died, and the boy started out on foot on a journey of about 400 miles to find his family which he finally did in Huron county, Ohio. At the age of twenty-one he married Sarah Blackman, by whom he had ten children. He became a member of the "Mormon" church in 1834, and rose through the office of priest, elder, and seventy. He was a member of Zion's camp, and accompanied Joseph Smith to Missouri in 1834. In 1837 he moved to Missouri to reside and passed through the mobbings and other persecutions endured by the saints in that state. He moved to Nauvoo and left there in the general exodus with the body of his people. In 1846 he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion and was elected captain of Company D. He arrived in Salt Lake valley with the Pueblo detachment of the Mormon Battalion. In 1849, he was called with other to go to Sanpete valley to assist in establishing settlements there. In 1855 he was called to go to Carson valley, Nevada, to assist in establishing a colony, and there remained until the breaking up of the colony in 1857. In 1864 he was called to go to Richfield to take charge of the settlements in Sevier valley, and was ordained a bishop under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, in which capacity he served until 1873, when he was honorably released and moved two miles south of Elsinore, in Sevier county, where he lived through the remaining years of his life.

380He was successively captain, major, and colonel in the Utah Militia, and served as general in the absence of Charles C. Rich. He was successively captain, major, and colonel during the Walker War, while living in Sanpete; and was a major and commanding officer all through the "Utah Indian Blackhawk War." Amid these frontier conditions he reared a large family.

380Daniel C. Davis — Captain Company E. Daniel C. Davis was born in New York, Feb. 23, 1804. He became a member of the "Mormon" church, and was numbered among that people upon their arrival at Council Bluffs. He enlisted in the battalion, and was chosen captain of Company E. He made the march across the continent and became the commanding officer of the company of about one hundred that reenlisted for another six months' service in California. Upon being mustered out of service he came to Utah with other members of the battalion, settling a little south of the town of Farmington, fourteen miles north of Salt Lake City. Davis county was named for him. He remained at his home near Farmington until 1850. That year he started east on personal business, and died en route at Fort Kearney, on the 1st of June.

NOTE

THE CONQUEST OF CALIFORNIA

The conquest of California was easily achieved. Fremont in the north with a company of but sixty Americans, with whom he had been sent to explore portions of New Mexico and California, was opposed in the vicnity of Monterey by a force under General Castro in June, 1846. With the aid of American settlers in the vicinity of San Francisco, Fremont defeated the Mexicans in two engagements, and on the 5th of July, the American Californians declared themselves independent, and placed Fremont at the head of their affairs. [^37] On the 7th of the same month Commodore Sloat, then in the command of the United States squadron in the Pacific, bombarded and captured Monterey. On the 9th Commodore Montgomery took possession of San Francisco. Commodore Stockton arrived on the 15th of July and in cooperation with Colonel Fremont took possession of the city of Los Angeles on the 17th of August. There was, however, a subsequent uprising in the south, an attempt of the Mexicans to regain possession of the country. The attempt, however, proved abortive, and was chiefly noteworthy as occurring at such time as to allow General Kearney's troop of one hundred soldiers, who had marched from Santa Fe, to participate in some of the last engagements—December 16th, 1846; Jan. 8th, 1847—that ended in the conquest and pacification of California.

381A question of authority arose between Colonel Fremont and General Kearney. The former had acted in the self-appointed capacity of "Military Commandant of California." General Kearney refused to recognize him in that capacity since in addition to being Fremont's superior military officer, Kearney also had been instructed himself to establish civil government in California. [^38]

381Fremont refused to obey the orders of his superior, and was ordered home to be tried for his disobedience. He was deprived of his commission; but in consideration of previous service, it was offered to him again, but refused; and Fremont "went again to the wilderness and engaged in exploration." [^39]

Footnotes

"The 'Gold Fever':—When tidings of the discovery reached the east a rapid emigration to California began. From all parts of the United States and from Europe men hastened to the gold fields. Some crossed the continent, some made their way across the Isthmus of Panama, some sailed around Cape Horn. Many died on the Isthmus route. Many perished in the long journey over the plains, where the line of march was indicated by the skeletons of animals. But thousands reached California, whose population rapidly increased. The growth of San Francisco was a marvel. In a short time its population rose to twenty thousand, while a far greater number had flocked to the mining region." (History of the United States, Morrison, p. 328).

---
Notas:
[^1] EARLY UTAH CURRENCY AND COINAGE This was called "The State of Deseret Coinage of Gold," and was meant only for local use. See Note 1, end of chapter on early Utah currency and coinage.
[^2] THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS PERPETUAL EMIGRATION FUND COMPANY A covenant was proposed by Brigham Young in the Nauvoo Temple to the effect that "We take all the saints with us, to the extent of our ability, that is, our influence and our property." (See this History, ch. lxix).
[^3] PHILIP DE LA MARE, EARLY UTAH INDUSTRIAL HERO Section xvi of the act of incorporation of the "Perpetual Emigration Fund Company," and note of obligation signed by those receiving aid from the fund, Liverpool Route, 1855, pp. 10, 11. Also Note 2, end of chapter.
[^4] "On the 3rd of December, 1848, at a meeting held in the fort (i.e. Salt Lake City) fellowship was withdrawn from Lyman Wight, one of the twelve apostles, and George Miller, bishop (History of the Church, Cannon, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, p. 134. Also Millennial Star, vol. xi, p. 246). Lyman Wight was then in Texas, in which state he died March 31, 1858.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 6. Entry for Feb. 12, 1849. "I [Brigham Young] was mouth in the ordination of Elder Rich and E. Snow; Bro. Kimball in the ordination of Elders L. Snow and F. D. Richards." (See also an appended note Ibid, p. 17).
[^6] The minutes of this conference are published in Millennial Star, vol. xii, pp. 131-135.
[^7] The two elders making the purchase describe the tract as follows: "The soil is rich; the water and timber abundant. We are situated about one hundred miles from San Diego, seventy miles from the seaport of San Pedro, and fifty miles from Pueblo de Los Angelos." (Letter of Lyman and Rich, December 10, 1851. Millennial Star, vol. xiv, pp. 75-6.)
[^8] See Lyman-Rich letter, Millennial Star, vol. xiv, p. 75. The Los Angelos Star for May 31st of that year thus announced the arrival of the "Mormons" in southern California: "We learn that 150 Mormon families are at Cajon Pass, sixty miles south of this city, on their way here from Deseret. The families, it is said, intend to settle in this valley, and to make it their permanent home. We cannot yet give full credit to these statements, because they do not come to us fully authenticated. But if it be true that Mormons are coming in such numbers to settle among us, we shall, as good and industrious citizens, extend to them a friendly welcome."
[^9] General Epistle of the Presidency, under date of April 7, 1851, Millennial Star, vol. xiii, pp. 209-216. Also letter of Lyman and Rich, above, note 7. The presidency of the British Mission, under instructions from the first presidency investigated this route of immigration, but it was found impracticable and emigration was resumed over the old route via New Orleans, the Mississippi and the Missouri rivers, and Kanesville. (Liverpool Route, 1855, p. 10). Lyman and Rich in describing the purpose of their settlement on the Rancho de San Bernardino, say: "Our location here is made in view of forwarding the gathering of the saints from abroad, and from Europe in particular, by this route, should we be enabled to settle in this country as we wish." (See letter cited above). Captain Stansbury refers to the same matter: "Measures are being taken to open a southern route, by which the converts coming from abroad may cross the Isthmus of Panama and landing at San Diego may thence reach the land of promise by a comparatively short and easy transit, without being subject to the hazard of a sickly voyage up the Mississippi or to the tedious and expensive journey across the plains." (Stansbury's Report, 1852, p. 139).
[^10] President Young's account of the incident is as follows: "Addison Pratt received his endowments on Ensign Hill on the 21st, the place being consecrated for the purpose. Myself and Elders Isaac Morley, P. P. Pratt, L. Snow, E. Snow, C. C. Rich and F. D. Richards, Levi W. Hancock, Henry Harriman and J. M. Grant being present. President H. C. Kimball, Bishop N. K. Whitney and Elder John Taylor came after the ordinances were attended to. Elders C. C. Rich and Addison Pratt were blessed by all, President Kimball being mouth." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 107). Thus a new sanctity was given to this prominent peak, "in the side of the mountain" group, which overlooks Salt Lake City from the north. A very fine view of this now sacred mountain in the engraving of Great Salt Lake valley from the painting by Mr. Culmer, is published in this volume. The mount is on the upper right hand of the engraving.
[^11] Journal entry Sunday, May 1st, 1842: "I preached in the grove on the keys of the kingdom, charity, etc. The keys are certain signs and words by which false spirits and personages may be detected from true, which cannot be revealed to the elders till the temple is completed. The rich can only get them in the temple, the poor may get them on the mountain top as did Moses." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 608).
[^12] Minutes of the Conference, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 133.
[^13] 13. Report of the Church Historian, 1880, in Utah Pioneers, p. 26.
[^14] Snow's Autobiography, p. 199.
[^15] The pamphlet will be found in extenso in the Biography and Autobiography of Lorenzo Snow, chapters xxi and xxii, where it occupies thirty-two pages. The compilation was made in English and then translated into French by a professor from the University of Paris residing in England and engaged by Elder Orson Pratt to do the work. It appears that it was also later published in Italian. (Snow's Autobiography, p. 215).
[^16] Snow's Autobiography, p. 215.
[^17] These missionary labors are elaborately set forth in Elder Snow's Biography and Autobiography, by his sister, Eliza R. Snow Smith, chapters xviii to xxxi. Also Millennial Star, vols. xii-xiv, passim.
[^18] Report of Church Historian in Utah Pioneers, p. 27. Also Millenniah Star, vols. xii to xiv passim.
[^19] See Howell's letters to Millennial Star, vol. xii, pp. 90-92; also pp. 157-9. Following is Howell's characteristically Welsh report of the event:
[^20] Revs. C. W. Cleve, James Robertson and Philip Carter were the names of the three ministers. Elder Taylor inclosed the challenge to the Mayor of Boulogne with a note asking if there would be any objection to such a meeting. Being informed there would be no objection, the challenge was accepted and the preliminaries arranged. (Life of John Taylor, 1892, Roberts, p. 202).
[^21] It is published in the Works of Orson Pratt, edition of 1851, Liverpool.
[^22] Public Discussion in France, p. 36, in Orson Pratt's Works, edition of 1851.
[^23] A young man of the name of Philip De La Mare of Jersey Island,—of whom more later—contributed a thousand dollars to these publications, five hundred dollars to each of them. This according to a brief Ms., Biography of Philip De La Mare now in possession of his family and submitted to the author.
[^24] History of the Deseret Manufacturing Company, Ms., Philip De La Mare.
[^25] History of the Deseret Manufacturing Company, Ms.; also see Note, end of chapter.
[^26] The history of this initial movement for the manufacture of sugar in the state of Utah by the Latter-day Saints is condensed from the Ms. History of it by Philip De La Mare, now in the possession of his family at Tooele City, Utah, and comprises three ms. papers, that well deserve editing and publishing in a separate brochure.
[^27] The other elders called by this conference to go to England were Job Smith, Haden W. Church, Geo. B. Wallace, John S. Higbee, Jacob Gates, Joseph W. Johnson, Joseph W. Young. (See Minutes of the Conference, Millennial Star, vol. xii, pp. 131-5; also an Epistle of the First Presidency, Ibid, pp. 118-122). "Elder Orson Pratt is doing a great work in England, and the cause of truth is advancing rapidly," said the epistle.
[^28] Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 89.
[^29] See Epistle, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 135, et seq.
[^30] 30. See Pratt's Epistle in Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 246, et seq.
[^31] See testimonial to Orson Pratt on the occasion of his departure for Salt Lake City, given 22nd January, 1851. (Millennial Star, vol. xiii, pp. 43, 44).
[^32] Its title page was as follows:
[^33] Nine hundred and seventy-seven to be exact. (Liverpool Route, Tables, p. 15). The reason there was such a falling off in the numbers emigrated in Elder Richards' administration as compared with that of Elder Pratt's, arose from the fact that about the time Elder Richards' administration began the presidency of the church suspended immigration to America except in cases where the parties could meet the expense of the journey through to Salt lake valley, and as but few could do this, the emigration was very much decreased.
[^34] Demosthenes Orations, Harvard Classics, vol. i, p. 172.
[^35] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 1.
[^36] Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 120.
[^37] "Bishop Hunter is now in Kanesville with $6,000 as the first fruits of the fund which was obtained in the valley by voluntary donations for the purpose of buying oxen, and to take the poor saints from the Bluff's to the Valley in the spring." (Letter from Wilford Woodruf, Cambridgeport, Mass., June 12, 1850, in Millennial Star, p. 62-3.) At the general conference of the church held at Salt Lake in September, 1850, President Young placed the sum at over $5,000: "Last year we did wonders," are his words, "we accomplished a good thing in raising over $5,000, which was sent back to the states for the poor." (Millennial Star, vol. xiii, p. 21).
[^38] Minutes of conference for Oct., 1849: Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 131, et seq.
[^39] See Utah Enactments of the territorial legislature for those years and dates.
