B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

382CHAPTER LXXXVIII

382THE FOUNDING OF MISSIONS 1849-1850

382THE activities of the Latter-day Saints through their church in the period, to which our historical narrative has now brought us, 1849-1850, were in marked but unconscious antithesis to the spirit of their fellow countrymen of the United States. I say unconscious antithesis because neither in the annals of the church in the period referred to, nor in Latter-day Saint literature since that time, do I remember to have seen anything that leads me to believe that the saints were then conscious of the antithesis, nor are they conscious of it now.

ANTITHESIS: THE SAINTS AND THE WORLD

At the time period referred to, the people of the United States—to give the subject no broader scope—were gold crazed, and engaged in a mad rush for the gold fields of California. On the other hand, though some of the representatives of the church were present when gold was discovered in California, were the first to extend the area of that discovery, and had participated in some of the richest finds on the American river, and had even brought considerable quantities of the precious metal to the Salt Lake valley settlements, until gold dust and certain stamped disks of gold, ranging in value from $2.50 pieces to $20 pieces were used as mediums of exchange [^1]—notwithstanding all this, and the further fact that large communities of Latter-day Saints were comparatively adjacent to these gold fields—a very few individuals aside—the Latter-day Saints were unmoved by the gold fever excitement, and were held to the high community purposes of colonizing semi-desert valleys; to gathering their co-religionists from the Missouri frontiers to these same valleys; and to sending the message of the New Dispensation of the gospel to very many nations, and to the islands of the seas.

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC383In the work of gathering their co-religionists from the Missouri frontiers—their fellow exiles from Illinois, too poor to make the journey to the valleys without the assistance of their more fortunate brethren—the saints in the valleys of Utah contributed both time and means on a large scale; but in this they were reminded that they were but fulfilling the obligations entered into at Nauvoo before the exodus began. [^2] It was in this year of grace, 1849, however, that what was known afterwards as "The Perpetual Emigration Fund" was established. It had for its purpose, first, the removal to the mountains of all the worthy Latter-day Saints exiled from Illinois, who desired to gather to the main body of the church, and after that to extend aid to the worthy poor among the saints throughout the world.

THE PERPETUAL EMIGRATION FUND

Perpetual Emigrating FundHCThe "perpetual" feature of the plan was to be maintained by those who received aid from this emigrating fund returning "the same, in labor or otherwise, as soon as their circumstances will admit," and "with interest if required," [^3] in order that the means might be used again to aid others; which arrangement if followed out, with additions made by new contributions from time to time by those philanthropically inclined, was calculated not only to make the fund perpetual but constantly increase its volume, and by that also increase its power for good in its chosen and very necessary field.

OPENING AND STRENGTHENING OF MISSIONS

The measure taken by the church to send forth her message to nations wherein it had never yet been proclaimed, and which activity forms part of the contrast between the saints and the world of that period—the antithesis I am here considering—were astonishingly large, all circumstances considered.

384The choice of three members of the apostles' quorum to form the first presidency, and disfellowshiping Lyman Wight, another of the apostles, [^4] had made four vacancies in that quorum, and these vacancies on the 12th of February were filled by the selection and ordination of Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, and Franklin D. Richards. [^5] This circumstance of filling these vacancies in the apostolate is mentioned preliminary to recounting the missionary movements of the church began in 1849, because these new members are to take prominent part in those movements.

THE MISSION OF ELDERS LYMAN AND RICH TO CALIFORNIA

At the general conference held in October [^6] Charles C. Rich was appointed to join Elder Amasa M. Lyman who had been in California since April previous, (1849) and assist him in the presidency of the mission in western California, as the Pacific slope of the Sierras and the coast line of mountains was then called; and also to succeed Elder Lyman in the presidency of the mission when the latter should return to Salt Lake City. The mission of Elders Lyman and Rich in western California, resulted in establishing something like discipline among the scattered church members on the Pacific slope; and ultimately, about two years later, in the purchase of the San Bernardino Rancho, a tract of country of from eighty thousand to one hundred thousand acres of land in what has since proved to be one of the richest fruit-growing regions of southern California. [^7] In the spring of 1851 a company of about five hundred saints from Salt Lake valley removed to this rancho for the purpose of settlement, [^8] and it was designed also that the immigration from the British Isles should be diverted to that region via the Gulf of Mexico across the "Isthmus of Panama, Tehuantepec or some of the interior routes, and land them at San Diego, and thus save three thousand miles of inland migration through a most sickly climate and country." [^9] It was also intended that this settlement on the Pacific slope would be the western terminus of a line of settlements over the eight hundred miles of country between that point and Salt Lake City.

These several enterprises connected with the opening of this California Mission gave great promise of large success, but a few years later the mission was disrupted by an event, the consideration of which belongs to a subsequent chapter.

ADDISON PRATT'S MISSION TO THE SOCIETY ISLANDS—SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN

"It was moved and seconded that Elder Addison Pratt, James Brown, and Hiram H. Blackwell, go to the Society Islands to preach the gospel. Carried." Such the action of the conference of October 6th, 1849; and shortly afterwards these men left the valley on their way to the islands. Sometime previous to starting upon this mission, Addison Pratt, who had been a faithful elder for many years, but on account of his absence on previous missions in the South Pacific Islands had not had an opportunity to receive the endowment ceremonies of the temple, was taken to the summit of Ensign Peak and there received those sacred ordinances, the mountain being dedicated especially for that purpose. [^10] This action was in harmony with the instructions of the Prophet in Nauvoo when he said that these ordinances of the temple under certain circumstances might be obtained on the mountain top, as Moses did them. [^11]

387This mission of Addison Pratt's was but a renewal of his labors in the Pacific Islands, previously mentioned in these pages; but his second advent among the natives of those islands, with his new companions was not only a renewal but an enlargement of the work which has continued without abatement until the present, resulting in the conversion of thousands of those people to a true faith in God, and an acceptance of the Christ as the Redeemer of the world.

ELDER LORENZO SNOW'S MISSION TO ITALY, SWITZERLAND AND MALTA

It was "moved and carried" by this October, 1849, general conference of the church, that "Lorenzo Snow and Joseph Toronto go on a mission to Italy." And they accordingly went and opened the door of the gospel to that nation. Progress in introducing the gospel into Italy was at first slow, that being a Catholic country, with religious liberty at the time somewhat restricted. Yet within eleven months of his departure from Salt Lake valley, Elder Snow succeeded in effecting an organization of the church in Italy. During a sojourn in London—Elder Snow years before had been a missionary in the world's metropolis—Elders T. B. H. Stenhouse and Jabez Woodward were added to the Italian mission, and these, with Elders Snow and Toronto, for a time constituted the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Italy," which they, on the 19th of September, 1850, in formal manner, and with great rejoicing, organized on the summit of a mountain overlooking the Piedmont valley, a short distance from La Tour, and which they named "Mt. Brigham." About one month later baptisms began, and ultimately resulted in the organization of a branch of the church among the Waldenses at La Tour and vicinity, with John D. Malan, president. Joseph Toronto, a native of Sicily, in the early months of the mission, visited his relatives in that island, but could make no impression with his message.

388Elder Stenhouse was sent by Elder Snow to Switzerland to open the work in that country. He began his labors in Geneva, but later extended them to the city of Lausanne, and succeeded in baptizing a number of converts in both these cities. He was twice visited by Elder Snow, and by their conjoint labors the mission was founded which remains to this day, and is one of the most fruitful missions maintained by the church.

Elder Snow with the assistance of Elder Woodard and Thomas Obray, the latter as well as the former from England, introduced the New Dispensation of the gospel on the Island of Malta, south of Sicily, where a branch of the church was organized in June, 1852. Elder Snow regarded Malta as "a most important field of labor, where a great work may be accomplished, extending to adjacent nations." "The organization of a branch of the church here," he remarks, "would lessen the spiritual fetters of many nations, as the Maltese in their commercial relations are spread along the shores of Europe, Asia and Africa." Indeed Elder Snow from this island raised his eyes to empire conquests in his missionary enterprises. In the October conference of 1849, replying to the question "Can lorenzo Snow dictate [i.e. the work] anywhere but in Italy?" President Young answered: "Yes. The twelve dictate in all the world. We have appointed Lorenzo and Erastus Snow to certain missions, have they a right to go anywhere else? Yes; I wish they would open the door to every nation on earth." [^12] Acting under this extended authorization Elder Snow conceived the idea of introducing the gospel into several countries bordering the Mediterranean sea, including Russia, Turkey, and Spain. Meeting with a brother in England who had lived several years in India, he conceived the idea of opening the door of the gospel in that country by sending him and others with authority to preach the gospel, himself to follow later to give apostolic sanction to their work. Conferring with his fellow apostles in England upon the subject, they sanctioned his suggestions and Elder William Willis was sent to Calcutta, where a few days after his arrival he baptized nine natives of the East Indies. Subsequently he baptized three hundred natives, and raised up a branch of the church among the Europeans of over forty members. [^13] About the same time Elder Hugh Findlay, president of the Hull conference, England, was sent to Bombay, by Elder Snow; and a little later Elder Joseph Richards was sent to the assistance of Elder Willis at Calcutta. It was the purpose of Elder Snow, as already stated, to visit these distant countries himself, and then accomplish the circumnavigation of the globe by returning to Salt Lake valley "by way of San Francisco, San Diego, and the newly established settlements in the valleys of California." [^14]

389Such his plans for the extension of missionary work both for himself and others; but while waiting at Malta for a vessel in which to begin the journey to India he received his release from the church authorities at Salt Lake City, as his labors and influence were needed in Utah. Leaving Elder Stenhouse as president of the Swiss Mission; Elder Woodard, president of the mission in Italy; Elder Obray, president of the mission in Malta; and Elder Willis, president of the mission in India, Elder Snow returned to Utah via England and the United States.

While on this mission Elder Snow published in the French language—much in use both in Piedmont and Switzerland —The Voice of Joseph, chiefly a compilation of historical data covering the rise and progress of the New Dispensation from the beginning of the work, with the visions of Joseph Smith to the arrival of the exiled saints in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. [^15] Later he wrote and published another tract for his mission, The Ancient Gospel Restored, published in a first edition under the title The Only Way to be Saved. [^16] The latter pamphlet was afterwards translated into Bengalee and Hindostanee. Elder Snow also superintended the translation of the Book of Mormon into Italian; and had the happiness of seeing it published in that language before leaving his mission. [^17]

MISSION OF ERASTUS SNOW TO SCANDINAVIA

The conference of 1849 sent the then newly ordained apostle, Erastus Snow, to open the door of the gospel to the Scandinavian countries. He was accompanied from Salt Lake by Peter O. Hansen, a native of Denmark, and Elder John Forsgren, a native of Sweden. In England the mission was joined by George P. Dykes, an American elder, then on a mission in that land. He was lieutenant in Company "D" of the Mormon Battalion during its march to California, it will be remembered, and for a time adjutant to Colonel Cooke. Elder Hansen was the first of the mission to arrive in Copenhagen, where the others arrived on the 14th of June, 1850. By August 12th, Elder Snow baptized in that city fifteen persons, and on September 15th organized a branch of the church composed of fifty members.

"Elder John Forsgren was sent to Geffle, in the north of Sweden, where he baptized twenty persons, for which he was arrested and sent to Stockholm, August 8th, where the was under surveilance of the authorities until September 11th, when he was put on board a vessel for America, but escaped at Elsinore, in Denmark, and continued his labors with Elder Snow.

391"Elder George P. Dykes was sent to Jutland, arriving in Aalborg, October 10, 1851, where, and in the vicinity of which, he labored six months, and baptized ninety-one persons."

391September, 1851, Elder Canute Peterson was sent by Elder Snow from Aalborg to Norway. He baptized a few persons and organized a branch at Bergen.

391The same year Elder Snow sent from Copenhagen to Iceland Elder Gudmund Gudmundsen, a native Icelander, whom he had baptized and ordained to preach the gospel in his native land. Gudmundsen baptized several persons and laid the foundation for subsequent missionary labors there.

391"During Elder Snow's stay of twenty-two months in Denmark about six hundred persons were baptized. The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants were translated and published in the Danish language, as also a number of pamphlets in Swedish and Danish, and the Scandinavien Stjerne founded, which continues the organ of the church in that country to this day." [^18]

ELDER JOHN TAYLOR'S MISSION TO FRANCE AND GERMANY

The October conference of 1849 appointed John Taylor of the quorum of the twelve, and Curtis E. Bolton and John Pack to a mission in France and Germany. Elder William Howell, a zealous elder from Wales, had preached the gospel in various places in the Jersey Islands and on the coast of France and had baptized a few into the church, and organized a branch of the church with six members, on the 6th of April, 1850, at Boulogne-sur-mer, France. [^19]

392PUBLIC DISCUSSION IN FRANCE—BOULOGNE-SUR-MER

392After a brief stay in England Elder Taylor and his associates of the French Mission crossed the English channel, arriving at Boulogne-sur-mer on the 18th of June. A hall was taken in the center of the city and a course of lectures announced which were attended by a number of Protestant ministers of the city, three of whom finally joined in a challenge to Elder Taylor to publicly discuss the subject of "Mormonism." The challenge was promptly accepted. [^20] The Boulogne Interpreter published a condensed report of the discussion, and subsequently, in substance, it was published in pamphlet form and circulated in the British Mission. [^21] The fact that the discussion was published and circulated in the British Mission gives evidence of the success of Elder Taylor's advocacy and defense of the cause he espoused. So vigorous were the replies of Elder Taylor to the charges and arguments of his opponents that the three ministers asked that the discussion close, and while yet speaking the chairman informed Elder Taylor that the other side wished the debate to end.

392The following is the manner of the closing. Elder Taylor was defending the organization and ordinances of the New Dispensation by a comparison of them with the New Testament doctrines, then—

392Chairman (To Elder Taylor)—"Do you wish to continue; the gentlemen on the opposite side are satisfied that it rest here?

392Elder Taylor.—"I certainly did not anticipate this. I expected to investigate their principles further, according to agreement.

392Chairman.—"They do not wish to say any more.

392Elder Taylor.—"If they have no reply to make, of course, I must let it rest." [^22]

393There is one item connected with this discussion that should be dealt with, since it is a matter that the enemies of Elder Taylor have sought to make much of in casting reproach upon his veracity and moral courage. In the course of the discussion his opponents rehearsed writings and lectures of John C. Bennett after he was excommunicated from the church, and accused the saints with practicing the grave immoralities described by this arch apostate. Among the immoralities charged were those of promiscuous intercourse, a community of wives, the keeping of seraglios, polygamy, illicit intercourse, by permisison of the Prophet, and the keeping of spiritual wives.

393To all this Elder Taylor made a general and emphatic denial, and read from an article then published in the Appendix of the Doctrine and Covenants, expressing the belief of the church on the subject of marriage; and inasmuch as he knew of and had obeyed the law of celestial marriage, including as it does a plurality of wives, he has been accused of falsehood, and of seeking to deceive by denying the charges then brought against the church.

The polygamy and gross sensuality charged by Bennett and repeated by those ministers in France, had no resemblance to celestial or patriarchal marriage which Elder Taylor knew existed in Nauvoo, and which he had obeyed. Hence in denying the false charges of Bennett he did not deny the existence of that system of marriage that God had revealed; no more than a man would be guilty of denying the legal, genuine currency of his country, by denying the genuineness and denouncing what he knew to be a mere counterfeit of it.

394Notwithstanding much opposition the mission in France was successful, and branches of the church were organized in Paris, Havre, Calais, and Boulogne. In June, 1851, the branches of the Channel Islands were added to the French Mission. By December, 1851, when a conference was held in the city of Paris, more than four hundred members in the French Mission were represented.

394Besides publishing a number of articles in the current press of France on the subject of his mission, Elder Taylor founded a monthly periodical in French under the title, Etoile Du Deseret, a royal octavo sheet, the first number of which appeared in May, 1851. With the assistance of his associates, Elders Curtis and Bolton, together with the assistance of Louis Bertrand (Elder Taylor's first convert in Paris), and others, he succeeded in translating and publishing the Book of Mormon in French. A few wealthy members of the church in England and the Jersey Islands, [^23] supplied the means, and he made such arrangements with the publishers that when copies of the book were sold a certain amount of the proceeds was set aside for printing another edition, "until 200,000 copies were printed without additional expense."

394Elder Taylor introduced the New Dispensation of the gospel into Germany as well as into France. He preached in the city of Hamburg and organized a branch of the church there in the summer of 1851. Here also he founded another monthly periodical called Zion's Panier, the first number of which issued from the press November 1st, 1851.

395Elder Taylor supervised the translation of the Book of Mormon and arranged for its publication in German. The work was completed and the plates stereotyped; and the text so arranged that the French and German pages would face each other, each page containing the same matter in the same opening, thus admitting of their being bound together in one volume.

395In this work he was assisted by Elder Viet, a German, and a teacher of that language in France, where Elder Taylor found him; by Elder George P. Dykes, who by this time had been transferred from the Scandinavian Mission to Germany; and by a Brother Charles Miller, who was among the first converts in Hamburg.

395The unsettled conditions obtaining in France during the years 1850-1852, hindered very much the progress of the mission to France, especially in the matter of publishing Etoile Du Deseret, those being the years of the revolution which marked the rise to power of Napoleon III; and Elder Taylor found it necessary to leave France in the closing month of 1851.

INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKING TO BUILD UP "DESERET"

In the mission movement of 1849-1850, that sent so many prominent elders of the church into nearly all parts of Europe, President Young admonished them to be alert in the observation of industries and enterprises that might be suitable to establish in "Deseret" (i.e. Utah). In pursuance of this instruction President Taylor took note of the many industries of France. At one time he was much attracted to consider the "colza plant" plantations of that country, as a possible industry for "Deseret." "Colza" is an oil plant, the manufactured product of which, at the time, was used in lamps to illuminate homes in place of sperm whale oil then much used for that purpose. This, after some investigation, was abandoned.

Some three months after completing the translation of the Book of Mormon into the French and German languages, Elder Taylor received a letter from President Young urging him to further endeavors "to get ideas and machinery if necessary to send to "Deseret" to further and build up her industries." [^24] In pursuance of this new urging a visit was made to Arras in the department of Pas-De-Calais in northern France, which had long been a center of the beet sugar industry of France, the little town putting on the market from two to three million pounds of sugar per year. A careful investigation was made of the soil in the vicinity, of the growing plants; and through the courtesy of those in charge the machinery was inspected. The result of the investigation was an enthusiastic conviction that sugar beet manufacturing was a feasible industry for the then distant "State of Deseret," and the idea of the organization of the "Deseret Manufacturing Company" was born. Young Philip De La Mare, who had accompanied Elder Taylor on this tour of investigation, agreed to take one thousand English pounds of the stock ($5,000.00); and Elder Taylor went to England to raise the remainder of the capital among some wealthy gentlemen newly converted to the faith. The stock was enthusiastically subscribed: A Mr. Collinson, a wealthy boot and shoe manufacturer in Liverpool, and for whom John R. Winder, later to become so prominent in the church—no less than a member in its presiding bishopric, and later a member of its first presidency—was then at work, subscribed a thousand pounds. Mr. John W. Coward, a salt dealer in Liverpool, and a recent convert to the church, subscribed a thousand pounds. Captain Russell, a wealthy ship builder of Scotland, also a recent convert, subscribed nine thousand pounds. This brought the capital stock up to twelve thousand pounds, equal to $60,000.00, subscribed by the four stock owners. To Elder Taylor was assigned $10,000.00 of the stock for being the chief mover in promoting the company. Under his supervision the machinery for the sugar plant was manufactured by the firm of Faucett, Preston & Co., at a cost of $12,500.00. It is claimed for it that it was first class machinery, the best that could be obtained, and certainly it was the product of one of the most reliable and foremost manufacturers of machinery in England. Such was its weight that it required over 200 yoke of cattle to haul it across the plains to "Deseret."

DIFFICULTIES ENCOUNTERED

Many were the difficulties encountered in carrying this first sugar plant to "Deseret"—the first beet sugar plant for Utah, and also, so far as known, imported into or erected within the United States. The shipment was made via New Orleans. And here, unexpectedly, was demanded the payment of $5,000.00 government tariff assessed upon machinery. There was no way of avoiding the payment, and it had to be advanced by the importing company, and none of it was ever recovered though strenuous efforts were made to have it refunded through congress. Captain Russell had been sent on ahead of the machinery to secure fifty-two wagons thought necessary for the shipment of the plant across the plains. These were manufactured at Omaha and taken to Fort Leavenworth on the Missouri, to which point the machinery had been shipped on small boats on the rivers via St. Louis. Here it was discovered that the fifty-two wagons manufactured at Omaha were worthless; being too light they broke down under the great weight of the machinery, and had to be abandoned. Those not broken down were given to a number of poor families of saints gathered at Fort Leavenworth to accompany the "sugar train" to Salt Lake valley.

The funds of the company after the payment of the expenses of the journey thus far, the purchase of the worthless wagons, and buying more than four hundred head of cattle for the plains journey, were greatly depleted. But Young De La Mare, who here, at Fort Leavenworth, was supervising the shipping of the sugar plant to Utah, fortunately met one Charles H. Perry, a non-"Mormon," who sold him on credit forty great Santa Fe wagons, of heavy weight, onto which the machinery was loaded. De La Mare also purchased a large amount of flour on credit. This proved to be worthless, filled with worms, and heavily mixed with "plaster of paris," and had to be thrown away, and replaced by another purchase on credit.

BEGINNING OF THE PLAINS TREK

By the 4th of July, however, all the preparations were completed and the journey of twelve hundred miles from Fort Leavenworth to Salt Lake City began. That journey was an epic of itself in industrial enterprise. It may not, however, be minutely followed here. Through the hot summer days the train drew its slow-moving length across the monotonous plains. As the mountain end of the journey was approached winter storms threatened. On the Sweetwater, west of Green river and still some two hundred miles from Salt Lake City the first severe snow storm was encountered. Snow fell to the depth of two feet, and the thermometer dropped to below zero. Here their cattle broke away and scattered in every direction; and while most of them were rounded up some were never found. Provisions ran low while moving through western Wyoming and the camp compelled to kill some of their remaining cattle which weakened their team power and slowed up their speed of travel. At Green river they were fortunate enough to purchase on credit some cattle from trappers—Descamp and Garnier—to take the place of those that had been eaten. Further on in western Wyoming they were met with provisions and other supplies sent to them from Salt Lake City by Elder John Taylor, per Brother Joseph Horn; and they were again met with more teams and food supplies at Fort Bridger, again brought from Elder Taylor by Abraham O. Smoot. With other provisions he brought a load of good flour, and flour at that time was $50.00 per hundred weight. On Mr. Smoot returning westward most of the families traveling with the "sugar train" went on into Salt Lake with him, the machineladened train following more slowly.

399Soon after crossing Bear river the snow was found to be so deep and the roads so rugged that it became necessary that several of the large boilers of the machinery should be left on the roadside until the following spring. The rest of the outfit moved on into Salt Lake City in the latter part of November, 1852, having spent about five months in making the journey from Fort Leavenworth.

THE SUGAR PLANT IN UTAH

The sugar machinery in the first place was shipped to Provo, but later was returned to Salt Lake City where part of the plant was set up on the northeast corner of the temple block, where it made its first run, and its first attempt in molasses making. The whole plant, however, was finally set up about four miles south of Salt Lake City, and its location became known as "Sugar House," a suburb of Salt Lake City. Here the first attempt in the manufacture of sugar in Utah was made. Five thousand pounds of beet seed had been brought from France with the machinery. It was planted for the most part in low lands, and the juice was filled with minerals and was dark. In this the enterprise met its most discouraging incident. When Mr. Mollenhauer, an expert sugar maker who had been brought to Utah to superintend the manufacture of the sugar, saw the state of the juice, he sought for the "retorts" of the plant to clarify and purify the syrup. Then he found that the "retorts" were not with the plant! These "retorts" were the cast iron ovens wherein bones were burned to make the animal charcoal that had to be used to clarify and purify the juice of the beets before it could be granulated and made into white sugar. It turned out that the "retorts" had never been ordered at the English manufacturers of machinery, "as they were not in the plans given by the Arras company" to the proposed enterprise. Mr. Mollenhauer had supposed all the time they had been brought along with the machinery. The discovery was most disappointing and humiliating to the company, and for the present defeating to the project. Mr. Mollenhauer and Mr. De La Mare, however, gathered a few bones together and burned them in a charcoal pit, and from the few bones thus burned they clarified a few bottles of the black beet sirup "until it was clear as crystal;" and "satisfied ourselves" says Mr. De La Mare, who relates the incident, "that the sugar could be made, and all that was needed was an abundance of animal clarifying matter."

CONTRIBUTING CAUSES TO FAILURE

Speaking of the serious mishap of the omitted "retorts," Mr. De La Mare says: "If that had been all the matter they [the retorts] could have been ordered, and imported for next season's use. But the fact was the company received such opposition from quarters not expected, it was broken up and disheartened. They did not receive the aid they had been promised. They had spent all their funds and were heavily in debt. Bills were pressing with no means to pay them; and to clear matters up with those we owed we turned the whole plant over to the church with the understanding that they [the church] assumed the debts that were against us. And that was the end of the matter with the 'Deseret Manufacturing Company'."

400The plant was used thereafter in the manufacture of sirup, chiefly, but beet sugar was not made.

QUALITY OF THE MACHINERY AND WORKMEN EMPLOYED

Some writers treating "the history of the sugar industry" of Utah, have assigned the failure of this first wonderful attempt to produce sugar as due to the "crude condition of the machinery, operated by men wholly unskilful in its manipulations." This Mr. De La mare—really the hero of this remarkable undertaking [^25]—resents, by giving the account of the manufacture of the machinery in England, its cost and excellence; and on the score of unskilled manipulations of the machinery he cites the facts that Elias Morris (an experienced builder) was engaged in Wales to come with the plant and put up the building for the factory. "John Vernon, an expert and competent engineer of Hull, England, and who was engaged in the construction of the machinery (at the works of Faucett, Preston & Co.), was secured to come to Utah and supervise the erection of the same. And Mr. Mollenhauer, an expert sugar maker and refiner was placed in charge of the running of the plant; and to aid him came also John Bollwinkle and a Mr. Connor, who had worked in a sugar factory in Liverpool." [^26]

NOT ALL WASTE THIS SUGAR PLANT ENTERPRISE

This immense undertaking though technically resulting in failure was not all waste. It disclosed two things, yea, three: First, that beet sugar could be produced in Utah; and the present, and for years past, successful manufacture of beet sugar in Utah and throughout the intermountain west, until it is now one of the recognized major industries of that region, is a vindication of Elder Taylor's conviction and judgment that the soil and climate of Utah and the region round about, was preeminently suited to that great industry. Second, this movement is a strong testimony to the financial and moral and physical courage, and to the largeness of views, and the spirit of daring enterprise of the Latter-day Saint men of early Utah. Third, the character of those men, early converts to the New Dispensation in England, both those men who furnished the capital for the sugar company, as also those employed by that company in conveying the plant to Utah, and to carry on its affairs, their wealth and standing, in the financial and industrial world—is a strong refutation of the charge made against the Church of the Latter-day Saints that she gathered her converts from the slums and lower orders of the people in England and other countries of Europe.

ELDER ORSON PRATT'S AND ELDER FRANKLIN D. RICHARDS' MISSION IN THE BRITISH ISLES

Elder Pratt was already in England when the general conference of October, 1849, appointed Elder Franklin D. Richards, of the council of the twelve, and a number of other elders from the Salt Lake valley, [^27] to a mission in England; Elder Richards being selected to succeed Elder Pratt in the presidency whenever the latter should deem it advisable or necessary to return home.

Elder Pratt, it will be remembered, went to England from Winter Quarters in 1848, arriving in Liverpool in the latter part of July, honorably releasing Elder Orson Spencer from the presidency of the British Mission. He inaugurated a most vigorous administration; and some of his most effective and valuable works appeared in the Millennial Star of the next two years. Then appeared his series of articles on Divine Authority, or Was Joseph Smith Sent of God; The Kingdom of God; Remarkable Visions; The New Jerusalem, a consideration of the prophecies concerning the founding of a holy city, Zion, on the American continent; Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon; A Reply to Remarks on Mormonism, being an answer to a pamphlet printed at Glasgow with the "approbation of clergymen of different denominations;" and a philosophical treatise on the Absurdities of Immaterialism.

403After one year and a half of this vigorous work, which extended to preaching the gospel, the organization of branches, the multiplying of conferences, and the emigration of the saints to America, as well as to the publication of the works above noted, he could say on the 15th of March, 1850:

403"It is now over one year and a half since our arrival in this country; during this period, the kingdom of God has rolled forth with unparalleled success; its numbers have increased in Great Britain alone, from about eighteen thousand to nearly twenty-nine thousand souls (increase of 11,000). Two thousand of this number have emigrated to America. The circulation of the Star, during the same period, has increased from thirty-seven hundred to fifty-seven hundred. The great reduction proposed in the price of the Star will, no doubt, have a tendency to soon quadruple its circulation." [^28]

403All these achievements were accomplished before the arrival of Elder Richards, and Elder Pratt makes the above comment on the eve of a departure for the United States on business.

403Elder Richards arrived in England in March, 1850, and during the temporary absence of Elder Pratt assumed the responsibilities of presidency. [^29] The latter part of July Elder Pratt returned and resumed the presidency, [^30] which he held until the latter part of January, 1851. During his administration the Millennial Star increased in circulation from 3,700 to 22,000; by his agency 5,500 souls emigrated from the British Mission to America; and twenty-one thousand were brought into the church. [^31]

After his departure Elder Richards, the appointed president from the October conference of 1849, continued the work in the same spirit. It was during his presidency that the Millennial Star was changed from a semi-monthly to a weekly periodical, in which form it continues to this day (1930). He enlarged and printed a new edition of the Latter-day Saints Hymn Book; published a collection of revelations and writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, known as the Pearl of Great Price, which, with the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants, is now recognized and accepted as one of the volumes of scripture by the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and binding upon the church as authority in doctrine and history. [^32] He published a new edition of Parley P. Pratt's "Mormon" classic, the Voice of Warning; stereotyped plates of the Book of Mormon; founded the Perpetual Emigration Fund in Great Britain, and sent the first company by that agency to the Salt Lake valley. During his presidency about one thousand souls emigrated to Utah. [^33]

Such were the missions appointed by the conference of 1849; such, in brief, the things accomplished by those missions. These achievements are remarkable when all the circumstances are taken into account. The men engaging in these missionary enterprises had been for two years, and some of them for three years, exiles, and forced into camp life in the wilderness, on the frontiers of the United States. Some of them had been in the Mormon Battalion march from the Missouri river to the Pacific coast. Some of them had been leaders in the "Mormon" Pioneer journey, from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake valley. All had been engaged in founding colonies on the shores of the Salt Lake, America's "Dead Sea." Their families were living in log or adobe huts in the newly settled, wilderness homes. Their habitat, when called to these missions, was comparatively adjacent to the gold fields of California, to which vast multitudes were hastening with all available speed; one of the main streams of this gold-mad migration passed through their city of huts of log and adobe homes, and mocked the humble lives they led, derided the faith they followed, the ideals they cherished as evangels of a New Dispensation of the gospel of Christ, and often urged them to forsake this to participate in the world's rush for gold. But these men responded to the call of conceived duty, and became the founders of missions in foreign lands, or enlarged the work where it was already established. They founded periodicals and translated their scriptures and wrote books in languages to them before unknown. They directed streams of emigration to the faraway "state" they and their associates were founding in the Great Basin. Their thoughts were upon big things. They were building the world-wide empire of the Christ. Their vision of their work stretched wide as eternity. They were living in conscious union and service with God. They were his ambassadors to the nations and empires of the world. Their work concerned itself with the salvation of men. Their service was given for the love of God and the love of man. If it be true that occupation influences character (and who doubts it?); that as men's spirits can never be generous and noble while they engage in petty, mean employments; so also they can never be abject and mean-spirited while their actions are honorable and glorious, [^34] then what must have been the greatness of soul, the spirit-expanding power experienced by these men while engaged in these missions of the church, appointed in that year of grace 1849!

406And while considering the account of these missions, the antithesis their work presents to that of the gold-mad migration rushing westward through their settlements, ought not to be overlooked.

NOTES

The first currency in Salt Lake valley would naturally be such United States money as the people would bring with them, which, considering their circumstances when driven from their homes, would not be a large amount. When Captain Brown of the Mormon Battalion returned from California in December of 1847 with the pay of the invalided detachments of the battalion, which he had been authorized to collect, he brought the amount, about $10,000, in Spanish doubloons; and this, for a time, supplied a currency. On the arrival of Brigham Young in the valley in 1848 he brought with him $84 "in small change," and this was distributed in the community; but this was inadequate, soon disappeared, and the people were distressed for want of change. The gold dust brought into the valley from the California mines by members of the Mormon Battalion was inconvenient to handle and there was much waste in weighing it. An effort was made to coin the dust, John Kay being employed to do the work, but all the crucibles broke and the effort failed. President Young then proposed to issue paper currency against the gold deposited until the dust on hand could be coined. The municipal council of Salt Lake City authorized the issuance of such currency, and appointed Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and N. K. Whitney to issue, it. The first bills of one dollar denomination were printed on the first day of January, 1849, and this was the first printing done in Salt Lake valley. [^35] Later Kirtland Bank bills (see ante this History, ch. xxxi) of various denominations, which had been preserved by some of the saints, were brought out, resigned and placed on a par with gold. "Thus fulfilling the prophecy of Joseph" [Smith], said Brigham Young, "that the Kirtland notes would one day be as good as gold" (Journal History of Brigham Young, 1849, p. 3. See also Ibid p. 56). A second attempt at coinage of gold dust was successful, and coins of the denomination of $2 1-2, $5, $10, and $20 pieces were issued. Their fineness was 899.1000, no alloy being used except a little silver. The coinage continued intermittently until as late as 1860.

407An engraving of these several coins from photographs of them is published with this chapter. The characters on the reverse side of the coin of 1860, (around the lion couchant) are in the characters of the "Deseret Phonetic Alphabet," designed by Orson Pratt, and reads "Holiness to the Lord."

407

Perpetual Emigrating FundHCThe first steps in effecting this organization, as stated in the text of this History, were taken in September, 1849, when "the propriety of creating a perpetual fund for the purpose of helping the poor saints to emigrate to this place [i.e. the Salt Lake valley], agreeably to our covenants in the (Nauvoo) temple that we would "never cease our exertions, by all the means and influence within our reach, till all the saints who were obliged to leave Nauvoo should be located at some gathering place of the saints." The council approved this suggestion, and a committee was appointed to raise a fund by voluntary contribution to effect this purpose. "The October conference (1849) sanctioned the doings of the committee," says the epistle of the presidency, bearing date of October 12th, 1849, and appointed Edward Hunter, a tried, faithful and approved bishop, as general agent to bear the perpetual emigration funds to the states, to superintend the direction and appropriation thereof, and return the same to this place with such poor brethren as (it) shall be wisdom to help.

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC"We wish all to understand, that this fund is perpetual, and is never to be diverted from the object of gathering the poor to Zion while there are saints to be gathered, unless He whose right it is to rule shall otherwise command. Therefore we call upon President Orson Hyde and all the saints, and all benevolent souls everywhere, to unite their gold, their silver, and their cattle, with ours in this perpetual fund, and cooperate with Bishop Hunter in producing as many teams as possible, preparatory for next spring's emigration." [^36]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC408The subject at the October conference was brought up by Heber C. Kimball. Referring to the Nauvoo covenant he said: "Shall we fulfill that covenant, or shall we not?" The vote was unanimous to fulfill the covenant. "Now let every man and woman take hold," said Elder Kimball, "and do not send your agent to the states with less than $10,000; and then you will cause a day of rejoicing among the poor in Illinois." The conference appointed a committee of five to gather contributions for the fund. The names of the committee follow: Willard Snow, John S. Fulmer, Lorenzo Snow, John D. Lee and Franklin D. Richards. Bishop Edward Hunter was appointed to be the agent to go east and expend the funds thus raised,—amounting that year to six thousand dollars; [^37] in gathering the poor to the valleys. It was moved by Elder John Taylor that the whole business pertaining to the fund be placed under the direction of the first presidency of the church, and his motion was carried unanimously. [^38]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC408The general manner of using the fund was thus stated in the epistle of the first presidency, under date of Oct. 12, 1849:

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC408"This perpetual fund is to be under the special direction of the presidency at all times, and as soon as Bishop Hunter shall return with the same and his freight of saints to this place, the cattle and teams will be disposed of to the best advantage, and the avails, with all we can add to it, will be sent forth immediately on another mission, and we want you all prepared to meet it and add to it, and so would we continue to increase from year to year, until 'when a nation is born in a day,' they can be removed the next, if the Lord will; therefore, ye poor, and meek of the earth, lift up your heads and rejoice in the Holy One of Israel, for your redemption draweth nigh; but in your rejoicings be patient, for though your turn to emigrate may not be the first year, or even the second, it will come, and its tarryings will be short, if all the saints who have, [means] will be as liberal as those in the valley."

Perpetual Emigrating FundHCThis passage reflects the spirit in which the movement was conceived and in which for many years its work was carried on. In order to give this charity stability and perpetuity its promoters were organized into a company by the provisional government of the "State of Deseret," September 14, 1850; under the style and title of "The Perpetual Emigration Fund Company." This act was legalized by the Utah territorial government, Oct. 4th, 1851; amended by the same authority in January 12, 1856. [^39]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC409The method of making this fund a perpetual one was by requiring those emigrated by the fund to repay into its coffers the amount used in their emigration, "with interest if required;" this to be used again in immigrating others. The first efforts of the Emigration Company was to provide for the gathering of the exiles from Illinois; but the presidency of the British Mission was also authorized to introduced this system for the gathering of the saints out of that country, and by January, 1852, 1,140 English pounds, equal to about $5,700.00 had been subscribed; and in the emigration of that year from England, 251 persons were sent by the "fund." Special arrangements had been made to conduct this company from Liverpool to Salt Lake City; John S. Higbee and Isaac C. Haight having charge of the saints on the ocean voyage traveling in two vessels, the Kennebec, Haight in charge, the Ellen Maria, Higbee in charge; the first sailing from Liverpool in January; the second in February. On arriving in America, these elders delivered their respective companies over to the care of Abraham O. Smoot, who conducted them over the plains and mountains to Salt Lake City, where they arrived on the 3rd of September following. This company was met at the mouth of Emigration canon by President Young, a number of the twelve, and many leading citizens on horseback and in carriages and escorted into the city, headed by Captain Pitts' band. When passing temple square the company was saluted by the firing of cannons; and before dispersing were welcomed in a public address by President Young, in the course of which he said—and from this paragraph may be judged the spirit of this whole emigration movement in behalf of the poor:

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC409"I will say to this company, they have had the honor of being escorted into the city by some of the most distinguished individuals of our society, and a band of music, accompanied with a salutation from the cannon. Other companies have not had this mark of respect shown to them; they belong to the rich, and are able to help themselves. I rejoice that you are here; and that you will find yourselves in the midst of an abundance of the common necessaries of life, a liberal supply of which you can easily obtain by your labor." [^40]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC409In order to comply with the requirements of the 16th section of the act of incorporation, viz, that "all persons receiving assistance from the Perpetual Emigration Fund for the Poor, shall reimburse the same, in labor or otherwise, as soon as their circumstances will admit," the following obligation was drawn up and signed by each emigrant of this first and by members of all subsequent companies:

CONTRACT

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC"Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, organized at Great Salt Lake City, Deseret, U. S. A., October 6th, 1849.

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC409————————————————————————————————————————————————— Agent, Liverpool.

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410We, the undersigned, do hereby agree with and bind ourselves to the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, in the following conditions, viz.—

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410That, in consideration of the aforesaid company emigrating or transporting us, and our necessary luggage, from Great Britain to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, according to the rules of the company, and the general instructions of their authorized agents;

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410We do severally and jointly promise and bind ourselves to continue with, and obey the instructions of, the agent appointed to superintend our passage thither: that we will receipt for our passages previous to arriving at the several ports of New Orleans, St. Louis, and Kanesville;

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410And that, on our arrival in the Great Salt Lake valley, we will hold ourselves, our time and our labor, subject to the appropriation of the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, until the full cost of our emigration is paid, with interest if required." [^41]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410That these obligations were never rigorously pressed—some anti-Mormon" writers to the contrary notwithstanding-is witnessed by the fact that by the year 1880, the unpaid principal of indebtedness to this fund amounted in the church to the sum of $704,000; and if interest on this outstanding indebtedness during the years it could legitimately have drawn interest at the rate of ten per cent—the usual rate in the west previous to 1880—that interest would have amounted to $900,000; making a total of principal and interest of $1,604,000. Yet instead of oppressively seeking to collect this amount, the Fund Company in the year 1880—the year known in our annals as the Year of Jubilee, the church then having been in existence fifty years—one-half of this principal and interest was cancelled, being applied on the indebtedness of the worthy poor, they being wholly set free from the obligation of payment. [^42]

Perpetual Emigrating FundHC410It will be observed that the obligation in the signed contract concerning interest was an agreement to pay interest "if required." When ever there was anything like promptness in the payment of the principal, or where misfortune had been encountered, it was the policy of the company not to require interest; indeed the policy of the company was very generous in respect of the payment of both principal and interest. This fund conceived in such noble spirit was the means of bringing tens of thousands of the landless poor from Europe—for its operations were not confined to America and the British Isles—to the unoccupied lands of the Great Basin, where in a few years, they and their descendants became landed proprietors, independent and prosperous citizens of the intermountain west. The "Perpetual Emigration Fund Company" was dissolved by act of congress in 1887, the congressional enactment known as the "Edmunds-Tucker Act," of which more in the appropriate place.

Philip De La Mare spoken of in the body of this chapter as supervising the transportation of the sugar plant from Liverpool, England, to Salt Lake valley, and more especially from Fort Leavenworth. Kansas, to Utah by a train of ox teams, with from four to eight yoke of cattle to a wagon, in the summer and fall of 1852—well deserves the title accorded him at the head of this note—"Early Utah Industrial Hero."

411Philip De La Mare was of French descent, though born on the Island of Jersey, a British possession, on April 3d, 1823, at Grouville, and in the parish of Grouville, and hence was but 29 years of age at the time of his great American plains adventure somewhat detailed in the text of this chapter. The ancestors of the De La Mares left France and settled in the Island of Jersey in the 16th century, this on account of religious and political unrest in France, due to the religious contentions of that period and the successive revolutions that occurred; the De La Mares were Protestants, a rural agricultural people, and preferred flight and peace to the uncertain conditions prevailing in France in that religiously cruel 16th century.

411Though a peaceful and rural folk devoted largely to agricultural pursuits, there was a spirit of enterprise and adventure accompanied by executive ability of a high order in the race that expressed itself worthily in the family. Abraham De La Mare, grandfather of our Philip, was a government contractor in his day and built the old North Pier, on the Island of Jersey, in the 17th century. Philip's father, Francis De La Mare, was born on the Island of Jersey in 1792. He became also a government contractor and builder, reputed to be of high skill in marine constructive work and of rare executive ability. In 1841 the Jersey parliament awarded the great Victoria Pier on the south coast of Jersey at the contract price of 280,000 English pounds, equal to about $1,400,000 of American money, a sum in those days considered almost fabulous, and represented an enormous undertaking. This contract was successfully completed in 1845.

411A second government contract was awarded to Francis De La Mare by the Jersey parliament in 1847 to construct the Albert Pier, a greater enterprise than the first contract since it was built at a cost of 549,000 English pounds, or about $2,745,000. The contract was completed in five years.

Our Philip's connection with all this: In his childhood, notwithstanding these later great and prosperous contracts of his father's, which enriched the family, he had in common with the children of the Island of Jersey very limited educational opportunities, and at ten years of age began work on a farm, which he followed for two years. Then he was apprenticed for five years, to the blacksmith trade. For this period he received no remuneration whatever. The sixth year he was paid 30 cents a day and the next year 36 cents a day—a journeyman's wages then. This brought him to the year of his father's first contract, and though but eighteen years of age he was put in charge of twenty- nine skilled blacksmiths, whose duty it was to make and keep in repair all the tools necessary to carry on the work of construction of the pier.

412The first contract in Jersey completed, young De La Mare went to England where he obtained employment in the great shops of Abbott and Brown at Van Castle, and assisted in the construction of the "high level" bridge built in five sections across the river Tyne, which has the distinction of being built by Robert Stephenson and stands one hundred and twelve feet above the flood of the Tyne, at New Castle on Tyne. While here young De La Mare spent his spare time and his evenings in acquiring such education as his opportunities afforded. His father's second contract brought him back to the Island of Jersey, to participate in the construction of the Albert Pier, on which five hundred men were employed through five years. Such was the success of the De La Mares that young Philip himself made a clear profit of $10,000.00.

412Here the gospel of the New Dispensation found him through the preaching of Wm. C. Dunbar then on a mission in the Island of Jersey, and later became one of the founders of the daily Salt Lake Herald in Utah. The contact was brought about by the casual remark of one of the blacksmith workmen on the pier, one John LeCocq—that a new religion was being preached in the town. Being religiously inclined young De La Mare attended the service only to become so impressed by what he heard that he was soon afterwards baptized by Elder Dunbar and a week later ordained an elder, that he might preach the new faith. This in 1849.

412In the autumn of 1850 came Elder John Taylor to the Island of Jersey to visit Elder Dunbar and the saints of that vicinity. Here he met young Philip De La Mare and their friendship began. Subsequent visits of Elder Taylor and the completion of the Albert Pier contract resulted in young De La Mare accepting an appointment to fill a six months' mission with Elder Taylor, and he accompanied the latter to Paris. He had already subscribed $1,000.00 to the publication of the Book of Mormon in the French and German languages; near the close of his six months' mission he accompanied Elder Taylor on his visit to Arras to investigate the sugar plants and industry of that region, shared Elder Taylor's enthusiastic conviction that the industry could be successfully launched in distant "Deseret;" he subscribed his $10,000 to the proposed "Deseret Manufacturing Company" and accompanied Elder Taylor to England to raise the rest of the capital, with the result already set forth in the text of this chapter.

412One feature connected with this rich and wonderful experience of Philip De La Mare in connection with this industrial undertaking of conveying a sugar plant to Utah, yea, two features should be noted as follows: first, at the close of his account of the experiment in Utah, when failure had to be admitted not from one but from a variety of sources, and the enterprise which had cost him so much was abandoned under the advice of Brigham Young, he says: "And that was the end of the matter with the Deseret Manufacturing Company. Personally I came out of the affair without a dollar to my name, and had to start life anew, with my wife and children to support."

413A note of melancholy is struck in that remark; but the chapter of Philip's biography thus closed, never affected the pure white light of his faith in the gospel of the New Dispensation, he had received. He built his life anew making his home in Tooele, where he became a prosperous farmer and where he reared a family of patriarchal proportions who were, and his descendents now are, faithful members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. Both sons and grandsons of his are numbered among the faithful elders who have performed missionary work for the church in various lands. The writer labored with one of his sons—a faithful earnest man—in the Southern States Mission, 1884, where he acquitted himself with honor.

413The second feature as following this apparent disastrous ending of Philip De La Mare's experience in this sugar production in Utah, is the fact that its disastrous results never affected his faith in, nor his esteem for President John Taylor. Always, to the close of each life, in fact and in memory they remained friends; and when in the course of events some would attempt to blame "his chief" or censure his judgment or charge him with bringing to Utah and installing faulty or inferior machinery, or defects in his undertaking or that superior workmen had not been secured for the manufacture of sugar, Philip always defended him. "I discover some errors" he wrote to one such critic, "which I desire to correct, in justice to President John Taylor."

413Again in closing a somewhat extended article largely in defense of "his chief," he said:

413"Being the only surviving member of the original company, and as my days may not be long upon this land, I desire to write this much in behalf of the honor of President John Taylor, and the other few men that spent their time and money so freely to try to establish the first sugar factory in Utah."

413Such the friendship—worthy the name! which the gospel of the New Dispensation brings to men.

Footnotes

The spirit in which the call for subscriptions to the Emigrating Fund was responded to in Salt Lake valley may be judged by the following incident related by Lorenzo Snow, one of a committee appointed to collect the fund: "One man insisted that I should take his only cow, saying that the Lord had delivered him, and blessed him in leaving the old country and coming to a land of peace; and by giving his only cow, he felt that he would only do what duty demanded, and what he would expect from others, were the situation reversed." (Biography and Autobiography of Lorenzo Snow, 1884, p. 108).

"April 6th, 1830.—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized on the continent of America containing six members.

April 6th, 1850.—I had the pleasure of organizing a branch of the same church on the continent of Europe containing six members, to be called the Boulogne-surmer branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, under the presidency at Liverpool." Elder Howell also ordained G. Viet, to preach the Gospel in France.

The

PEARL OF GREAT PRICE

Being a

413Choice Selection

413from the

413Revelations, Translations, and Narrations

413of

413JOSEPH SMITH,

413First Prophet, Seer, and Revelator to the Church

413of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

413In addition to the articles now published in the current and authorized version of the book, it also contained a number of excerpts from the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants, including a key to the revelations of St. John (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxvii); commandments to the church concerning baptism (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx); on the method of administering the sacrament of the Lord's Supper (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx); the duties of the elders, priests, teachers, and deacons and members of the church (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx); on priesthood (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv); the calling and duties of the twelve apostles (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107); an extract from the revelation given July, 1830, (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvii); extract from the revelation on the rise of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. i); John Jaques' splendid hymn, entitled "Truth," (Hymn Book, p. 71), and last but not least, the revelation and prophecy on war, (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii). From this enumeration of articles omitted from this choice collection in the later editions of the work, it is seen that nothing is omitted but what is now published in the Doctrine and Covenants or Hymn Book; and the eliminations were made to avoid duplicating the publication of the articles in several books.

413Reverting to the revelation and prophecy on war, I call attention to the fact that the Preface of the Pearl of Great Price bears the date of July 11, 1851, and the work was published in that year; but it was not until the morning of the 12th of April, 1861, that the first gun in the great rebellion was fired on Fort Sumter by General Beaureguard, so that this remarkable prophecy made by the Prophet in 1832 was actually in print and widely published in England and the United States nearly ten years before the war of the rebellion broke out.

---
Notas:
[^1] REFUSAL OF THE GENERAL GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE CIVIL GOVERNMENT IN THE GREAT BASIN History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, p. 133. Later, namely, on the 31st of August of the same year, discussing the same subject, and the action of some of the "great ones at Washington," President Young, referring to the government, said "that if they (i. e. the government) would treat us as they ought, we would fight for them, and do them good; but we never would consent to be governed again by unjust judges or governors, let the consequences be what they might." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 219-220, entry for Aug. 31st. 1846).
[^2] THE VIEWS OF COLONEL KANE ON THE DESIRABILITY OF A STATE RATHER THAN OF A TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE SALT LAKE COLONISTS See this History, chapter lxxiii.
[^3] DR. BERNHISEL'S ACTIVITIES IN WASHINGTON FOR THE ADMISSION OF THE "STATE OF DESERET" History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1846, bk. 2, pp. 136-140, where this letter is published in extenso. Also in this History, Note 5 end of ch. lxxiii. I find reference made to it in a personal letter by Colonel Thomas L. Kane to President Millard Fillmore, in which he quotes the assertions in it respecting the "government" and "the United States' Constitution"—the former as "the best government on earth;" and the latter, as the "most precious among the nations"—in evidence of the loyalty of President Young and the "Mormon" people. Colonel Kane had the letter with him at the time, July 11th, 1851. He regretted that he had never been authorized to make use of it, but he sent a copy of it to President Fillmore, at the same time saying: "I regret that I have never been authorized to make use of the paper, a copy of which I enclose you, itself a copy of a letter to President Polk, written at a time of the severest trial. Its author, I believe, was the talented gentleman whose name was offered to you for the post of secretary of the territory, [Dr. Willard Richards]; but it was signed by Brigham Young, and I know expresses the genuine feelings of his heart. I want you to remark, sir, that this, their first communication with our government after their expulsion from their homes in Illinois, dates of August 9, 1846." (Millennial Star, vol. xiii, p. 344).
[^4] Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 115.
[^5] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1096.
[^6] Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 428, 29 Vol. 8
[^7] See excerpts from President Young's Letter to President Polk; and the whole letter in Note 5, end of chapter lxxiii. As it was in respect of civil government, so also was it in relation to lands. "The Mormons having been driven from what was then the United States," says Bancroft, "it was but natural, as indeed it seemed to be necessity, that they should take possession of such unoccupied lands in the region toward the Pacific as best suited them. But it was not necessary that they should hold possession of such lands in opposition to the government of the United States, as they have been charged with doing." (Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 239-40).
[^8] I charge this to a mistake so far as Lieutenant Gunnison is concerned, because throughout his valuable book, notwithstanding some misconception, I am sure his effort was to be entirely fair to the "Mormon" people, and it is a pleasure to make this acknowledgment. Following is the passage in full referred to in the text. "Though this people fled to a foreign country to enjoy the liberty that persecution denied them in the states, as soon as they found their adopted land had come under the jurisdiction of the stripes and stars—which their own valor had helped to win in the army of the Pacific against Mexico,—they embraced the earliest opportunity of declaring their adherence to the great charter of liberty and national glory, and announced to the world that it was given to our patriot fathers by divine inspiration, and that they will uphold and defend it, though all the original parties shall secede and trample it under foot. They will make no law forbidden by the sacred Constitution of the United States, and predict that the day is not far distant when they shall be solicited by patriotic American citizens, to descend from their rocky fastnesses, to enforce its sanctions upon those led astray by frantic, political delusion and anarchy." (The History of the Mormons, pp. 83, 84). Stenhouse, referring to the passing over of the Salt Lake country from Mexico to the United States, says: "This was unforseen and undesirable to the Mormon leaders, for they could have dictated terms to Mexico and have worked out better the theocratic problem with the relics of the Montezumas, than with the Anglo-Saxon descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers." This cannot be credited to mistake, because Mr. Stenhouse by his association with the leaders of the church during the years of his membership therein, and with his knowledge of "Mormon" history and literature, must have known better.
[^9] Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 431, Congressional Globe, vol. xxi, p. 413. A falsehood once launched into the literature of a subject, how hard it is to destroy it! As late as August 16th, 1909, the Salt Lake Tribune, editorially discussing the intentions of the "Chiefs of the Church," at the time of the exodus from Nauvoo said: "It is well known to be a fact that the idea of the chiefs of the church at the time was to get out from under the flag and establish in the west a kingdom of their own, in which they should reign in independence of the general government."
[^10] Congressional Globe, 1849-50, vol. xxi, p. 92. Also quoted by Linn, Story of the Mormons, p. 430.
[^11] Letter of Orson Hyde from Washington to Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, bearing date of April 26th, 1844, History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 374. Hyde sent two letters to the Prophet about this time, and both are important as dealing with this contemplated movement of the church to the west. (Ibid, pp. 369-376).
[^12] Ante, chapter lxxxii, this History. The treaty which ceded the Mexican territory in the Great Basin to the United States was signed 2nd February, 1848. "This treaty was finally agreed to by both governments, and on the 4th of July following, President Polk proclaimed it." (Lossing's History of the United States, p. 496, edition of 1872). The United States flag was raised in Salt Lake valley at least as early as October, 1847. (See this History, chapter lxxxii).
[^13] See this History, chapter lxxxii.
[^14] This fact was well stated in the debates in the house of representatives by Mr. Brown of Mississippi, who said: "How, sir, in what manner have we governed these territories [New Mexico and Deseret]? We have steadily refused them all governments. The aegis of our protection has not been extended over them. We have sent them neither governors, secretaries, judges, or tax-gatherers. We have taken no cognizance of them, or of their condition. This state of things ought not so long to have existed. It was the solemn duty of congress to have taken these people under its care—to have extended over them the shield of the Constitution—to have given them laws and government. It was a reproach to congress that all this had been neglected or refused." (Congressional Globe, vol. xxii, p. 1415. See also Note 1, end of chapter).
[^15] The word Deseret is a Book of Mormon word meaning "honey bee." It is, of course, the symbol of industry and frugality.
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1849, entry 1st Feb., p. 3. "Monday, fifth day of March" in the text of the Notice is an error, should be the "fourth;" for Monday was the fourth of March that year, and that was the day the convention met.
[^17] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 26. The date on which the committee was appointed is given in the published reports of the ordinances passed by the "State of Deseret" as the 15th of March, and the date of their report as the 18th of March (See Acts, Resolutions and Memorials of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah, 1855, which authorized the publication of the Constitution and the ordinances passed by the "State of Deseret," pp. 44-109). All other original sources of information, however, are in harmony with the date of the text, while the date of the published report, though authorized by the territorial legislature, stands alone.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 26.
[^19] "Referring to the preamble of the Constitution, which was finally adopted, one anti-Mormon writer declares that the purpose was to establish a 'free and independent government,' that it was the intention for it to remain such 'until the new state thus constituted should be admitted into the Union.' In other words, they (i. e. the Mormons) intended through the machinery of this independent state to harass and annoy the government and the Gentiles until the 'saints' could force themselves into the union upon their own terms. * * * The formation of this government for the "State of Deseret" was the first effort to throw off the yoke of the federal government—an effort which has been persistently perserved in to the present time (i. e. 1866)." (The Mormon Prophet, or An Authentic History of Brigham Young, Waite, p. 13).
[^20] Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 19. The Constitution is there published in extenso, copied from the New York Herald. It will be observed that the boundaries proposed for the new state included an immense area of country. It gave the proposed state a bit of sea coast; the whole of the Great Basin; the Green, the Colorado, and the Gila river basins; and was truly an empire in extent. The great area to be included in the proposed state was one of the serious objections against the proposition to admit the state of Deseret into the Union.
[^21] Article viii, Constitution "State of Deseret," sec. 2.
[^22] Ibid, sec. 3.
[^23] The election of the chief and the associate justices indicates an irregularity, since the Constitution provided for the election of these judges by the conjoint vote of the two houses of the general assembly. The other irregularity of procedure consisted in changing the time of holding the election from the first Monday in May to the 12th of March.
[^24] If the election of the bishops of the respective wards, referred to in the text, was intended to be the election of the "inferior judges" contemplated by the state Constitution, then their election marks another irregularity of procedure, as the Constitution declared that the election of the judiciary, except members of the supreme court, should be provided for by the legislature. But evidently there was such unanimity of feeling and action that the people were doing things on the basis of "unanimous consent." Making these bishops civil magistrates was evidently only a temporary arrangement; as also the first election of the supreme court judges since a few months later, after the new government had been more completely inaugurated, Messrs. Daniel H. Wells, Daniel Spencer, and Orson Spencer were nominated as judges of the supreme court; Andrew Perkins for county judge; with Messrs. William Crosby and James Hendrix associate judges; Messrs. Aaron Farr and Willard Snow magistrates. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., for January, 1850, p. 3).
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., pp. 38, 39, entry for the 12th of March, 1849.
[^26] For date of memorial see Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 23. It was afterwards adopted by the general assembly of the "State of Deseret," July of the same year, and forwarded to congress by the hand of the representative of the provisional state government, Almon W. Babbitt.
[^27] Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 24. Italics are mine—author.
[^28] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, pp. 70-71, entry for April 30.
[^29] This more especially on the east and the north; the boundaries were to include all lands "lying between Oregon and Mexico, and between the Sierra Nevada and the 27th degree of west longitude" (i. e. from Washington). (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 72).
[^30] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 73.
[^31] Ibid, pp. 73, 74.
[^32] See Note 1, end of chapter.
[^33] The above was reported by Elder Woodruff and is recorded in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, pp. 161-164. See also Journal of Wilford Woodruff, Ms., entry for 26th of Nov., 1849, in Addenda near close of his Journal for 1849. It appears from this interview, reported by Woodruff, that Colonel Kane had presented even an earlier petition for territorial government for the Salt Lake colonists; and that this petition was tentatively presented in the closing months of President Polk's administration; and then withdrawn because Colonel Kane could not be sure that territorial officers from among the colonists would be appointed, but men from the east who would not be in sympathy with them; from which circumstance he foresaw great difficulties would arise—and they did afterwards arise—and hence he withdrew the petition he had presented. The incident is so important, and as it is one that has escaped our historians, I give the passage from Colonel Kane's remarks, as reported by Wilford Woodruff, at the close of this chapter. (See Note 2 end of chapter).
[^34] The services of Doctor Bernhisel are worthy of special mention, and his own report of them as they are recorded in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., will be found in Note 3 at the end of the chapter.
[^35] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 104.
[^36] The day's proceedings are given at length in the Frontier Guardian of Sept. 19, 1849. As an item of interest it may be added that in a letter from the first presidency to Orson Hyde they speak of having heard of Oliver Cowdery's return to the church, and that his feelings were right; and they express the wish that he might accompany Mr. Babbitt to Washington, and direct Elder Hyde to render brother Cowdery assistance to that end. But doubtless for the reason that Cowdery was absent in Missouri, he did not join Babbitt in this mission. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, p. 105). The letter to Hyde bears date of July 20th, 1849. The presidency also wrote direct to Oliver Cowdery congratulating him on his return to the church, admonishing him to righteousness and informing him of their desire that he should accompany Mr. Babbitt to Washington and endeavor "to obtain the admission of the 'State of Deseret' into the union." (Ibid, pp. 106-7).
[^37] Congressional Globe, vol. xxi, p. 86.
[^38] Ibid, p. 229. On the 23rd of Jan., Mr. Boyd had previously asked unanimous consent to introduce the memorial, the Constitution, and the credentials of the delegate (Ibid, p. 213), but objection being made, the matter went over to the 28th.
[^39] The matter was decided on the 20th of July, 1850. (Congressional Globe, vol. xxii, p. 1413).
[^40] "When, therefore, Mr. Babbitt came here [i. e. to congress] and asked the house to admit him to a seat on this floor, he asked that which his legislative constituency who sent him have not asked. On the contrary, they asked that he should be received after a form of government should have been established [i. e. by congress] and not before." (Speech of Mr. Strong of Pennsylvania, chairman of the committee on territories). In support of which Mr. Strong quotes from the memorial—"and, upon the adoption of any form of government here, that their delegate be received, and their interests properly and faithfully represented in the congress of the United States."
[^41] For the debates on this whole question see Congressional Globe, vol. xxii, passim, but more especially pp. 1413-1423. An effort was later made to secure Babbitt's admission on the same credentials after congress had passed the enabling act (Sept. 9th, 1850) creating the territory of Utah, and fixing its boundaries; but this, too, failed (Ibid, pp. 1811, 1850, 1868); though an appropriation was made by congress allowing him the same for mileage that was allowed the delegate from Oregon—$2,460. (Congressional Globe, vol. xxii, pp. 1779, 1949). Douglas, when presenting the same to the senate, at the request of the House Committee on Territories, named the amount given above, but said it was "for mileage and compensation" (Congressional Globe, vol. xxi, p. 822), to be paid out of the contingent fund of the house. The Deseret News of Nov., 1850, declares that the bill introduced into the house allowing $5 per day and $2000 traveling fees was negatived by the casting vote of the speaker. (vol. i, p. 164).
[^42] Mr. McDonald had previously shown that it would require the cooperation of house, senate and executive to do that.
