B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

414CHAPTER LXXXIX

414THE FOUNDING OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT IN THE GREAT BASIN— "DESERET"—UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHC414THE founding of civil government in the Great Basin by the Latter-day Saints can only properly be understood by viewing the act in the light of the declared intentions and purposes of the church leaders; and accordingly these are here considered.

THE DECLARED RELATIONS OF THE CHURCH WITH THE UNITED STATES

Political and Legal AffairsHCOn the 7th of August, 1846, a council meeting was held at the tent of Geo. D. Grant in the Camp of Israel at which the twelve, Bishop Whitney, et al, were present and met with Colonel Thomas L. Kane who wished to know the intentions of these church leaders respecting their relationship to the government of the United States. To which President Young made the following answer:

Political and Legal AffairsHC414"I informed the colonel we intended settling in the Great Basin or Bear river valley, and those who went round by water would settle at San Francisco. We would be glad to raise the American flag; we love the Constitution of our country, but are opposed to mobocracy; and will not live under such oppression as we have done. We are willing to have the banner of the United States Constitution float over us.

Political and Legal AffairsHC414Colonel Kane said Boggs had been working against us in Washington, and asked whether we should like a territorial government. I replied we should, and that many of our English emigrants would probably settle at Vancouver Island.

414The colonel said that Lord Aberdeen informed Mr. McLance that the British government designed to colonize Vancouver's Island. I said, we would be willing to carry the mail across the continent, and build block houses wherever the United States might wish." [^1]

Political and Legal AffairsHC415I have already published a letter of Parley P. Pratt's in facsimile, [^2] dated at the "Camp of Israel, July 9th, 1846," in which, when urging haste in raising the Mormon Battalion, he said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC415"Be assured it is the mind and will of God that we should improve the opportunity which a kind Providence has now opened for us to secure a permanent home in that country, [i. e. the Rocky Mountains] and thus lay a foundation for a territorial or state government under the Constitution of the United States, where we shall be the first settlers and a vast majority of the people, and thus be independent of mobs and be able to maintain our rights and freedom, and to assist in the redemption of our country, and the emancipation of the world from bondage."

Political and Legal AffairsHC415Again, in a letter to President James K. Polk, dated at "Omaha Nation, August 9th, 1846," and signed by Brigham Young, president; and Willard Richards, Clerk, in a series of six resolutions contained in that letter the first, third, and fifth were as follows:

Political and Legal AffairsHC415(1) "Resolved, That as children of the United States, we have not been disappointed in our anticipation of a brighter day and a more righteous administration in our endeavors for the canvass of his excellency, James K. Polk, to the presidency. * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC415(3) Resolved, That should we locate within the territory of the United States, as we anticipate, we would esteem a territorial government of our own, as one of the richest boons of earth, and while we appreciate the Constitution of the United States as the most precious among the nations, we feel that we had rather retreat to the deserts, island or mountain caves than consent to be ruled by governors and judges whose hands are drenched in the blood of innocence and virtue, who delight in injustice and oppression. * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC415(5) Resolved, That as soon as we are settled in the Great Basin we design to petition the United States for a territorial government, bounded on the north by the British, and south by the Mexican dominions, and east and west by the summits of the Rocky and Cascade mountains." [^3]

Political and Legal AffairsHC416Again, in November, 1846, Elder John Taylor in a letter to the church in England; explaining the prospects for the saints in America obtaining lands in the Great Basin, to which they were removing, it will be seen that the probability of that land falling under the control of the United States was complacently anticipated, and the advantages to the saints considered as great as if it remained under the control of Mexico:

Political and Legal AffairsHC416"When we arrive in California, according to the provisions of the Mexican government, each family will be entitled to a large tract of land, amounting to several hundred acres; but as the Mexican and American nations are now at war, should California fall into the hands of the American nation—there has been a bill before congress, in relation to Oregon, which will undoubtedly pass, appropriating six hundred and forty acres of land to every male settler—should California fall into the hands of the American nation, this privilege will unquestionably extend to that land, for the encouragement of emigration; so that whether it is in the hands of the Americans or Mexicans, still we shall obtain a vast territory [area] of country for nothing, and become the legal proprietors of the soil without any outlay of money or other property—our presence alone gives it value." [^4]

Political and Legal AffairsHC416As early as the 20th of January, 1846, the high council at Nauvoo in a document which, according to the document itself, was unanimously agreed to by all the authorities of the church at Nauvoo, stated:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"We also further declare, for the satisfaction of some who have concluded that our grievances have alienated us from our country, that our patriotism has not been overcome by fire—by sword—by daylight, nor by midnight assassinations, which we have endured; neither have they alienated us from the institutions of our country. Should hostilities arise between the government of the United States and any other power, in relation to the right of possessing the territory of Oregon, we are on hand to sustain the claims of the United States government to that country. It is geographically ours; and of right, no foreign power should hold dominion there; and if our services are required to prevent it, those services will be cheerfully rendered according to our ability." [^5]

MISREPRESENTATION OF THE ATTITUDE OF THE SAINTS TOWARDS THE GOVERNMENT

Political and Legal AffairsHCSuch were the declared purposes of the leading authorities of the church respecting their relations with the United States. They are presented here at such length and from original documents, because the motives and intentions of the saints with reference to their removal to the west have been so grossly misrepresented that I deem it necessary that their purpose should be stated clearly, and placed upon such authority as to be henceforth incontestable. We shall also see in the sequence that their actions were in strict harmony with these early declared intentions. Before confirming that statement by proof, however, let the misrepresentation of their purposes be considered.

Political and Legal AffairsHC417William A. Linn, in his Story of the Mormons, says:

Political and Legal AffairsHC417"We have seen that Joseph Smith's desire was, when he suggested a possible removal of the church to the far west, that they should have, not only an undisturbed place of residence, but a government of their own. This idea of political independence Young never lost sight of. Had Utah remained a distant province of the Mexican government, the Mormons might have been allowed to dwell there a long time, practically without governmental control. But when that region passed under the government of the United States by the proclamation of the treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, on July 4, 1848, Brigham Young had to face a new situation. He then decided that what he wanted was an independent state government, not territorial rule under the federal authorities, and he planned accordingly." [^6]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe unfairness of this representation of the desires of Joseph Smith and his people for "a government of their own," arises, first from the interpretation given to the phrase that such government is to be separate from the government of the United States; and, second, that a state government was only contemplated or desired after the treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo was proclaimed, by which the Great Basin became United States territory. The latter notion is clearly contrary to the evidence in the case, as may be verified by reference to the quotations from original documents already given in preceding paragraphs of this chapter, where the hope is expressed that they could obtain in the Great Basin either a state or a territorial government, "under the Constitution of the United States," even before these Pioneers had left the Missouri for the mountains. And as to the first part of the misrepresentation, that "a government of their own" meant a government separate from that of the United States, that is contradicted from the quotations from the same documents in this chapter, where entire willingness is expressed to have such civil government as they contemplated in connection with and under the Constitution of the United States, which they esteemed as "the most precious among the nations." [^7]

GUNNISON'S ERROR

Political and Legal AffairsHCEven Lieutenant Gunnison in his History of the Mormons, by mistake, puts the declaration of "their adherence to the great charter of liberty," the Constitution, to a time after their "adopted land had come under the jurisdiction of the stars and stripes." [^8]

Political and Legal AffairsHC419On the 22nd of February, 1850, when the question of providing government for the country occupied by the Latter-day Saints was being considered in the national house of representatives, John Wentworth, a representative from Illinois, presented a petition from citizens of Lee county, in his state, asking congress to protect the rights of American citizens passing through the Salt Lake valley, and charging, on the "Mormon" leaders, among other things, "a desire for a kingly government." [^9]

Political and Legal AffairsHCOn the last day of December, 1849, Joseph R. Underwood, of Kentucky, presented in the house of representatives a memorial from William Smith, and Isaac Sheen, the former the brother of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and twelve others, making the charge that fifteen hundred of the "Mormons" before leaving Illinois, had taken a treasonable oath to avenge the blood of Joseph Smith upon the nation of the United States; that they would so teach their children; and would forthwith begin to carry out hostilities against the nation, but "keep the same a profound secret now and forever." [^10] Just how the hostility was to "begin forthwith," and at the same time be kept a profound secret, does not appear. This is not the place for a defense of the saints against this particular charge of Smith, Sheen, et al, it is mentioned here only as a passing reference to the charges of disloyalty made against the saints in those early years of Utah's history, 1849-1850. It will be enough to say now, and the evidence is before the reader in the first few paragraphs of this chapter, that no fact of history is more clearly established than the fact of the expectation and desire on the part of the Latter-day Saints to form a civil government in the midst of the Rocky Mountains under the sanctions of the Constitution of the United States; and that both the desire and expectation existed and was expressed before they arrived in the Salt Lake valley, and therefore before that section of Mexico passed under the jurisdiction of the United States.

ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE SAINTS TO UNDERTAKE A SEPARATE GOVERNMENT

Political and Legal AffairsHCIf the Latter-day Saints did not aspire to establish civil government in the Salt Lake valley in opposition to, or independent of, the government of the United States, the fact that they did not was not owing to any lack of encouragement for them to do so. First there was Senator Stephen A. Douglas who, in April, 1844, on the occasion of Orson Hyde being in Washington to urge congress to pass an ordinance authorizing Joseph Smith to police the Intermountain and Pacific coast west with a volunteer force of 100,000 men, gave the Prophet's representative every encouragement to seize upon the then existing opportunities to settle the saints in Oregon. It should be remembered here that Joseph Smith was seeking authorization to police the west—including Oregon—for the United States! "Judge Douglas says," reports Elder Hyde, "he would equally as soon go to that country without an act of congress as with; 'and that in five years a noble state might be formed; and then if they would not receive us into the Union, we would have a government of our own.' He is decidedly of the opinion that congress will pass no act in favor of any particular man going there; but he says if any man will go and desires that privilege, and has confidence in his own ability to perform it, he already has the right, and the sooner he is off the better for his scheme." [^11]

Political and Legal AffairsHC421Under date of April 8th, 1845, Governor Ford of Illinois, urged upon the church authorities an invasion of Mexico and the establishment of an independent state which Mexico would be too feeble to overthrow! I copy the portion of the governor's letter relating to the proposed western movement of the church, the last paragraph of which, with Governor Ford's signature, being reproduced in facsimile in this chapter from a photograph of the original now in the Church Historian's office at Salt Lake City:

421

EXCERPT OF FORD'S LETTER

Political and Legal AffairsHC"I was informed by General Joseph Smith last summer that he contemplated a removal west and from what I learned from him and others at that time, I think, if he had lived he would have begun to move in the matter before this time. I would be willing to exert all my feeble abilities and influence to further your views, in this respect, if it was the wish of your people.

Political and Legal AffairsHCI would suggest a matter in confidence. California now offers a field for the prettiest enterprise that has been undertaken in modern times. It is but sparsely inhabited and by none but the Indian or imbecile Mexican Spaniard. I have not inquired enough to know how strong it is in men and means. But this we know that if conquered from Mexico, that country is so physically weak and morally distracted that she could never send a force to reconquer it. Why would it not be a pretty operation for your people to go out there and take possession of and conquer a portion of the vacant country and establish an independent government of your own, subject only to the laws of nations. You would remain then a long time before you would be disturbed by the proximity of other settlements. If you conclude to do this your design ought not to be known or otherwise it would become the duty of the United States to prevent your emigration. But if you once cross the line of the United States territories, you would be in no danger of being interfered with.

Political and Legal AffairsHC422I am respectfully your obedient servant,

Political and Legal AffairsHC422[Signed] "THOMAS FORD."

Political and Legal AffairsHC422This suggestion, of course, was never acted upon by the church leaders. On the contrary, as we have already seen, they raised the stars and stripes in the Salt Lake valley while it was yet Mexican territory, at least ten months before the authority of the United States was extended over it, [^12]—although not on Ensign Peak a few days after their arrival, as already set forth. [^13] And what is more, the congress of the United States having not only failed, but actually refused to provide any kind of civil government for the territory—at least for that portion of it east of the Sierras [^14]—ceded to the United States by Mexico, the colonists in the Great Basin themselves took steps to institute civil government; and on the first day of February, 1849, issued the following, signed by many citizens:

Political and Legal AffairsHC422THE STATE OF DESERET [^15]

Political and Legal AffairsHC422Call for a Convention to Form Civil Government in the Great Basin.

Political and Legal AffairsHC"Notice is hereby given to all the citizens of that portion of Upper California lying east of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, that a convention will be held at the Great Salt Lake in said territory, on Monday, the fifth day of March next, for the purpose of taking into consideration the propriety of organizing a territorial or state government.

Political and Legal AffairsHC423Dated at Great Salt Lake City, Great Basin, North America, this first day of February, 1849." [^16]

Political and Legal AffairsHC423In accordance with this call a "considerable number of the inhabitants of that portion of Upper California, lying east of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, met in convention in Great Salt Lake City, on Monday the 4th [^17] and appointed Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, William W. Phelps, David Fullmer, John S. Fullmer, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, John M. Bernhisel and Erastus Snow a committee to draft and report to the convention a constitution, under which the inhabitants of said territory might organize and govern themselves, until the congress of the United States should otherwise provide by law." [^18]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe italics in the foregoing quotation are mine, and I employ them because of the efforts of anti-"Mormon" writers to distort this effort to establish a civil government in the Great Basin as something reprehensible, un-American in fact. [^19] The last clause of the closing sentence, duly noted, certainly corrects such a false impression and proves that the proposed state was merely a provisional government, awaiting either the confirmation of the national congress to give permanent effect to its proceedings, or otherwise to provide for civil government in the territory concerned; in either event clearly recognizing the sovereignty of the national congress in the premises.

Political and Legal AffairsHC424The convention assembled again on the 8th, 9th and 10th of March, when the committee appointed to draft a constitution, through its chairman, Albert Carrington, reported; and after such consideration as could be given the subject in the three days through which the convention met, a constitution was finally adopted. The preamble was as follows:

Political and Legal AffairsHC424"Whereas, A large number of citizens of the United States, before and since the treaty of peace with the republic of Mexico, emigrated to and settled in that portion of the territory of the United States, lying west of the Rocky Mountains, and in the great interior basin of Upper California; and

Political and Legal AffairsHC424Whereas, By reason of said treaty, all civil organization originating from the republic of Mexico became abrogated; and

Political and Legal AffairsHC424Whereas, The congress of the United States has failed to provide a form of civil government for the territory so acquired, or any portion thereof; and

Political and Legal AffairsHC424Whereas, Civil government and laws are necessary for the security, peace, and prosperity of society; and

Political and Legal AffairsHC424Whereas, It is a fundamental principle in all republican governments that all political power is inherent in the people; and governments instituted for their protection, security, and benefit, should emanate from the same—

Political and Legal AffairsHC424Therefore, Your committee beg leave to recommend the adoption of the following Constitution, until the congress of the United States shall otherwise provide for the government of the territory hereinafter named and described.

Political and Legal AffairsHCWe, the people, grateful to the Supreme Being for the blessings hitherto enjoyed, and feeling our dependence on him for a continuation of those blessings, do ordain and establish a free and independent government, by the name of the 'State of Deseret;' including all the territory of the United States within the following boundaries, to wit: commencing at the 33rd degree of north latitude, where it crosses the 108th degree of longitude, west of Greenwich; thence running south and west to the northern boundary of Mexico; thence west to and down the main channel of the Gila river, on the northern line of Mexico, and on the northern boundary of Lower California to the Pacific Ocean; thence along the coast northwesterly to 118 degrees, 30 minutes of west longitude; thence north to where said line intersects the dividing ridge of the Sierra Nevada Mountains; thence north along the summit of the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the dividing range of mountains that separates the waters flowing into the Columbia river, from the waters running into the Great Basin; thence easterly along the dividing range of mountains that separates said waters flowing into the Columbia river on the north, from the waters flowing into the Great Basin on the south, to the summit of the Wind river chain of mountains; thence southeast and south, by the dividing range of mountains that separate the waters flowing into the Gulf of Mexico, from the waters flowing into the Gulf of California; to the place of beginning, as set forth in a map drawn by Charles Preuss, and published by order of the senate of the United States in 1848." [^20]

Political and Legal AffairsHC425The Constitution of this provisional state government, in a general way, followed the lines of the older state constitutions; creating administrative, legislative, and judicial departments and describing and therefore prescribing the limits of each sphere of the government. The electorate of the state to vote upon the Constitution and at the first election was to consist of all white male residents of the state over the age of twenty-one years, exclusive of persons in the military, naval, or marine service of the United States.

Political and Legal AffairsHC425The state officers were to be elected for a term of four years. The judicial power was to be vested in a supreme court, and such inferior courts as the general assembly "shall from time to time establish;" but the supreme court, by constitutional provision, was to consist of a chief justice and two associate justices elected by conjoint vote of both houses of the general assembly, their term of office to be for four years, and until their successors were elected and qualified.

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe Constitution included a declaration of rights in which it was said that in republican governments all men should be born equally free and independent, and possess the right to enjoy and defend their rights of life and liberty; acquiring, possessing and defending property; seeking and obtaining their safety and happiness. All political power was declared to be inherent in the people, and all free governments are founded in their authority and instituted for their benefit; "therefore they have an inalienable and indefeasible right to institute government, and to alter, reform, and totally change the same when their safety, happiness, and the public good shall require it." [^21]

Political and Legal AffairsHC426A state militia was provided for, to consist of "all able bodied, white, male citizens, between the ages of eighteen and forty-five years, except such as are or may be hereafter exempt by the laws of the United States, or this state; and shall be armed, equipped and trained as the general assembly may provide by law."

RELIGIOUS LIBERTY AFFIRMED FOR THE STATE OF DESERET

Political and Legal AffairsHCReligious freedom within the state was emphatically affirmed in the following provision:

Political and Legal AffairsHC426"Section 3: All men shall have a natural and inalienable right to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience; and the general assembly shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or disturb any person in his religious worship or sentiments; provided he does not disturb the public peace, nor obstruct others in their religious worship; and all persons demeaning themselves peaceably, as good members of the state, shall be equally under the protection of the laws; and no subordination or preference of any one sect or denomination to another, shall ever be established by law; nor shall any religious test be ever required for any office of trust under this state." [^22]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe first election was appointed for the first Monday in May, 1849, at the usual places of holding public meetings in the different districts and settlements; "at which time and place the qualified voters shall vote for or against the adoption of this Constitution; and if a majority of all the legal votes shall be in favor of its adoption, the same shall take effect from and after said election."

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Salt Lake City was declared to be the seat of government, until otherwise provided by law.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427While the Constitution designated the first Monday in May as the time for the first election, both for the adoption of the Constitution and the election of state officers, the first election was really held on the 12th of March at the "bowery"—the place of holding religious services—with the following result: The Constitution was adopted and state officers chosen:

Political and Legal AffairsHC427For Governor: Brigham Young.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Secretary: Willard Richards.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Chief Justice: Heber C. Kimball.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Associate Justices: Newel K. Whitney and John Taylor. [^23]

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Marshal: Horace S. Eldredge.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Attorney General: Daniel H. Wells.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Assessor and Collector: Albert Carrington.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Treasurer: Newel K. Whitney.

Political and Legal AffairsHC427Supervisor of Roads: Joseph L. Heywood.

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe bishops of the nineteen wards that Salt Lake City was now divided into, together with the bishops of Weber river precinct; North Cottonwood precinct; North Mill cannon; South [Little] Cottonwood, Big Cottonwood, and Mill Creek, were elected magistrates to serve in a civil capacity. [^24] The number of votes cast for the candidates is given as 674; [^25] and as things were being done practically by unanimous consent, it is supposed that the votes for the Constitution and for all the state officers, were practically the same.

Political and Legal AffairsHC428The constitutional convention which convened on the 4th of March, 1849, before adjournment, memorialized the national congress in behalf of their constituents and the approval of the Constitution they were about to submit for consideration. [^26]

Political and Legal AffairsHC428The Memorial called attention to the fact that congress had failed to provide, by law, a form of civil government for any part of the territory ceded to the United States by the republic of Mexico; that "strong fears have been, and still are entertained from the failure of congress to provide legal, civil authorities, that political aspirants may subject the government of the United States to the sacrifice of much blood and treasure in extending jurisdiction over that valuable country;" that in regard for their own security, and for the preservation of the constitutional right of the United States to hold jurisdiction there, the inhabitants of the "State of Deseret" had organized a provisional state government under which the civil policy of the nation is duly maintained; that there were a sufficient number of individuals residing within the "State of Deseret" to support a state government, thereby relieving the general government from the expense of a territorial government in the region marked off by the boundaries of the proposed state.

Political and Legal AffairsHC"Your memorialists therefore ask your honorable body," concluded this supplementary document to the Constitution, "to favorably consider their interests; and, if consistent with the Constitution and usages of the federal government, that the Constitution accompanying this memorial be ratified, and that the 'State of Deseret' be admitted into the Union on an equal footing with other states, or such other form of civil government as your wisdom and magnanimity may award to the people of Deseret. And, upon the adoption of any form of government here, that their delegates be received, and their interests properly and faithfully represented, in the congress of the United States. And your memorialists, as in duty bound, will ever pray." [^27]

AN UNFORTUNATE ALTERNATIVE—"A TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT" PROPOSED

Political and Legal AffairsHCAs if mistrustful of their application for a sovereign state government and admission into the Union being favorably received, a petition was circulated in April, of the same year, asking for a territorial form of government. Brigham Young records the fact that he signed this second memorial on the 30th of that month, and that it bore the signatures of 2,270 others. [^28] The boundaries of the territory to be included within the jurisdiction of the civil government to be created, followed practically those of the "State of Deseret," though here and there extended to more definite lines. [^29]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe justification for petitioning for so large an area of country is disclosed in this second memorial as being, to use the memorialists own words,—"we have done more by our arms and influence than any other equal number of citizens to obtain and secure this country to the government of the United States: therefore," they continue, "we respectfully petition your honorable body to charter for your memorialists a territorial government of the most liberal construction authorized by our excellent federal Constitution, with the least possible delay, to be known by the name of 'Deseret.'"

Political and Legal AffairsHC430Dr. John M. Bernhisel was given the mission of taking this second Memorial to Washington, there to make application for a territorial government; at the same time being instructed to call upon Colonel Thomas L. Kane and confer with him in the matter. A rather free hand was given to Colonel Kane in relation to the boundaries of the proposed territory; as he was authorized to extend, if consistent, the proposed northern boundary line to latitude 43 degrees north; to modify the eastern line, and the line extending to the Pacific coast as he might find it expedient or necessary. [^30] Dr. Bernhisel was also given a letter of introduction to Senator Stephen A. Douglas, whose aid the Salt Lake colonists solicited, in the name of past friendship for the saints, and associations with the church leaders. [^31] Dr. Bernhisel left on his mission for Washington on the 4th of May, 1849.

Political and Legal AffairsHCSurely in all this procedure to establish civil government the Salt Lake colonists were deferential enough to the general government. Their Constitution for the provisional state and their Memorial accompanying the same breathe no spirit of defiance; and give no evidence of a wish for political separation from the United States. Neither does their petition for a territorial form of government. On the contrary these documents represent the people in the Salt Lake valley as taking the initiative in the matter of establishing civil government only because the general government had failed to provide by law for civil government in any part of that extensive territory ceded to the United States by Mexico; [^32] that, feeling secure in their ability to care for themselves, they instituted this provisional state government for the preservation of the constitutional rights of the United States to hold jurisdiction within its boundaries, and maintain the civil policy of the nation; that if this form of government they presented for a sovereign state in the Union was not consistent with the usages of the federal government, then a willingness is expressed to accept "such other form of civil government," as "the wisdom and magnanimity" of congress "may award to the people of 'Deseret';" only praying that upon the adoption of any form of government for the country they occupied, their "delegates be received and their interests properly and faithfully represented in the congress of the United States."

Political and Legal AffairsHC431If the procedure in all this matter is open to criticism at any point, it would have to be an indictment against the colonists for too great complaisance towards the general government in expressing willingness to accept, practically, any form of government which the "wisdom or magnanimity" of the congress might "award to the people of 'Deseret'." The right of the people to local self-government is a more stalwart right than it is here represented to be by the several actions of the Salt Lake colonists. And while they may have been extravagant in the matter of the extensive boundaries they prescribed, both for the state and the territory they petitioned for, in the matter of asserting the right of self-government for their community, the colonists were over moderate.

Political and Legal AffairsHC431So, too, evidently, thought their friend and political advisor, Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who, when the agent of the colonists, Dr. John M. Bernhisel, accompanied by Wilford Woodruff, called upon him in Philadelphia, strongly advised against presenting the petition for a territorial form of government, on the ground that they would be better off without any government than with a territorial government, unless they could at least obtain assurances that the officers would be appointed from residents of the territory. Following are Colonel Kane's remarks on this head as reported by Elder Wilford Woodruff:

Political and Legal AffairsHC432"You are better off without any government from the hands of congress than with a territorial government. The political intrigues of government officers will be against you. You can govern yourselves better than they can govern you. I would prefer to see you withdraw the bill, rather than to have a territorial government, for if you are defeated in the state government, you can fall back upon it again at another session, if you have not a territorial government; but if you have, you cannot apply for a state government for a number of years. I insist upon it, you do not want corrupt political men from Washington strutting around you, with military epaulettes and dress, who will speculate out of you all they can. They will also control the Indian agency, and Land agency, and will conflict with your calculations in a great measure. You do not want two governments. You have a government now [alluding to the provisional state government of Deseret then in existence] which is firm and powerful, and you are under no obligations to the United States." * * * If you have a state government, men may come along and say, 'I am judge,' 'I am colonel,' 'I am governor,' you can whistle and ask no odds of them. But while you have a territorial government you cannot do it. And then there are always so many intrigues to make political parties among you, the first thing you know, a strong political party is rising up in your midst, selfish, and against your interests." [^33]

Political and Legal AffairsHC432That the violation of these principles and rights of "home rule"—"local self-government,"—discussed above by Colonel Kane, and dear to Anglo-Saxon people everywhere, but doubly dear to Americans, among whom their necessity and their value had been demonstrated in the colonial days of the United States—that the violation of these principles and rights, I say, were responsible for much, and very much, of the difficulties which subsequently arose between the people of Utah and the government of the United States, will be noted in the proper place.

Political and Legal AffairsHC433It is not of record that John M. Bernhisel took any steps to present to congress the petition for a territorial government, naturally the advice of Colonel Kane would deter him from taking such a step; but he became earnestly active in presenting the cause of the "State of Deseret" to the members of both the house and the senate of the national congress. [^34]

Political and Legal AffairsHC433Meantime the provisional state government of Deseret went into effect. On the 2nd of July, 1849, the general assembly met and on the 3rd the speaker of the house, Willard Snow, administered the oath of office to the state officers. On the 5th in conjoint session, Almon W. Babbitt was "elected delegate and representative to congress." The house of Deseret general assembly on the 6th, and the senate on the 9th, "adopted" the memorial to congress, passed by the constitutional convention on the 9th of March previous, praying for the admission of the "'State of Deseret,' into the Union, on an equal footing with the other states;" or "such other form of civil government as congress in its wisdom and magnanimity" might "award to the people of Deseret." Two thousand copies of the Constitution and Memorial were ordered printed. Later certified copies of the Constitution and Memorial together with a synopsis of the proceedings of the general assembly were signed by the secretary of state, Willard Richards, and placed in the hands of the delegate-representative, Almon W. Babbitt, to be presented to congress. [^35]

REJOICING AT KANESVILLE OVER DESERET'S PROSPECTS

En route to the east, Mr. Babbitt went via Kanesville, where, on the 9th of September a public celebration was given in which the saints in the Missouri river settlements participated in a day of rejoicing in anticipation of the admission of the "State of Deseret" into the Union. A long procession marched through the streets of Kanesville, headed by special officers of the day, and Pitt's martial band. Various banners were displayed along the line, prominent among which was one designed and painted for the occasion. The stars and stripes, constituted the background, but with a rising star represented in the center, also a Bee Hive, the emblem of the proposed state, and in the white stripes of the flag were the words:

434"The Constitution of the United States: May it Live Forever;"

434"Liberty and Truth Will Prevail."

434There was music, songs and speeches; a welcome to Mr. Babbit as the representative to congress from the new state; a response by him, which was the principal speech of the occasion. A public dinner was served at which all partook of earth's bounties; many toasts were given and responded to; one of which was as follows:

434"May the new star Deseret be as the star of Bethlehem, a Guide to the Nations."

434The whole celebration ended with a dancing party in the evening. [^36]

434Of course the reason for the rejoicing by the people in the Missouri settlements over the prospect of a state government in the Great Basin, grew out of their intention to migrate to the new state, and their community sympathy with the saints in the Salt Lake valley.

THE "STATE OF DESERET" BEFORE CONGRESS

Political and Legal AffairsHCDelegate Babbitt arrived in Washington in due time, but congress appeared to be in no mood to admit Deseret into the Union of states. Senator Douglas, notwithstanding Colonel Kane's disparaging remark as to his real friendship for the Salt Lake colonists, introduced the memorial of the general assembly of the provisional state, also the "Constitution," into the senate, describing it as an application for admission as a state, "with the alternative of admission as a territory, if congress should so direct;" and moved that the Memorial and the "Constitution" be printed and referred to the committee on territories. This on the 27th of December, 1849. [^37] The same documents were introduced into the house by Mr. Linn Boyd of Kentucky, together with the credentials of the delegate, Mr. Babbitt, which were referred to the house committee on territories, but not until the 28th of January, 1850. [^38]

Political and Legal AffairsHC435The question of admitting Almon W. Babbitt as a delegate from the "State of Deseret," was referred to the house committee on elections, which after some time unanimously reported to the house the following resolution:

Political and Legal AffairsHC435"That it is inexpedient to admit Almon W. Babbitt, Esq., to a seat in this body as a delegate from the alleged state of Deseret."

Political and Legal AffairsHC435The resolution after long debates was finally adopted by a vote of 104 to 78. [^39]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe reasons which prevailed against the admission of the delegate seemed to be (1) that the memorial he presented from the legislature of the provisional state, did not ask for representation in congress until that body had awarded the people of Deseret some form of government; [^40] (2) that Mr. Babbitt came as the representative of a state, but of a state not in the Union; and, therefore, not entitled to representation in congress; (3) congress could not admit the delegate without at the same time recognizing a legal existence for the "state" from which he came as delegate; (4) the boundaries of the proposed state, as described in the preamble of the Constitution, included portions of both California and Oregon. [^41]

Political and Legal AffairsHC436Those who favored the admission of a delegate from Deseret opposed these technical, legal grounds for his rejection, with the broad American principle of the right of a community to representation in legislative bodies where their interests were to be determined; and the right of a community to be self-governing. The case of the delegate and people of "Deseret" was most effectively stated by Mr. McDonald, of Indiana, who said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"The people of that territory had provided a state government—a political organization. They were unquestionably citizens of the United States, and their interests should be promoted here by the admission of an accredited agent, capable of furnishing any information which might be required. * * * But the chairman of the committee on elections says, that because Deseret has adopted a state Constitution, therefore we must not admit her delegate, lest, thereby, we adopt her Constitution also. Does the gentleman believe that the house of representatives can admit a state into the Union? [^42] Can we, by a resolution of the house, admit a state into the confederacy? Surely not. We cannot, then, so recognize the political institutions which these people have formed as to give them more force or effect than attaches to them at this time. Nor do we, by the simple admission of a delegate here to represent the wishes of that people, adopt or recognize any political organization established by themselves. * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC437From the memorial of the legislature of Deseret, which has been read, and from the report of the committee on elections, it seems that these people have acted with great forbearance, prudence, and moderation. For purpose of self-protection, they formed a state government; and they call upon the congress of the United States, either to give them a state government, or to form such other organic law, or regulations as congress in its wisdom may think proper. It is true they did not expect their delegate to take his seat until some form of government had been furnished. But could they have believed that congress would have remained seven months in session and that the question of their organization, would not, during that long period, even have been approached? And may not this unprecedented delay on the part of congress in acting for the people of that territory, very justly have induced a departure from the strict line of instructions which Mr. Babbitt had received, so that he might ask to be admitted at once, to represent the rights and interests of the people who sent him here? * * * He is admitted merely that he may give information as to the people whom he represents—that he may present their petitions here and ask for them such legislation as may be suited to their peculiar wants and condition." [^43]

THE GENERAL JOHN WILSON INCIDENT

Meantime another event had happened which promised for a time to brighten the prospects of Deseret in gaining admision into the Union. This was the arrival in Salt Lake valley of General John Wilson with a small military escort, on a mission to the Salt Lake colonists from President Zachary Taylor.

General Wilson arrived on the 20th of August, 1849. He had been appointed United States Indian Agent for California, by President Zachary Taylor, and was en route to the field of his labors. The private mission from President Taylor in substance he stated as follows: Trouble was anticipated in the then approaching congress which would convene in December. Texas had been annexed and was a slave state. So extensive was her territory, that it was capable of being divided into several states, all of which, of course, would become slave states. The treaty which closed the war with Mexico had resulted in the United States obtaining an immense area of country, out of which new states and territories would be carved; and, of course, there was in prospect a terrible struggle between the pro-slavery and anti-slavery parties, the former seeking to establish slavery in, and the latter to exclude it from the states and territories to be created out of this new accession of territory. It was thought by the administration, that if a large state extending from the Pacific Ocean eastward to Salt Lake—including all the territory ceded by Mexico to the United States—was admitted as one state, leaving the question of slavery to be determined by the people of the state, it would remove the question from congress; and if the proposed state was voted free, as most likely it would be, it would offset the then late accession of Texas and thus calm the rising storm over that question.

438General Wilson stated, that so eager was the president of the United States in regard to the subject, that if he (Wilson) found any difficulty in the way, his instructions were to appeal to the patriotism of the "Mormon" people.

438Elder Taylor, Charles C. Rich, and Daniel Spencer were appointed to confer with General Wilson upon the subject of his mission. The result of those deliberations was a proposal by the people of Salt Lake valley, California agreeing therewith, to form a state unitedly, and continue in that condition two years; after which the eastern part of the state was to be formed into a state by itself.

The dissolution of the one state into two, however, at the beginning of 1851, was to be realized automatically by the fulfillment of terms agreed upon in the Constitution to be adopted, without any further action of congress. "We are to have a general Constitution for two states," writes Brigham Young to Amasa M. Lyman, then in California, "the boundaries of the one mentioned by us, before referred to, [the boundaries of the "State of Deseret" already described] is our state, the other boundaries to be defined by the people on the coast, to be agreed upon in a general convention; the two states to be consolidated in one and named as the convention shall think proper, but to be dissolved at the commencement of the year 1851, each one having its own Constitution, and each becoming a free, sovereign, independent state, without any further action of congress." And "in case of a consolidated state being formed," "the Constitution must, bona fide, remain unalterable during the consolidation. [^44]

THE WILSON PROPOSITION REJECTED BY CALIFORNIA

Elder Amasa M. Lyman was appointed a delegate to cooperate with General Wilson in representing Salt Lake valley colonists to the convention it was proposed to call in California to consider President Taylor's proposition. General Wilson, however, was delayed in his journey by snow storms and did not reach California until late in January, 1850. And by this time California had already held her constitutional convention, adopted her Constitution, [^45] agreed upon the boundaries of the state, and its first legislature, on the arrival of General Wilson, was in session at San Jose, where it had convened on the 15th of December, previous. The proposals which Messrs. Wilson and Lyman were authorized to make on behalf of the people of Deseret to California's constitutional convention, were made by memorial to that state's legislature; but Governor P. H. Burnett reviewed the several proposals one by one in a message to the legislature, condemning them all. Among other things he held that the communities were too far apart to be united even temporarily, and that "Texas and Maine might as well be made one state as Deseret and California. [^46] The legislature, whether in consequence of the governor's views, or for independent reasons, does not appear, refused consideration of the Memorial, and there the matter ended.

STATE vs. TERRITORIAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR "DESERET"—CHANGE OF FRONT

Political and Legal AffairsHCIt may not now be determined what produced the change in the minds of leaders of the Salt Lake colonists in relation to a more earnest desire for a state rather than for a territorial government for Deseret. It may have been the incident of the visit of General Wilson, and the more careful consideration of the advantages of a state government as against a territorial government, necessarily involved in the proposition of a state government in temporary union with California. Or it may have been the views of Colonel Thomas L. Kane upon the subject, expressed to Messrs. Bernhisel and Woodruff and reported to Brigham Young, in which the colonel pointed out the undesirability of a territorial government for Deseret, and the necessity of a state government in order to procure the political peace and happiness of her people. His views have already been stated in this chapter. No matter which of these incidents produced the change—perhaps both were contributing causes—the change came, and that after they had received both the report of California's legislature refusing to consider the question of uniting the Salt Lake and Pacific coast communities into one state; and the views of Colonel Kane, that they had better remain as they were than to accept a territorial government. The general assembly of Deseret passed a series of resolutions to the effect that their agent, Dr. Bernhisel, and their delegate, Almon W. Babbitt, be instructed to withdraw all petitions, memorials, and applications to congress for a territorial government; that they use all proper means to procure an early admission of the "State of Deseret" under the Constitution presented; and representing that it would be far better for the people of Deseret to remain as they were, until congress should see proper to admit them as a state, than to accept a territorial government. [^47]

Political and Legal AffairsHCA committee of three was appointed to draft a letter to accompany the resolutions; [^48] and that communication very ably presented the case for a state government, as will be seen by a few excerpts from it:

Political and Legal AffairsHC442"If congress has passed, at the present session, an act for the organization of a territory called 'Utah Territory,' which they design for us, regardless of all our feelings in the matter, then we have only to yield our quiet acquiescence therein, for the time being only urging the more strenuously the early adjustment of our boundaries, and acceptances of our Constitution and admission. If, on the contrary, they have adjourned, and no action had upon the subject, you will only urge our claims for admission as a state. * * * Had congress given us a territorial organization in the first instance all would have been well: (This doubtless in reference to the application Colonel Kane was authorized to make, see Note 2, end of chapter) for then we could have tracked accordingly. But what else, we ask, during the tardy action of congress, could we have done, than what we have? Should we have lain dormant, and permitted our settlements to be overrun by the natives, and ourselves by the lawless and most blameable inaction and indifference, characterize our lack of interest for the welfare of our existence as an enlightened or civilized people? * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC442Do they object to the name of our state? It is good enough for us, who have to wear it. Do they object to our numbers as being insufficient? Let them take the census! Do they object to our boundaries? Let them leave it to the inhabitants who dwell therein to decide, and if they choose to go into western California, or have a state of their own south of us so let it be. * * * We admit the boundary asked for is large, when we consider the area; but if land susceptible of cultivation, that will admit of a dense population, is taken into consideration, it is not so large; and we are not advised of a single dissenting voice within our proposed boundaries, that objects to being included therein. * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC442What propriety or consistency is there in granting us a territorial, and California a state government? When our actual settlers outnumber them as five to three; and, moreover, those who have been expected to locate there, are at this moment flowing back upon us by hundreds and thousands? We admit the potency of gold; but should not a nation be willing, nay, seek to cherish those who are endeavoring to render her most sterile and barren domain productive; who are extending settlements, making improvements, and developing the national resources of hitherto unexplored regions, thereby adding to the national wealth? * * *

Political and Legal AffairsHC442Let congress give us a government, based as all republican governments should be, upon the authority of the people; let them decide our boundaries in accordance with the wishes of the actual settlers, or residents therein, upon the principle of common justice, according and guaranteeing unto us those rights and immunities only, which are the privilege of American citizens in like, or similar circumstances." [^49]

A TERRITORY, NOT A STATE CREATED BY CONGRESS—UTAH NOT "DESERET"

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe effort to obtain a state rather than a territorial government, came too late, however, even if it could, in any event, have influenced the action of the national congress. The resolutions of the state's general assembly were passed on the 11th of September; the act creating a territorial government for Utah, became a law on the 9th day of the same month and year. The act creating the territory very greatly reduced the area that had been proposed for the boundaries of the state; or for the territory of Deseret. The boundaries were as follows: "All that part of the territory of the United States included within the following limits to wit: bounded on the west by the state of California [which then extended on the east to the 120th degree of west longitude]; on the north by the territory of Oregon [to the 42nd degree of north latitude; on the east by the summit of the Rocky Mountains, and on the south by the 37th parallel of north latitude." [^50] Congress altogether ignored the wishes of the people with reference to the name of the state or territory to be formed by an act of congress. The territory of Utah was created; the boon of statehood was withheld for a half century, less four years.

NOTES

The statement in the text of this History, that the United States not only failed to provide civil government in the Great Basin, but refused to do it for some time, is quite right and provable. President Zachary Taylor in a special message to congress under date of January 23rd, 1850, transmitting certain documents and information respecting the founding of government in the ceded territory, says:

"On coming into office, I found the military commandant of the Department of California exercising the functions of civil governor in that territory; and left, as I was, under the treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, without the aid of any legislative provision establishing a government in that territory, I thought it best not to disturb that arrangement, made under my predecessor, until congress should take some action on that subject. I therefore did not interfere with the powers of the military commandant, who continued to exercise the functions of civil governor as before, but I made no such appointment, conferred no such authority, and have allowed no increased compensation to the commandant for his service."

444This represents the conditions existing as to civil government in the ceded territory up to Jan. 23rd, 1850.

444Later, in the same message, after discussing the matter of California's application for admission as a state, and referring to the part of the ceded territory "uninhabited, except in a settlement of our countrymen in the vicinity of Salt Lake," President Taylor remarked:

444"No material inconvenience will result from the want, for a short period, of a government established by congress over that part of the territory which lies eastward of the new state of California." [^51]

444On the 11th of December, 1848, there had been referred to the house committee on territories, a resolution instructing that committee to "inquire into the expediency of so dividing the territory of Upper California as to organize and extend a district territorial government over that portion of said territory which includes the white settlement in the vicinity of the Salt Lake." Early in January Mr. Rockwell of Massachusetts, made an adverse report on the matter, and the report was laid on the table. So that congress, I say, not only failed to provide civil government for the Great Basin territory, but refused to do so, at least from the acquisition of the ceded territory in February, 1848, to January, 1850, a period of about two years. And since the general government would not take the initiative in establishing civil government, were not the people justified in doing so?

The statement of President Taylor in the above to the effect that no material inconvenience would result from a further delay in the establishment of government by congress in the territory east of California, reveals a lack of information on the part of the president of the actual conditions prevailing in the Salt Lake valley; for in addition to the considerable "Mormon" population in the valley—by this time, 1850, numbering 11,380, there was the annual migration through their settlements of thousands of gold seekers who arrived in the valley with many differences and claims to be settled, and naturally expected in such a community as they found on the shores of the Great Salt Lake and in adjacent valleys, civil government established and courts of law to which they might appeal for a settlement of personal grievances and property rights. And while, if the "Mormon" colonies had been entirely isolated, and had remained exclusively "Mormon," they would have found the organization of their church, and submission to the rulings of its ecclesiastical courts adequate for the maintenance of substantial justice and the good order of society, still a population of mixed faiths, and conflicting interests such as the colonies in the Great Basin were rapidly becoming, could not be expected to be satisfied with the rule of a church in civil affairs; so that there was very great need for the establishment of civil government in the Salt Lake valley, and very material inconvenience and serious complications were likely to arise by the government continuing to delay, even for a short period longer, the establishment of government by congress over the territory in the Great Basin, President Taylor to the contrary notwithstanding.

Colonel Kane said: "You must not commit yourselves to any party, but keep a close mouth with all parties, and the most discreet and wise course must be pursued in order to do anything at all. I will do what I can with the Free Soil party, my father and Mr. Dallas with the Democrats. It will be the most critical congress ever held.

445I applied, according to the wish of President Young, for a territorial government. I had my last sad, and painful interview with President Polk. I found he did not feel disposed to favor your people, and he had his men of his own stamp picked out to serve as governor and other officers, who would have oppressed you or injured you in any way to fill their own pockets. He would not appoint men from among yourselves, and I saw it absolutely necessary that you should have officers of your own people, to govern you, or you were better without any government. I had to use my own discretion, and I withdrew the petition. I am fully decided upon that point—that you must have officers of yourselves, and not military politicians strutting around in your midst, and usurping authority over you. It will not do for you to take up the slavery question, or anti-slavery, or any other side, but be neutral.

Atchison of Missouri, with the Mormon opposing party, will still be your enemies. Thomas Benton has been an inveterate enemy, and still may be. And all the parties, with the whole congress, are a mass of corruption and abomination. They are all governed by party management, without any regard to principle, and if we do anything upon this subject we shall have to enter into wise management. We have to favor the south some, though they are your enemies, and I hate to do it. Parties are all breaking up and new ones are forming, and no man can tell what a day will bring forth. Thomas Benton was the head of your being driven from Winter Quarters, in the Indian country, and Polk favored it, and I could not turn them from their purpose. I told Mr. Polk we should not present any petition while he dictated matters. Benton is still your enemy at heart. Douglas is going down with a certain class connected with him. The time was when he could have done your people much good by merely bearing his testimony of your good character while he was judge in Illinois, and he would not do it." [^52]

446Notwithstanding this opinion respecting Douglas' course, that senator, as will be seen from the text of this History, continued for some time, at least, to assist the agents of the Salt Lake colonists in getting their several measures before the senate.

The doctor arrived at Washington on November 30, 1849, and took temporary lodgings at the National Hotel which he described as "the center of politics, fashions, and folly." "I met General Cass," he remarks, in a letter to President Young, "at his invitation, in the senate chamber on the first day of the session, and was introduced to the vice-president, Millard Fillmore, Mr. John C. Calhoun and a number of other senators. The vice-president kindly granted me the privilege of the floor of the senate during my sojourn in Washington. On the same day I was also admitted to the privileged seats on the floor of the house of representatives. I merely mention these things to show that the prophecy which you delivered in the council in regard to my reception at Washington has been literally fulfilled.

446Since my arrival here I have been quite busy among the grave senators, the impulsive representatives of the people, and other functionaries. I took ground and did not experience any difficulty in making the acquaintance of all the leading men in both houses of congress, and that of a host of other members, though not particularly distinguished, yet highly respectable and influential. I conversed freely with all of them, explained matters to them, and answered objections.

446In the early part of the session I called on the editors of all the leading journals in this city, and furnished each of them with a copy of the Memorial and Constitution of Deseret. I also handed copies of them to members of congress, as well as to heads of departments whenever an opportunity presented itself, and I presume that all have not seen them. I also sent a copy to the editor of the New York Herald, which he published. The Constitution is highly approved by the south, because it contains no clause inhibiting the introduction of slavery, but the free soilers and many other northern members object to it on that ground."

The Doctor gave an account of the presentation December 27th, 1849, of the Memorial and Constitution of "Deseret" to the senate by Judge Douglas, who asked for the admission of Deseret into the Union as a state or for a territorial government, leaving the alternative with congress; and of the presentation of the same to the house by Hon. Lynn Boyd, Jan. 3rd; at which time objection being made they were laid over till the 28th, when they were referred to the committee on territories and ordered to be printed.

447About the same time Senator Underwood presented a memorial from William Smith [this the Prophet Joseph's brother] and Isaac Sheen. A similar document was presented to the house by Mr. Stanton. The wholesale calumny contained in Smith and Sheen's memorial created quite a sensation in both wings of the capitol, and it was referred to the committee on territories and ordered to be printed.

447The doctor, feeling it his special duty and privilege to disabuse the minds of members of congress, called upon them in relation to the memorial and thereby had many opportunities of setting before them the history and belief of the saints. In his interviews with Senator Underwood he refuted the charges of Smith and Sheen as to the disloyalty of our people, their refusal to obey the laws of the United States, etc.

447In conclusion the senator [Underwood] remarked to Dr. Bernhisel, that our people had performed a great deal of work in the valley,—that it was wonderful that they had been able to make a settlement in that remote region and gather so many people there. The Doctor replied, that considering the circumstances under which the settlement was made, and in so short a time, it was certainly wonderful; and added, that whatever else our enemies denied us, they could not deny us enterprise and industry. The senator agreed with this view. The Doctor then asked if it were possible for a body of so depraved, vicious and abominable wretches, as we were represented to be, to perform such wonders as we had performed and maintain a spirit of peace, concord and harmony? The senator replied, "That it was not." [^53]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is block 102 in the original plat, two blocks north and two west of temple square, and is now occupied by Salt Lake city's high school buildings.
[^2] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for March 28, 1851, pp. 14, 15. Doubtless some of these acts were in excess of the provisional state's authority, but they show in what spirit the government ordained by the national congress was received by the general assembly of "Deseret." The time of the final dissolution of the state, as understood by its founders, is perhaps best fixed by the Memorial passed by the territorial legislature—most of the members of the latter body having been members also of the general assembly of the state—asking congress to appropriate a sufficient sum to meet the expenses of the provisional government "from 1849, to September, 1851." The sum asked for was $27,735.35. (Laws of Utah, 1852, first session of the legislature, pp. 223-4). Bancroft says that "for many years the shadow of a state government was preserved, the members of the ideal state assembly, after each session, reenacting and sanctioning by vote and in due form the laws which they had previously passed as a territorial legislature." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 445; also Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 276).
[^3] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., bks. for 1849, 1850, 1851, passim). The enactments of the general assembly creating these counties seem to be lost, as they are not to be found in our Utah annals. The collection of the acts of the general assembly of "Deseret" published by the territorial legislature of 1855 is but a fragment of the legislation of the older state. They publish but twenty-two ordinances in all, whereas, in the History of Brigham Young, Ms. (April, 1851, pp. 16, 17), he gives a list of thirty-two enactments approved by him in the single session of 1850-51. (See History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, pp. 16, 17).
[^4] The act was approved 7th of Sept., 1850, see Liverpool Route, ch. iii. This is one of the acts not listed in the 1855 collection.
[^5] Ordinances, etc., of Deseret, Laws of Utah, 1855, p. 109. The state legislation of "Deseret" has been quite generally censured for the grants made of special privileges to prominent church leaders of timber lands, mill sites, etc.; but the requirements in opening and maintaining roads into the timber belts, and the construction of mills upon the sites granted, resulted in public benefits that offset the special privileges acquired in these instances.
[^6] These methods of procedure and all that pertains to the church ecclesiastical judiciary system are treated at length in this History, chapter lxii.
[^7] See Biography of Daniel Spencer, in L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, pp. 286-9, where instances are cited as occurring in the high council of the church at Salt Lake City, over which Daniel Spencer presided, where Gentiles preferred a hearing before the church rather than the civil courts.
[^8] The term "Gentile," I shall use, and perhaps quite frequently from now on, instead of non-"Mormons," as being a more euphonious term and the one used both in "Mormon" and anti-"Mormon" literature to designate those not of the "Mormon" faith, from those who were members of the church; but it is used in no other sense than this, certainly not as a term of reproach.
[^9] Stansbury and his party of surveyors arrived on the 28th of August, 1849. There was some misunderstanding with reference to the object of the Captain's mission, to which he himself refers in a passage too extended to be used in a footnote, but too important to be omitted from this History, the reader will therefore find the passage in Note end of the chapter.
[^10] Stansbury's Report to the Government on the Survey of Great Salt Lake, pp. 130-1, Executive Document No. 3, special session, March, 1851. After making the above statement relative to the substantial fairness of the courts of "Deseret," he notes what was inevitable under the circumstances, and which he himself admits to be inevitable, viz., the close union of the temporal state government with the ecclesiastical authority. On this head his report said:
[^11] The Mormons, Gunnison, p. 65. Gunnison also notes what under the circumstances was the inevitable mingling of church and state affairs: "We found them in 1849, organized into a state with all the order of legislative, judicial, and executive offices regularly filled, under a Constitution eminently republican in sentiment, and tolerant in religion; and though the authority of congress has not yet sanctioned this form of government, presented and petitioned for, they proceed quietly with all the routine of an organized self-governing people, under the title of a territory [should be 'State of Deseret,' for that was the title of the civil government]. * * * While professing a complete divorce of church and state, their political character and administration is made subservient to the theocratical or religious element. They delight to call their system of government a 'Theo-Democracy;' and that, in civil capacity, they stand as the Israelites of old under Moses." (The Mormons, p. 23).
[^12] The only incident I find in our annals which could be the foundation of this story is one in relation to a Mr. Pomeroy, who arrived in Salt Lake valley in the summer of 1849. He was a merchant from St. Louis, and brought with him a stock of goods to the value of about $50,000. (See letter of John Taylor to the Frontier Guardian of January 9th, 1850); Taylor refers to "Messrs. Pomeroy," as "merchants from Missouri," hence more than one of that name. The Pomeroys were of the number of merchants who found it impracticable to go further than the Salt Lake valley with their loads of merchandise, and hence decided to sell their goods at auction in Salt Lake City, Brigham Young in his History, Ms., under entry of the 12th of August, records the following:
[^13] This in the Proceedings of the United States Senate on the 31st of December, 1849. (Congressional Globe, vol. xxi, p. 92).
[^14] Congressional Globe, vol. xxi, p. 92. It is evident that the tax was more in the nature of a municipal license than a state tax.
[^15] Stansbury's Report, pp. 132-3.
[^16] The following incident is offered in proof: "On the 2nd [Feb., 1849] being informed that Wm. Tubbs was coming into the city with whiskey for sale, I gave an order to Elder C. C. Rich to apprehend him, take the liquor into custody and await a hearing. The next day Tubbs was tried before Bishop Tarlton Lewis and cut off for evil speaking against the first presidency." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., p. 4, Feb. 2, 1849). So throughout the moral law, and trespasses upon decency were promptly punished in the Salt Lake colony even before the state government went into commission.
[^17] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for March, 1849, p. 25.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for May, 1849. The names of all the subordinate officers of the respective companies, etc., are given in detail in the above History, pp. 78-82.
[^19] This History, ch. lxxxiii. See also Liverpool Route, pp. 104-5.
[^20] Stansbury in his Report, 1852, Executive Document, No. 3, of these tribes says: "The native tribes with whom we came in contact in the valley were the most degraded and the lowest in the scale of being of any I had ever seen. They consisted of the 'root-diggers,' a class of Indians which seemed to be composed of outcasts from their respective tribes, subsisting chiefly upon roots dug from the ground, and the seeds of various plants indigenous to the soil, which they grind into a kind of flour between two flat stones. Lizards and crickets also form a portion of their food. At certain seasons of the year they obtain, from the tributaries of both the Salt Lake and lake Utah, a considerable quantity of fish, which they take in weirs or traps, constructed of willow-bushes. Those that we saw were branches from the Shoshones or Snakes, and from the large and war-like tribe of Utahs, which latter inhabit a large tract of country to the southward. They are known among the traders by the designation of 'Snake-diggers,' and 'Utes;' those of the latter tribe, which inhabit the vicinity of the lakes and streams and live chiefly on fish, being distinguished by the name of 'Pah-Utahs,' or 'Pah-Utes,'—the word Pah, in their language, signifying water." (p. 148).
[^21] History of Brigham Young, Ms., May, 1849, pp. 76, 77.
[^22] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 155.
[^23] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, pp. 76, 77.
[^24] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for February, 1849, pp. 24, 25. Others say the number of Indians killed was five, (Whitney, History of Utah, vol. i, p. 423); he also says that Captain Scott's course was not approved. (Ibid). Tullidge's account of this is so defective that he says "none were killed on either side," (History of Salt Lake City, 1886, p. 69).
[^25] History of Brigham Young, Ms., June, 1849, p. 90.
[^26] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 21, cf, also this History, chapter lxxxi.
[^27] History of Provo, in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, for July, 1884, vol iii, p. 234.
[^28] This interview took place on the 14th of June, 1849. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, pp. 89-92).
[^29] See also Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 473.
[^30] Liverpool Route, 1855, pp. 104-5.
[^31] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 313, note; also pp. 473-4.
[^32] Fremont's Report, 1842-1844, p. 272.
[^33] History of Brigham Young, Ms., March, 1850, p. 25; also for the account of the ordination see History of Brigham Young, Ms., 9th of June, 1850, p. 50.
[^34] Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, vol. iii, July, 1884, p. 241.
[^35] Liverpool Route, p. 105.
[^36] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 539.
[^37] Liverpool Route, p. 105.
[^38] History of Brigham Young, Ms., May 13th, 1849, pp. 76, 77.
[^39] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Addenda, note in Feb., entry for 1850, pp. 17, 18.
[^40] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 31st January, 1850, p. 17.
[^41] Stansbury's Report, pp. 148-9.
[^42] Gunnison's, The Mormons, p. 146.
[^43] Stansbury's Report, pp. 149-150. See also Gunnison quoted in note 42.
[^44] Gunnison also refers to this old chief as "the terror of the mountains." "He had long boasted that no single person or trapper could live with him in the valley, and numbers are supposed to have fallen under his rifle." (Gunnison The Mormons, p. 146).
[^45] He is called Stick-on-the-Head. (Whitney's Utah, vol. i, p. 427); I follow the Ms. History of Brigham Young, where the orthography is as in the text above. He is also said to have desired, in this instance, peace, and had come out of the Indian redoubt to confer with the interpreter, Huntington, to that end, when the Indians began firing, and the battle was on." (Whitney, Ibid).
[^46] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, p. 22.
[^47] Stansbury's Report, p. 149.
[^48] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, pp. 22, 23.
[^49] See Addenda note in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, p. 22.
[^50] Stansbury's Report, pp. 84-86.
[^51] Message and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, pp. 26-30).
[^52] Woodruff's Journal, entry for 26th Nov., 1849. The statement is in his Addenda notes near the close of his Journal for that year, under the caption, "Views of Colonel Thomas L. Kane on a Government for Deseret." The pages of that part of the Journal are not numbered.
[^53] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, pp. 39, 40, 41, 42.
