B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

448CHAPTER XC

448THE STATE OF DESERET FUNCTIONING

Political and Legal AffairsHC448NOTWITHSTANDING the national congress did not admit the "State of Deseret" into the American Union, but organized instead therefor a territorial government, the "State of Deseret" continued to be the government of the people in the Great Salt Lake region until the arrival and installation of the territorial officers late in the summer of 1851.

FIRST LEGISLATIVE ACT OF DESERET

The general assembly of the "State of Deseret," on the 28th of March, 1851, took notice of the act of congress for "the organization of the territory of Utah," the mail having but recently been received, that conveyed information of that fact. In joint session the general assembly unanimously resolved that they cheerfully and cordially accept the legislation of congress in the act to establish a territorial government for Utah, welcomed the extension of the United States Constitution over the territory, and advised that all provisional state officers be requested to furnish their territorial successors every facility in their power by turning over public documents, etc. Also they granted "Union Square," in Great Salt Lake City, for the use of public buildings of said territory. [^1] They appointed Governor Young to be their agent to make drafts upon the treasury of the United States for the amount appropriated ($20,000) for said buildings, and directed that measures be taken for their immediate erection, and appointed an architect and superintendent of construction for said buildings. Also resolved that "the provisional 'State of Deseret' finally dissolve on the 5th day of April following, 1851." [^2] As already stated, however, the state government continued to function until the installation of the territorial officers some months later.

THE ENACTMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION OF "DESERET"

Political and Legal AffairsHCDuring its existence of more than two eventful years the "State of Deseret" was a good government, and gave peace, security, and good order to the community, and a fair administration of justice, as we shall presently see. Its general assembly prescribed the boundaries and organized seven counties. These were Salt Lake, Weber, Davis, Tooele, Utah, San Pete, and Iron counties; [^3] also passed ordinances granting charters for five cities; Great Salt Lake, approved January 19th, 1851; Ogden, Provo, Manti, and Parowan, all chartered on the same date, viz, the 6th of February, 1851; also a charter for the University of Deseret, approved February 28th, 1850; an ordinance incorporating the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, approved February 8th, 1851; one incorporating the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, September, 1850; [^4] another regulating the manufacture and vending of spirituous liquors; several ordinances granting the control of timber lands together with canons leading to them, and mill sites to certain individuals; creating the necessary officers for the state and county governments, and prescribing the manner of their appointment or election. In a word the acts of the general assembly extended to all the rightful subjects of legislation, and were quite comprehensive. The last enactment but one was a resolution approved February 12th, 1851, authorizing and requesting the governor of "Deseret" to procure a block of marble from the best specimens of stone that he could find in the state, for a contribution to the Washington Monument, then in progress of erection in Washington, D. C.; and cause the same to be suitably sculptured and forwarded to the Washington Monument committee, as soon as practicable, all expense incurred to be defrayed out of the public treasury. [^5]

THE JUDICIARY OF "DESERET"

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe judiciary of the "State of Deseret" no less than the legislature was useful to the colonists, to the great procession of emigrants that passed through the state, and the non-"Mormons," who, for the time being, made their abode in Latter-day Saint communities. But chiefly was it a convenience and a necessity to the non-"Mormon" emigrants and residents because principally appealed to by them for the settlement of controversies. Appeals to the courts by church members were discouraged by the church leaders, the saints being counseled to settle their controversies by appeals to the ecclesiastical courts and their methods of procedure. [^6] This ecclesiastical procedure, in the main, was satisfactory to the saints; but not, of course, to the non-members of the church, though in some cases there was voluntary submission by choice to the church tribunals [^7] even by the Gentiles. [^8]

Political and Legal AffairsHC451Happily there are Gentile witnesses who had ample opportunity for observation and personal contact with the "Mormon" communities, who testify to the substantial fairness of the "Deseret" courts, officered by leading elders of the Church of Latter-day Saints. Among these were Captain Howard Stansbury and Lieutenant J. W. Gunnison, of the United States topographical engineers, who came to "Deseret" in the fall of 1849, for the purpose of exploring and surveying for the government the Great Salt Lake. [^9] The work occupied them one year, and during that time these United States officers were often in contact with the leading officials of the church and the Latter-day Saint communities, making them competent witnesses of the status of the community in which they thus lived. On the one hand they were removed even from the suspicion of religious sympathy with the saints, because not favorably impressed with their faith or their church; and on the other hand, they were men of such standing and character that they could not be suspected of falsely coloring their reports, neither indeed did there exist any incentive to prompt such coloring.

Political and Legal AffairsHC451Of the administration of justice by the courts of "Deseret," Captain Stansbury reports:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"Their courts were constantly appealed to by companies of passing emigrants, who, having fallen out by the way, could not agree upon the division of their property. The decisions were remarkable for fairness and impartiality, and if not submitted to, were sternly enforced by the whole power of the community. Appeals for protection from oppression, by those passing through their midst, were not made in vain; and I know of at least one instance in which the marshal of the state was dispatched, with an adequate force, nearly two hundred miles into the western desert, in pursuit of some miscreants who had stolen off with nearly the whole outfit of a party of emigrants. He pursued and brought them back to the city, and the plundered property was restored to its rightful owner." [^10]

452After noting that a large portion of the great emigration overland to California passed through the "Mormon" settlements, Lieutenant Gunnison, the associate and chief lieutenant of Captain Stansbury, writes:

"Of the parties organized in the states to cross the plains, there was hardly one that did not break into several fragments, and the division of property caused a great deal of difficulty. Many of these litigants applied to the courts of 'Deseret' for redress of grievances, and there was every appearance of impartiality and strict justice done to all parties. Of course, there would be dissatisfaction when the right was declared to belong to one side alone; and the losers circulated letters far and near, of the oppression of the Mormons. These would sometimes rebel against the equity decisions, and they were made to feel the full majesty of the civil power. For contempt of court they were most severely fined, and in the end found it a losing game to indulge in vituperation of the court, or make remarks derogatory to the high functionaries.

453Again, the fields in the valley are imperfectly fenced, and the emigrants' cattle often trespassed upon the crops. For this, a good remuneration was demanded, and the value being so enormously greater than in the states, it looked to the stranger as an imposition and injustice to ask so large a price. A protest would usually be made, the case then taken before the bishop and the costs be added to the original demand. Such as these were the instances of terrible oppression that have been industriously circulated as unjust acts of 'heartless Mormons,' upon the gold emigration." [^11]

TAXES

Next to the judiciary system of the "State of Deseret," the thing which attracted both large attention and unfavorable comment was the tax that was levied upon goods brought into the state, reports concerning which not only reached "the states," but congress. The charge was made in the senate in connection with a Memorial, before referred to, signed by William Smith—brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith—Isaac Sheen, et al, and introduced by Senator Joseph R. Underwood of Kentucky, who when introducing the above named Memorial also read an article from a newspaper charging that two Indian agents had been seized and subjected to trial by the "Mormons" upon a charge of having been instrumental in driving the saints from the state of Missouri, and were only cleared in consequence of being able to prove that they had not participated in that act. [^12] "It also charged the Mormons with having imposed duties upon all goods imported into Salt Lake region from the United States." [^13] Senator Douglas, who had made inquiries of Mr. Babbitt, the delegate from "Deseret," was able to make answer to Senator Underwood upon the item of imposing taxes upon goods by the Salt Lake community, to the effect that these people had found it necessary, when they had established their government, to provide the means of raising revenue for its support. "The course adopted," Senator Douglas proceeded to say, "was to impose duties on all goods brought in and sold within the city of Salt Lake, whether by Mormons or anti-Mormons, residents or non-residents, all being placed upon an equality." Mr. Douglas also assured the senate on the authority of Mr. Babbitt, that this duty was only levied upon goods to be sold in the city, not upon goods in transit, nor sold outside the limits of the "Mormon" settlements; and the taxation "was merely for the purpose of providing revenue for the support of the government they had established until congress should provide one for them." [^14] In passing judgment, or drawing inferences upon such remarks as this, it should be remembered that the permanent communities of the "State of Deseret" were nearly exclusively of one religious faith; that conditions were very primitive and community life very simple; that almost absolute unity prevailed, there being perfect accord between the initiative of the leaders and the acquiescence of the people; that things were being done practically by unanimous consent; hence whether acting through the agency of the church or that of the state, the common welfare of the community being the end in view, it mattered little to the people which agency was used, as they were both state and church; and therefore it is not to be marveled at if the nice distinctions between the funds of the church and state, and even the spheres of church and state, were not as nicely observed as would be expected in the midst of a more complex community life, where men were of variant religious faiths, and opposing political parties.

455Fortunately upon this subject also Captain Stansbury has an enlightening passage. After describing the tithing system of the church, and saying that "the treasures of the church" were "freely devoted when necessary, to the promotion of the temporal prosperity of the body politic," he then adds: [^15]

455"A tax is also laid upon property as with us, which is levied upon all, both 'saint' and 'gentile,' and which constitutes the revenue of the civil government. All goods brought into the city, pay as the price of a license, a duty of one per cent, except spirituous liquors, for which one-half of the price at which they are sold is demanded: the object of this last impost being avowedly to discourage the introduction of that article among them. It has, indeed, operated to a great extent as a prohibition, the importer, to save himself from loss, having to double the price at which he could otherwise have afforded to sell. The result of this policy was, when we were there, to bring up the price of brandy, to twelve dollars per gallon, of which the authorities took six; and of whisky to eight dollars, of which they collected four dollars." [^16]

From the first there was manifested a strong determination on the part of the colonists to suppress traffic in liquor; [^17] and when from apparent force of circumstances it had to be tolerated, then the policy was to severely regulate the disposition of it.

MILITIA: PERPETUATION OF THE NAUVOO LEGION

A military organization was early effected, even before the "State of Deseret" existed, namely, on the 3rd of March, 1849. A direction was given to have "all able bodied men over fourteen and under seventy-five years of age in the valley to constitute the military force of the people, under the name of the Nauvoo Legion." But after the provisional state legislature came into existence a reorganization of this "legion" was effected in harmony with a report made by the legislative assembly's committee on military affairs, viz, Charles C. Rich and Daniel H. Wells; in which it was provided that the legion should consist of two cohorts of four regiments in each cohort; two battalions in a regiment; five companies in a battalion. The legion itself to be commanded by a major general. The first cohort was to consist of mounted men, commanded by a brigadier general; and the second cohort to consist of footmen also commanded by a brigadier general. [^18] This foreshadowed a rather extensive military organization, and later the outlines of it were filled out; but during the existence of the "State of Deseret," eleven companies comprised its utmost strength; six horse companies, and five foot companies. Daniel H. Wells was elected major general of the legion; Jedediah M. Grant, brigadier general of the first cohort; and Horace S. Eldredge, brigadier general of the second cohort. [^19]

"DESERET'S" INDIAN POLICY AND WARS

Indian AffairsHCThe "State of Deseret" also had its Indian troubles and carried on successful expeditions against hostile tribes. As noted in a previous chapter the Salt Lake region was occupied by two hostile tribes of Indians at the advent of the "Mormon" Pioneers—the "Utahs," or "Utes," and the "Shoshones" (or Snake Diggers), intermittently at war with each other. [^20] It so happened that the settlement of the saints in Salt Lake valley was on the border line between these tribes, the Shoshones extending north and westward, and the Utahs to the south, and westward to California. From the views entertained by the Latter-day Saints respecting the Indians—knowing their origin, as given in the Book of Mormon, and entertaining high hopes for the future of the race, because of what the Book of Mormon prophecies have declared concerning their ultimate redemption—it could not be otherwise than that the attitude of the Latter-day Saint colonists would be sympathetic towards their red brethren. Still it was no part of the policy of Brigham Young and the church leaders to be unduly familiar or treat as equals these degraded tribes of the Salt Lake region. [^21] President Young was too deeply read in human nature generally, and in Indian nature in particular, to think that the Indians could be helped by the whites condescending to approach in any degree their level of life and manners, or by receiving them on terms of equality. "I am opposed to James Emmett's method of converting Indians," said President Young. When Emmett and Bishop Miller on the outward journey from the Missouri had come in contact with the Pawnee Indians about Loupe Fork, and thence went to the Running Water on the Missouri to winter with the Indians, in 1846-7, "Emmett and his company never washed hands or faces for months, and in other things conformed to the Indian manner of life, a course which they supposed would win them favor with the Indians." [^22]

Indian AffairsHC458Again, in a letter to Isaac Higbee under date of October 18, 1849, in reply to a communication detailing certain peace overtures just completed with the Indians in Utah valley, yet complaining of Indian thefts and intrusions, President Young, after cautioning the colonists at Fort Utah to make every provision against treacherous surprise, gave the colonists this instruction and reproof, which indicates his whole policy with respect to whites and Indians:

Indian AffairsHC458"Stockade your fort and attend to your own affairs, and let the Indians take care of theirs. Let your women and children stay in the fort, and the Indians stay out; but, while you mix with them promiscuously, you must continue to receive such treatment from them which they please to give. This is what we have told you continually, and you will find it true.

Indian AffairsHC458Let any man, or company of men, be familiar with Indians, and they will be more familiar; and the more familiar, you will find the less influence you will have with them. If you would have dominion over them, for their good, which is the duty of the elders, you must not treat them as your equals. You cannot exalt them by this process. If they [consider that they] are your equals, you cannot raise them up to you.

Indian AffairsHCYou have been too familiar with them, your children have mixed promiscuously with them, they have been free in your houses, and some of the brethren have spent too much time in smoking and chatting with them; and instead of teaching them to labor, such a course has encouraged them in idleness and ignorance, the effects of which you begin to feel.

Indian AffairsHC459You must now rid yourselves of these evils the best way you can, by righting up everything and doing your first works, or probably what you would have done at first, if multiplied cares had not rested upon you, as is common in all new settlements.

Indian AffairsHC459A steady and upright and persevering course may yet restore or gain the confidence of the Indians, and you be safe." [^23]

Indian AffairsHC459Brigham Young had no illusions respecting the Indians, and what might be expected of them from the "Mormon" point of view. "As for the old Indians now alive entering into the new and everlasting covenant," he remarked on one occasion, "they will not do it. * * * How long does it take to train a white man? We have been training eighteen years; and how much longer an Indian? They will not be converted in many years." [^24]

Indian AffairsHC459Naturally this aloofness from the Indians—in such marked contrast to the course of the "trappers" and "pathfinders" with whom the natives had come in contact, while ultimately to result in the best good both of the white settlers and the red man, led at first to estrangement of the Indians, thence to depredations on their part against those whom they doubtless regarded as intruders, and so the early Indian wars.

FIRST EXPEDITION AGAINST THE INDIANS

Indian AffairsHCThe expeditions against the Indians under the authority of the "State of Deseret" were three in number. The first in February and March, 1849. Late in February of that year, when a report reached the principal colony that Indians from Utah valley had run off fourteen head of horses from Tooele valley, some twenty miles west of Salt Lake City; and it was also reported that they had been stealing and killing cattle at other places. Whereupon Captain John Scott and forty men of the state militia started in pursuit. The small predatory band was located with the aid of a friendly Indian, the son of "Little Chief," a Ute, on a small stream where it emerges from the base of the Wasatch Mountains. The militia company divided into four parties and surrounded the Indian encampment during the night.

Indian AffairsHC460The fight next morning took place in the presence of chief "Stick-on-the-Head" and his band of Timpany Utes, who from a table land overlooking the scene of conflict shouted encouragement to the Indians, and themselves giving evidence of willingness to fight. Fortunately, however, this band did not attempt to assist the other Indians further than shouting encouragement and bidding them to come in their direction in their flight. Four of the Indian men of the thieving party were killed and their women and children, fourteen in all, were sent to their relatives among the Snake Indians. [^25] The stream on which this incident took place was, from the foregoing circumstance, called "Battle Creek." The thriving town of Pleasant Grove, just west of the table land, now utilizes the stream for irrigation purposes.

CHIEF WALKER

Indian AffairsHCIn the summer of 1849, between the first and second Indian disturbance of this year, Walker, the Utah Indian chief, and twelve of his tribe held a notable interview with Brigham Young and other high church authorities at Salt Lake City. The interview was preceded with the Indian ceremony of smoking the "Peace Pipe," and the interesting fact was very clearly established that these mountain tribes, as well as many other native American tribes, were "sun worshippers;" following is the evidence as related by President Young: "When Walker had filled his pipe [preceding the interview], he offered the Lord the first smoke, pointing the pipe and stepping towards the sun. Walker then smoked it and passed it round the ring [the smokers are always seated in a circle] by the right hand of Heber C. Kimball, who smoked. It was then passed by the left to me and the rest of the company, ending with the Indians. Huntington, the interpreter, also explained at this time that the Indians 'have more idea of God than I was aware of. Their tradition is that God cut a man in two—the upper part remained the man, the lower part was made into woman'." [^26] As further evidence of the Indians being sun worshippers is the incident of the first company of settlers that went to found a settlement on Provo river (March, 1849) being met about three miles from "Old Fort Utah," built by Ashley—1824-25, [^27] by a band of Timpanogos Indians who were greatly alarmed at so large a company of white settlers—they numbered about one hundred and fifty souls, men, women and children—moving into their country. The settlers were halted about three miles from the "Old Fort Utah" and required to enter into a treaty that they would not "drive the Indians from their lands nor deprive them of their rights." In token of this covenant, Dimick B. Huntington, the Indian interpreter, with the settlers, "was required to raise his right hand and swear by the sun." [^28]

Indian AffairsHCThe purpose of Chief Walker's visit was to encourage more of his "Mormon" brethren to settle on what he called "his lands," further to the south, in San Pitch (San Pete) valley. Walker desired his white friends to settle Sevier valley, and in the region of "Little Salt Lake," a shallow sheet of salt water, about seven by one mile in width, some sixty miles south of Sevier Lake, and near the present towns of Parowan and Paragoonah. President Young promised the chief that he would send settlers among them in "six moons." President Young also told Walker that he had an understanding with "Goship" and "Wanship,"—Indian chiefs ranging in the mountains eastward of Salt Lake valley—"about this place," that is, about the settlement in Salt Lake valley. The talk was all for peace. "It is not good to fight the Indians;" said President Young. "Tell your Indians not to steal," he added, "We want to be friendly with you. We are poor now, but in a few years we shall be rich. We will trade cattle with you." To which Walker replied, "that's good."

Indian AffairsHC462The interview was quite protracted, ranging over the subject of the Indians changing from depending on the uncertainty of the chase to the raising of cattle and sheep for their subsistence, the weaving of blankets from wool by the Indian women, schooling of Indian children, to fixing the terms of barter in articles between the red men and white, thence back to peace talk, during which Walker said: "It is not good to fight. It makes women and children cry. But let the women and children play together. I told the Pieds [a sub-tribe] a great while ago to stop fighting, and stealing, but they have no ears." [^29]

Indian AffairsHCDimick B. Huntington was the interpreter in the above interview, though it is said of Chief Walker that in addition to several of the native dialects, he could converse fluently in Spanish and make himself understood in English. [^30] He was now in the prime of life, having been born, as nearly as the time can be ascertained, in 1808, and therefore about forty-one years of age at the time of the foregoing interview. His birthplace was on Spanish Fork river, in Utah valley—"Pequi-nary-no-quint," was the Indian name of the stream, meaning "Stinking Creek;" the odor which the name suggests is occasioned by streams from warm sulphur springs flowing into the mountain brook in one of the canons through which it passes. Dimick B. Huntington, the interpreter in the above interview, is the authority for these and many other facts recounted of Walker's life, including an alleged vision of the chief's following a serious illness, about two years before the advent of the "Mormon" Pioneers, in which alleged vision he saw God who warned him of the coming of "white friends," and gave him a new name—"Pannacarra-Quinker," meaning "Iron twister." [^31]

Indian AffairsHC"Long before the advent of the Mormons," writes Bancroft, "Walker," "anglicized from Walkara" (Whitney) and to which the whites also prefixed the English name "Joseph"—hence "Joseph Walker"—"made frequent raids into the Mexican states where he laid the people under contribution and took captive persons of rank and condition whom he held for ransom." On these expeditions he went forth decked out in a strange mixture of whitemen's modern clothing and the tawdry trappings of the savage. [^32] Fremont met this Ute chief in Sevier valley in May, 1844, when the former was returning from California during his second expedition. Walker and his band of warriors, well armed and well mounted; "were journeying slowly towards the Spanish trail, to levy their usual tribute upon the great Californian caravan. They were robbers of a higher sort than those of the desert. They conducted their depredations with form, and under the color of trade and toll for passing through their country. Instead of attacking and killing, they effect to purchase—taking the horses they liked and giving something nominal in return. The chief was quite civil to me. He was personally acquainted with his namesake, our guide, (Joseph Walker) who made my name known to him. He knew of my expedition of 1842; and, as tokens of friendship, and proof that we had met, proposed an interchange of presents. We had no great store to choose out of; so he gave me a Mexican blanket, and I gave him a very fine one which I had obtained at Vancouver." [^33]

Indian AffairsHCWalker was baptized a member of the church on the 13th of March, 1850. His brother Arapeen was also baptized, and later these two chiefs together with Sowiette, and Unhoquitch were ordained elders in the church, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards and Elijah Ward—the last named acting as interpreter—being present. The presidency would, of course, ordain the chiefs. [^34] Brother Morely [Isaac] had baptized Walker, the Utah chief, on the 13th (March, 1850). The settlers, notwithstanding their limited supply of provisions could not refrain from administering to the Indians, who would sometimes cry of hunger. The winter of 1849-50, in San Pete valley, had been very severe, the settlers only being able to preserve the lives of their stock in some cases by shoveling the snow from the grass; and even then the little colony in San Pete lost 71 oxen; 38 cows; 3 horses and 14 head of young stock. As stated, the facts of Walker's life are given through the interpreter, Dimick B. Huntington, who received them from the chief himself, and on the whole his report of the chief is sympathetic and favorable; that is, as Indian character is to be judged—and it should be remembered that Indians may not be judged by the white man's standards. Other accounts (see Tullidge and Whitney) represent Walker, though I know not on what authority, as cowardly, and disposed to be unfriendly and treacherously disposed toward the white settlers from the first; [^35] though it has to be admitted that the chief made a good end at his death, which took place on the 29th of January, 1855, at Meadow Creek, near Fillmore, (then the capital of the territory, with the legislature in session at the time). He died of a cold which had settled on his lungs. "He died," says Huntington's account, "with a good spirit, and spoke affectionately of President Young." [^36] "Walker, prior to his death," says Whitney, "became convinced that the 'Mormons' were his friends, and among his final words was an injunction to his tribe to live at peace with the settlers and not molest them." [^37] At his death, in accordance with Indian custom when a chief dies, "the Utahs killed 2 squaws, 2 Piede children, and about 15 of his best horses. * * * He was buried with all his presents and trinkets, and a letter which he had received the previous day from President Young." He was succeeded as chief by his brother, Arapeen, two years his junior, also a more daring leader than his brother, more passionate, and ungovernable." [^38]

JAMES BRIDGER'S SUSPECTED CONNECTION WITH EARLY INDIAN TROUBLES

Indian AffairsHCPresident Young strongly suspected James Bridger of being connected with the early Indian troubles. In May, 1849, he received a letter from Louis Vasquez, a western trader and sometime merchant in Salt Lake City, giving information of the killing of an Indian on Black's Fork of Green river, supposedly by white men from Salt Lake valley, and the prospect of an attack on Salt Lake settlements by the Bannock tribe in revenge.

Indian AffairsHC465The day following the reception of the letter, in a public meeting, the president said—in describing the meeting: "I expressed my conviction that Bridger and the other mountaineers were the real cause of the Indians being incensed against us if they were so." [^39]

THE SECOND EXPEDITION AGAINST THE UTAH INDIANS

Indian AffairsHCI wish I might let all the cause of the Indian wars under the authority of "Deseret" rest upon the general grounds of jealousy against the whites and resentment of their trespassing into the Indian country, as mentioned in a previous paragraph; but this may not be, with the evidence which lies before me. As one of the contributing causes to the outbreak of the Indians at Fort Utah in the winter of 1850, was the cowardly murder of a somewhat noted Indian called "Old Bishop," so-called, it is said, on account of his resemblance in looks and gestures to Bishop N. K. Whitney. Three men from Fort Utah met "Old Bishop" some distance from the fort wearing a shirt which one of the men claimed to be his, and he demanded it. The Indian refused to give it up saying he had bought it. Whereupon a struggle ensued between the white men and the Indian for possession of the shirt, and the latter to defend himself in the unequal struggle of three against one, drew his bow, when one of the white men shot him to death and his body was disemboweled, the cavity filled with stones, sown up and then thrown into the Provo river. The Indians on missing the somewhat noted character, became suspicious, instituted a search and found the body, rolling down the shallow river, and then began the depredations which led to the "Indian War" of the winter of 1850. While this murder seems to have been a matter of some talk among the colonists of Fort Utah, it did not come to the knowledge of President Young until June 12, 1854, when the facts were stated to him by James Bean, who, however, was not of the party of the three guilty of the crime. Following the recital of the killing as given above, President Young comments: "These facts which were kept hid at the time, explain to me why my feelings were opposed to going to war with the Indians, [i. e. then winter of 1850] to which I never consented until Brother Higbee [president at the time at Fort Utah] reported that all the settlers in Utah were of one mind in relation to it." [^40]

Indian AffairsHC467On the last day of January, Isaac Higbee in person reported to the governor of the "State of Deseret," that the Indians in Utah valley and killed and stolen between fifty and sixty head of cattle and horses; that they were impudent and threatened to kill more cattle and get more Indians to join them and help to kill the settlers in Utah valley. They taunted the colonists with cowardice because they would not fight. Higbee represented that the brethren at "Fort Utah" were agreed in asking the privilege of defending themselves and chastising the Indians. [^41]

Indian AffairsHC467On this subject of making war upon the Indians on this occasion, President Young manifested much reluctance, the psychological reasons for which although unknown to him at the time, are given in the narrative of "Old Bishop's" murder. The chief had been murdered early in January, 1850, and the bad conduct of the Indians in the latter part of the month seeking to bring about hostilities was doubtless in consonance with their traditions bearing upon the duty of revenge.

Indian AffairsHC467A council was called to consider the matter, to which Captain Howard Stansbury and Lieutenant Gunnison, were invited. These United States officers and their corps of engineers had been engaged during the late fall in surveying Utah Lake, and had suffered much annoyance from the petty thieving of these same Indians. Following is the captain's own account of these annoyances:

Indian AffairsHC467"While engaged in the survey of the Utah valley, we were no little annoyed by numbers of the latter tribe, who hung around the camp, crowding around the cook-fires, more like hungry dogs than human beings, eagerly watching for the least scrap that might be thrown away, which they devoured with avidity and without the least preparation. The herdsmen also complained that their cattle were frequently scattered and that notwithstanding their utmost vigilance, several of them had unaccountably disappeared and were lost. One morning, a fine fat ox came into camp with an arrow buried in his side, which perfectly accounted for the disappearance of the others.

Indian AffairsHCAfter the party left Lake Utah for winter quarters in Salt Lake City, the Indians became more insolent, boasting of what they had done—driving off the stock of the inhabitants in the southern settlements, resisting all attempts to recover them, and finally firing upon the people themselves, as they issued from their little stockade to attend to their ordinary occupations. Under these circumstances the settlers in Utah valley applied to the supreme government, at Salt Lake City, for counsel as to the proper course of action." [^42]

Indian AffairsHC468Gunnison reports on the same subject: "In the winter of 1849 they (the Indians) became insolent in Utah valley, killed cattle and boasted of it, entered homes and frightened women and children, took provisions forcibly, and compelled those on the farms to retire within the fort. Complaints of these things were sent to headquarters, and after all peaceable overtures were disregarded, the 'Utah War' [Indian] was resolved upon." [^43]

Indian AffairsHC468Speaking of this council to which he was invited Captain Stansbury writes:

Indian AffairsHC468"The president [Young] was at first extremely averse to the adoption of harsh measures; but, after several conciliatory overtures had been resorted to in vain, he very properly determined to put a stop, by force, to further aggressions, which, if not resisted, could only end in the total destruction of the colony. Before going to this decision, the authorities called upon me to consult as to the policy of the measure, and to request the expression of my opinion as to what view the government of the United States might be expected to take of it. Knowing, as I did, most of the circumstances, and feeling convinced that some action of the kind would ultimately have to be resorted to, as the forbearance already shown had been only attributed to weakness and cowardice, and had served but to encourage further and bolder outrages, I did not hesitate to say to them that, in my judgment, the contemplated expedition against these savage marauders was a measure not only of good policy, but one of absolute necessity and self-preservation. I knew the leader of the Indians (Old Elk) to be a crafty and blood-thirsty savage, who had been already guilty of several murders, and had openly threatened that he would kill every white man that he found alone upon the prairies. In addition to this, I was convinced that the completion of the yet unfinished survey of the Utah valley, the coming season, must otherwise be attended with serious difficulty, if not actual hazard, and would involve the necessity of a largely increased and armed escort for its protection. Such being the circumstances, the course proposed could not but meet my entire approval.

Indian AffairsHC469A force of one hundred men was accordingly organized, and, upon the application of President Young, leave was given to Lieutenant Howland, of the mounted rifles, then on duty with my command, to accompany the expedition as its adjutant: such assistance also was furnished as it was in my power to afford, consisting of arms, tents, camp-equipage, and ammunition." [^44]

Indian AffairsHCThe force to undertake this service was made up of volunteers; the first companies raised marching for Utah valley under command of Captain George D. Grant, but overtaken by the rest of the force under Major Andrew Lytle before arriving at Fort Utah. The united forces from Salt Lake and at Fort Utah, engaged the Indians on the Provo river near the fort, where they had constructed some rude breast works in the river bottom from trees they had felled, and they also occupied a settler's recently abandoned, double log house near their breast works. The Indians were led by "Old Elk," [^45] whom, as we have seen from Stansbury's Report, had declared his murderous intentions towards the whites; and by chief "Opecarry"—also known as "Stick-on-the-Head." [^46] The natives engaged—most of their women and children being concealed in the ravines and nearby canons—nearly equaled the whites in numbers, and offered a stubborn and brave resistance. On the second day of the fighting, the log house the Indians had occupied, greatly to the annoyance and danger of the assailants, was carried by a cavalry charge, highly commended by Lieutenant Howland. The Indians then dividing into several parties sought safety in flight to the canons on the east and around the south end of Utah Lake. Of the state militia, one was killed, Joseph Higbee, the son of Isaac Highbee, the president of the settlements in Utah valley; several more were wounded and a number of horses were killed and wounded in the charge upon the log house, to which reference has already been made. The Indians left eight of their dead in their redoubt, but took their wounded with them in their retreat. "Old Elk" was found dead on the trail up Rock canon, directly east of the scene of the engagement, and where a day or two later, among a few sick survivors, were found eight or ten more who had died of wounds, exhaustion and measels, which disease was then prevalent among the natives.

Indian AffairsHC470On the 10th of February, Daniel H. Wells, the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces, arrived on the scene and took command. Sending a small force to follow the refugees up Rock canon—what they found has already been stated—he moved with his main force to Spanish Fork river where it was reported there was an encampment of the hostiles. Not finding the Indians on the Spanish Fork, General Wells moved round the south end of Utah Lake, and at Promontory Point—sometimes called "Table Mountain"—on the 14th, he overtook a large party of the hostiles, and nearly all—"except the women and children, all of whom were spared" [^47]—were killed, including a number who in their flight ran out upon the ice which then nearly covered the lake. About forty of the natives, in all had been killed, and the women and children of the fallen, according to the custom of the natives, followed the victors and were distributed among the settlers at Salt Lake, where an attempt was made to wean them from their savage ways of life, and bring them up "in the habits of civilized and Christian life." The experiment did not succeed, most of the prisoners escaping upon the very first opportunity. [^48]

Indian AffairsHCThe horses taken from the defeated Utahs, by unanimous vote of the volunteers in the service, were given to the band of Indians at Salt Lake; and Daniel H. Wells made a verbal report of the expedition to the general legislative assembly then in session. [^49] Some years later, 1868, to be exact, General Wells reported in a special meeting of the brethren of the church, that twenty-seven Indians were killed at "Table Mountain." [^50]

Indian AffairsHC471Peace followed this vigorous treatment of the natives, of course; but doubtless, if the true cause of the Indians' anger, distrust of the settlers, and the real provocation for hostilities had been known by Brigham Young and his brethren, this sad page in the history of the "State of Deseret" would not, perforce, have been written.

THE THIRD EXPEDITION AGAINST THE INDIANS—THE SHOSHONES

Indian AffairsHCThe third expedition against Indians under the authority of the "State of Deseret" was to the northward, the Shoshones or Snakes being the cause of the alarm. The trouble arose in the month of September, 1850. As reported in the Deseret News, the treatment of the Indians by the emigrants of 1849, and later the killing of two Shoshone women by travelers, "as we are creditably informed, from Illinois," says the Deseret News article, had wrought a very marked change in the disposition of the northern Indians towards the white settlers in the Salt Lake region, than was at first manifested. They had become predatory in their action, and in the northern settlements on the Weber and Ogden rivers, had taken to pasturing their horses in the grain fields, stealing corn and melons, running off cattle, stealing horses, etc., etc., until their actions had become insufferable. In one of the Indian night raids upon the gardens in Brownsville [i. e. Ogden], a settler of the name of Urban Van Stewart, fired upon them and killed an Indian, said to be a petty chief. The next day the Indians in retaliation killed a man of the name of Campbell, some distance from the settlement on the north bank of Ogden river, and threatened to massacre the inhabitants of Brownsville, and burn the place. The matter was reported at Salt Lake and a detachment of the state militia was dispatched under command of Horace S. Eldredge, with instructions to "stand on the defensive." Upon this show of force and promptness of action the Shoshones moved northward, taking with them some horses and cattle belonging to the settlement. A band of Ute Indians from the south were near Brownsville and to make sure of their non-interference if a battle took place, a number of them, without resistance were taken prisoners and held as hostages for the good behavior of the band who were ordered to move south to their own lands, and have nothing further to do with the future movements of the Shoshones—orders which they obeyed. The predatory band of Shoshones moved so far northward that fear of further hostilities no longer existed, and after about a week's absence from Salt Lake, the militia under Eldridge returned.

Indian AffairsHC472And this is the sum of the Indian uprisings and troubles under the authority of the "State of Deseret."

NOTE

THE MISAPPREHENSION RESPECTING THE MISSION OF CAPTAIN HOWARD STANSBURY AND HIS COMPANY OF TOPOGRAPHICAL ENGINEERS

"Before reaching Great Salt Lake City, I had heard from various sources that much uneasiness was felt by the Mormon community at my anticipated coming among them. I was told that they would never permit my survey of their country to be made; while it was darkly hinted that if I persevered in attempting to carry it on, my life would scarce be safe. Utterly disregarding, indeed giving not the least credence to these insinuations, I at once called upon Brigham Young, the president of the Mormon church and the governor of the commonwealth, stated to him what I had heard, explained to him the views of the government in directing an exploration and survey of the lake, assuring him that these were the sole objects of the expedition. He replied that he did not hesitate to say that both he and the people over whom he presided had been very much disturbed and surprised that the government should send out a party into their country so soon after they had made their settlement; that he had heard of the expedition from time to time, since its outset from Fort Leavenworth; and that the whole community was extremely anxious as to what could be the design of the government in such a movement. It appeared, too, that their alarm had been increased by the indiscreet and totally unauthorized boasting of an attache of General Wilson, the newly-appointed Indian agent for California, whose train on its way thither had reached the city a few days before I myself arrived. This person, as I understood, had declared openly that General Wilson had come clothed with the authority from the president of the United States to expel the Mormons from the lands which they occupied, and that he would do so if he thought proper. The Mormons very naturally supposed from such a declaration that there must be some understanding or connection between General Wilson and myself; and that the arrival of the two parties so nearly together was the result of a concerted and combined movement for the ulterior purpose of breaking up and destroying their colony. The impression was that a survey was to be made of their country in the same manner that other public lands are surveyed, for the purpose of dividing it into townships and sections, and of thus establishing and recording the claims of the government to it, and thereby anticipating any claim the Mormons might set up from their previous occupation. However unreasonable such a suspicion may be considered, yet it must be remembered that these people are exasperated and rendered almost desperate by the wrongs and persecutions they had previously suffered in Illinois and Missouri; that they had left the confines of civilization and fled to these far distant wilds, that they might enjoy undisturbed the religious liberty which had been practically denied them; and that now they supposed themselves to be followed up by the general government with the view of driving them out from even this solitary spot, where they had hoped they should at length be permitted to set up their habitation in peace.

Upon all these points I undeceived Governor Young to his entire satisfaction. I was induced to pursue this conciliatory course, not only in justice to the government, but also because I knew, from the peculiar organization of this singular community, that, unless the 'president' was fully satisfied that no evil was intended to his people, it would be useless for me to attempt to carry out my instructions. He was not only civil governor, but the president of the whole Church of Latter-day Saints upon the earth, their prophet and their priest, receiving, as they all firmly believed, direct revelation of the Divine will, which, according to their creed, forms the law of the church. He is, consequently, profoundly revered by all, and possesses unbounded influence and almost unlimited power. I did not anticipate open resistance, but I was fully aware that if the president continued to view the expedition with distrust, nothing could be more natural than that every possible obstruction should be thrown in our way by a 'masterly inactivity'." [^51]

474Upon this circumstance related by Captain Stansbury, Linn, in his Story of the Mormons, comments: "The choice between abject conciliation or open conflict was that which Brigham Young extended to nearly every federal officer who entered Utah during his reign" (p. 438). If the course followed by Captain Stansbury is relied upon to establish an instance of "abject conciliation," I think the comment very unjust, believing that the captain's conduct was more nearly allied to straightforward manliness, and common sense, than "abject conciliation."

Footnotes

"While, however, there are all the extrior evidences of a govrnment strictly temporal, it cannot be concealed that it is so intimately blended with the spiritual administration of the church, that it would be impossible to separate the one from the other. The first civil governor under the Constitution of the new state, elected by the people, was the president of the church, Brigham Young; the lieutenant governor was his first ecclesiastical counselor, and the secretary of state his second counselor; these three individuals forming together the "presidency" of the church. The bishops of the several wards, who, by virtue of their office in the church, had exercised not only a spiritual but temporal authority over the several districts assigned to their charge, were appointed, under the civil organization, to be justices of the peace, and were supported in the discharge of their duties, not only by the civil power, but by the whole spiritual authority of the church also. This intimate connection of church and state seems to pervade everything that is done. The supreme power in both being lodged in the hands of the same individuals, it is difficult to separate their two official characters, and to determine whether in any one instance they act as spiritual or merely temporal officers.

The establishment of a civil government at all, seems to me to have been altogether the result of a foreseen necessity, which it was impossible to avoid. As the community grew in numbers and importance, it was not to be expected, as has been before remarked, that the whole population would always consist solely of members of the church, looking up to the presidency, not only as its spiritual head, but as the divinely commissioned and inspired source of law in temporal matters and policy also. tI became necessary, therefore, to provide for the government of the whole, by establishing some authority which could not be disputed by any, and would exercise a control over them as citizens, whether they were members of the church or not; and which, being acknowledged and recognized by the government of the United States, would be supported by its laws and upheld by its authority." (Stansbury's Report, pp. 131-132).

"A strong prejudice having arisen against Mr. Pomeroy, a merchant, founded on rumors of his being connected with the Missouri mobs in the expatriation of the saints from that state, his case was considered and testimony was heard upon it in a public meeting of the people, Elder John Taylor presiding. The investigation resulted in a unanimous vote in favor of the innocence of Mr. Pomeroy." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Aug. 12, 1849, p. 121).

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Centerville in History of Davis Stake of Zion, Jenson's Compilation, History of the Stakes.
[^2] The settlement was known by various names during the first years of its existence—"Sessions Settlement," "Call's Fort," after Anson Call, one of the early settlers; but when organized into an ecclesiastical subdivision of the church, and given a bishop, it was called "North Canon Ward;" but finally, in 1855, was officially named "Bountiful," a Book of Mormon name for one of the old Nephite cities, and "lands," supposed to be near "the narrow neck of land" that separates some of the larger divisions of the extended continent. (Book of Mormon, passim).
[^3] Cox only acted as bishop about six or eight months, being called in the fall of 1849 to assist in settling San Pete valley, and Anson Call was appointed bishop of "North Canyon Ward," with Aaron B. Cherry as his first, and Osmond M. Deuel as his second counselor.
[^4] In the price paid for the Goodyear claim, I follow the statement of this letter, in Brigham Young's History, Ms., March 6th, 1848, p. 16. The same for the statement that Brown made the purchase by "advice of the council," (Ibid). Others place the price at $3,000.00 (Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, p. 375. Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 307, note 4). There is some confusion as to the time of the purchase; June 6th, 1848, is the time fixed upon by Jenson's Chronology, 1848, p. 35. Whitney following Brown's family tradition places the purchase late in December, 1847, or early in January, 1848, and the return of Captain Brown from California in December, 1847; whereas President Young places the date of the captain's return "about the middle of November," 1847; that he brought with him "about five thousand dollars, mostly in gold: (others say $10,000 in Mexican doubloons). He was gone three months and seven days (i. e. from early in August to the middle of November). (History of Brigham Young, Ms., March 6th, 1849, p. 16).
[^5] Bancroft's Utah, p. 307, note 3; he cites Stanford's Ogden City, Ms., p. 1, and F. D. Richards' Narrative, Ms. Both are very reliable sources of information.
[^6] President Young had a similar experience in purchasing, through Lewis Robinson, a tract of land thirty miles square of James Bridger, in 1853, on which Fort Bridger stood. The price agreed upon was $8,000. (See Bancroft's History of Wyoming, p. 684 and note. Bancroft cites History of Fort Bridger, by Chambers, Ms.; also Trans. Wyom, Acad. Sciences, pp. 81-2, and Utah Hand Book of Reference, p. 73). He thinks the statement about the purchase was a "mistake," "as there were no Spanish (i. e. Mexican) grants in that region." (Ibid).
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1849, p. 124.
[^8] It required three years to complete it; its cost, when finished was $40,000, raised by taxation. (Stanford's Ogden City, Ms., p. 4).
[^9] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, p. 4. The organization was effected on the 20th of January. Isaac Clark and Erastus Bingham were made the bishops of the first and second wards, respectively.
[^10] History of Brigham Young, Ms., March, 1849; p. 40. John S. Highbee retained the presidency of these settlers only about 2 months, being released at his own request, on account of his family remaining in Salt Lake City. He was succeeded by his brother, Isaac Higbee, in May, (Ibid, pp. 83-4).
[^11] Speaking of these reported threats of Indian uprisings President Young said: "I forwarded the above information to John S. Higbee and the brethren settled on the Provo river, advising them to speedily complete their fort, to keep near the settlement, to place their cannon on the top of the fort, to gather a sufficient quantity of round stones, for grape shot, to secure and guard their horses and cattle, to keep a vigilant guard at night, to look out for the Indians, not to make presents to them, but if they would be friendly to teach them to raise grain and to order them to quit stealing." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., April, 1849, pp. 67, 68).
[^12] "It was decided to build a city a mile square," is President Young's account, "in blocks of four acres each, divided into lots of one-half acre each, reserving the center block of four acres for the site of a chapel and for school houses, the streets to be five rods wide." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Sept. 14, 1849, p. 133).
[^13] History of Brigham Young, Ms., March 19, 1851, p. 12, Isaac Higbee was made president, Elias H. Blackburn was ordained the bishop of Provo.
[^14] See History of Brigham Young, Ms., for years 1849-1851, passim; and Church Chronology, Jenson, for 1850, 1851, passim.
[^15] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 313, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, p. 138.
[^16] See Interview with Walker, History of Brigham Young, Ms., June 14, 1849, pp. 89-92.
[^17] Morley's company numbered 224 souls, and they arrived at their place of settlement the 22nd of November, 1849. At first the settlers were not very well pleased with the location; but as they became acquainted with the timber, water, and grazing resources they became better satisfied. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., November, 1849, p. 161). In President Young's first mention of Morley's company of settlers for San Pete valley he mentions it as consisting of "about thirty brethren," (Ibid, p. 159). The company was afterwards enlarged, and in the company of 224, women and children were counted as well as men. Bancroft twice states that Morley settled San Pete county in 1848, (History of Utah, p. 303 and 313), which is beyond question a mistake.
[^18] History of Brigham Young, Ms., August, 1850; p. 62. Bancroft says the town of Manti was laid out in November, 1850, and that it was surveyed by Jesse W. Fox. His authorities are Utah's Early Records, Ms., and Maiben, in Utah Sketches, Ms. I follow President Young as the more reliable authority.
[^19] See Book of Alma, in Book of Mormon,—passim.
[^20] See Acts of "Deseret" in Utah Legislature Proceedings, 1855, pp. 81-83.
[^21] George Albert Smith was the son of John Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet's father. His mother was Clarissa Lyman Smith. He was born June 26th, 1817, in Potsdam, St. Lawrence county, and reared in the faith of the Congregational church, but was early converted to the divine mission of his cousin Joseph, the Prophet, and gave his energies to the promulgation of the New Dispensation of the gospel. He was in his 34th year when he took the leadership of this colony bound for Little Salt Lake valley. Later, from 1868 to 1875, he was counselor to Brigham Young in the first presidency, and church historian and recorder from 1854 to the time of his death, September 1st, 1875.
[^22] "They possessed scarcely a horse, and were compelled to travel on foot. Their houses consisted of a few boughs of sagebrush or stunted greasewood, laid up in a manner to break the force of the wind, and were seldom over five feet high. In storms they would sometimes go for shelter among the cedars. They built very small fires, being too lazy to get much fuel. They were armed with short bows. Some of their arrow points were made of greasewood, others of flint. The chiefs' were of iron, and not more than an inch and a quarter long. Not having weapons appropriate for killing the few deer in the mountains, the Piedes lived principally on rabbits, snakes, lizards, mice, etc., and even this kind of game appeared scarce." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., January, 1851, pp. 2, 3).
[^23] History of Brigham Young, Ms., Jan., 1851, p. 2.
[^24] Walker had "previously sent a party of about thirteen warriors, led by San Pete, to California, to steal animals. The party succeeded in taking about 800 or 1000 horses, but the Mexicans pursued them for two or three days and overtook them. A battle ensued, in which one of Lugos' peons was killed, but his companions recovered all except 120 of the animals. Walker felt poor, as he had expected to get one thousand horses, having been accustomed to do so in such forays. He thought that if he had gone himself, he would have done better, and intimated that San Pete was not a good general. Walker talked of going on another expedition, but Geo. A. Smith persuaded him not to go, as the United States soldiers in that country would be likely to scalp him. San Pete and his party stated that in California they met Mr. Williams, of Williams' rancho, who gave them beef and agreed to keep their presence in the country a secret, provided they would not run off his stock. San Pete's party rested several days at Williams' and then went to Lugos' corral, and stole his animals." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., March, 1851, pp. 10, 11).
[^25] Ibid., pp. 3-8.
[^26] "Little Salt Lake" lying some several miles northwesterly from Parowan, the Indians, called "Paragcona"—i. e. "stinking water," (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, p. 3). James G. Bleak in his History of Utah's Dixie, (p. 14), gives a slightly different version; he says that the Indian name for the "Little Salt Lake" was "Pah-o-ou."
[^27] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, p. 46. President Young also mentions as an item of interest the following: "While I was at Parowan, brothers Bringhurst and Frost welded an axle-tree which was the first blacksmith work done with stone coal in the territory. The coal was considered of very good quality."
[^28] Ante this History, ch. lxxxiii.
[^29] Parley P. Pratt was president, and W. W. Phelps and David Fullmer his counselors. They adhered to the old organization of the plains "fifties," "tens," etc., though men, not wagons, in this instance, were the units of the divisions. Elder John Brown was captain of the 50: Isaac C. Haight, Joseph Matthews, Joseph Horne, Ephraim Green, and Josiah Arnold, captains of tens; W. W. Phelps was topographical engineer, and Robert L. Campbell, clerk and historian. The company had 12 wagons, 1 carriage; 24 yoke of cattle, 38 horses and mules, an odometer to measure distances, one brass field piece, small arms, 7 beeves, also 150 lbs. flour to each man, besides crackers, bread and meat. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Nov., 1849, pp. 160-1).
[^30] Pratt's Report, History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, pp. 7-8.
[^31] Fullmer's division had explored Little Salt Lake and found what Walker calls "God's Own House," in a canon of perpendicular rocks, penetrated by a branch of Little Salt Lake, and covered with hieroglyphics or strange figures cut on the rocks. Further west they found some good land and a small lake, separated from Little Salt Lake by a low mountain range; they had also explored the valley of the "Muddy," and found iron ore; in the canons they found abundance of pine timber, also quarries of free stone, plaster paris, and lime stone. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, p. 10).
[^32] Pratt's Report, in History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, pp. 4-17. Also Pratt's Autobiography, ch. xlvi.
[^33] "I now (November, 1849) received a commission," writes Parley P. Pratt in his Autobiography, "from the governor and legislative assembly of the 'State of Deseret' to raise fifty men with the necessary teams and outfit, and go at their head on an exploring tour to the southward," (p. 408), then follows his narrative of the journey of the text above.
[^34] The number of inhabitants can only be approximately stated because of the confusion in our data. Brigham Young in writing to Amasa M. Lyman in California anent the proposed state to be formed by the union of "Deseret" and California, places the number then in the Salt Lake valley, Sept. 6th, 1849, and en route westward from the South Pass, "at 15,000." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Sept., 1849, p. 129). According to Captain Burton a Mr. Kelley, in 1849, estimated the "Mormons" to be about 5,000 inhabitants in the town, and 7,000 more in the settlements. (Burton's City of the Saints, p. 294). "In 1850 the seventh official census of the United States numbered the inhabitants of Utah territory at 11,354 free + 26 slaves =11,380 souls." (Ibid). The estimate of 15,000 for 1849 I think too large, but with the government's enumeration, at between eleven and twelve thousand in 1850, by the fall of 1851 there is little doubt but the number would be 15,000 as stated in the text. While on this subject of early population of Utah and of the church, the following compilation from Burton is of interest and of value: "In 1853 the saints were reckoned at 25,000 by the Gentiles, and 30,000 to 35,000 by Mr. Orson Pratt, in the Seer." In 1854, Dr. S. W. Richards estimated the number at "probably from 40,000 to 50,000 in the United States, and in Great Britain at 29,797." In 1856 the "Mormon" census gave 76,335 souls. I subjoin a synopsis of the official papers:
[^35] Captain Stansbury bears witness to the interest manifested by the "State of Deseret" in the matter of education. He says: "While all these exertions are making for the physical development of a new empire among the mountains, the mental elevation of the people by education has been by no means lost sight of. Liberal appropriations of land and money have been made for the establishment of an university, the grounds for which are laid out and enclosed, being situated on one of the terraces of the mountain overlooking the city. A normal school, designed for the education of those who desire to become teachers, is already in successful operation. School houses have been built in most of the districts, both in the city and country, which are attended by old as well as young, and every effort is made to advance the mental improvement of the people." (Stansbury's Report, p. 143).
[^36] The message is published in full in the Deseret News of Jan. 11th, 1851.
[^37] The night before, President Young's own flag, that formerly used to fly from the Nauvoo temple was raised on the east side of the bowery; and since this fact will set at rest the question as to whether or not the saints brought with them an American flag in their flight from Nauvoo, I give President Young's historical journal entry: "July 23rd, [1849]. Many of the brethren with their respective bishops met at the bowery, and put up dinner tables and seats, erected a liberty pole and prepared cannon for the celebration of the next day. Some emigrants from California furnished 75 lbs. of powder for firing salutes. * * * In the evening my flag, that used to fly from the Nauvoo temple was hoisted at the east side of the bowery." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., July, 1849, pp. 107-8). It still might be a question, however, if this was a United States flag. The evidence that it was is beyond question. Colonel Kane in his description of the enrollment of the Mormon Battalion declares that "an American flag brought out from the storehouse of things rescued," was "hoisted to a tree mast," and under it the enrollment took place. (Kane's The Mormons, p. 80). Subsequently, when writing to President Fillmore in defense of President Young's loyalty, Colonel Kane declares that it was Brigham Young's "American flag" that was thus used; (Kane's letter to President and undoubtedly this was the same flag that President Young refers to so lovingly as "My flag," that waved on the "east side of the bowery," at Salt Lake City that evening of the 23rd of July, 1849.
[^38] See this History, ch. lxxxii, where the poem is published.
[^39] The ode was written by Eliza R. Snow Smith, and when sung to the tune of Scots Who Nae Wi Wallace Bled, deserves to become a national hymn.
[^40] Millennial Star, vol. xii, pp. 337-344.
[^41] See Deseret News, June 14, 1851, p. 276, Ibid, July 24, p. 300. Bancroft's Utah, pp. 455-6.
[^42] The speech is published in full in Deseret News of Aug. 19, 1851, pp. 305-6.
[^43] Stansbury's Report, pp. 149-150. See also Gunnison quoted in note 42.
[^44] Gunnison also refers to this old chief as "the terror of the mountains." "He had long boasted that no single person or trapper could live with him in the valley, and numbers are supposed to have fallen under his rifle." (Gunnison The Mormons, p. 146).
[^45] He is called Stick-on-the-Head. (Whitney's Utah, vol. i, p. 427); I follow the Ms. History of Brigham Young, where the orthography is as in the text above. He is also said to have desired, in this instance, peace, and had come out of the Indian redoubt to confer with the interpreter, Huntington, to that end, when the Indians began firing, and the battle was on." (Whitney, Ibid).
[^46] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, p. 22.
[^47] Stansbury's Report, p. 149.
[^48] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, pp. 22, 23.
[^49] See Addenda note in History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Feb., 1850, p. 22.
[^50] Stansbury's Report, pp. 84-86.
[^51] Message and Papers of the Presidents, vol. v, pp. 26-30).
