B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

475CHAPTER XCI

475THE "STATE OF DESERET"—COLONIZING ACHIEVEMENTS—AN INSTRUCTIVE EXPERIMENT IN SELF-GOVERNMENT

Colonization EffortsHC475THE extension of settlements under the "State of Desert's" regime was remarkable. The first settlements after Salt Lake City—the first of many daughters to the queen city of America's "Dead Sea"—were immediately northward in what is now the south end of Davis county on what was afterwards called "Deuel Creek," and "North Mill Creek," the former about eleven and the latter about nine miles from Salt Lake City, on the sites of the present towns of Centerville and Bountiful respectively.

THE FOUNDING OF NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS

Thomas Grover, in the fall of 1847, settled with his family on Deuel Creek, to care for stock through the winter; and where, early in the spring following, he was joined by other families, including the Deuel brothers, Osmond M. and William, and a permanent settlement was formed, notwithstanding it seemed to be the winter rendezvous of several bands of Indians. The settlers on this creek, however, were not organized into a ward and given a bishop until 1852, though Sanford Porter had acted as presiding elder from 1850, and became the settlement's first bishop, with Ozias Kilbourn and Simon H. Dalton as his counselors. [^1]

Colonization EffortsHCAbout the time that Thomas Grover settled on Deuel Creek, Perrigrine Sessions settled on East Mill Creek. In fact it is claimed that Sessions was the first Latter-day Saint who is known to have made "wagon tracks" north of the "Hot Springs." He was accompanied by Samuel Brown, afterwards killed by Indians. Like Grover these men took charge of large herds of cattle through the winter of 1847-8. The following spring Sessions removed his family to the site where he and Brown had wintered in their wagon. He was soon joined by other families and "Sessions' Settlement" began its existence, rapidly expanding into a thriving farming village, [^2] which a year later, spring 1849, was organized into an ecclesiastical ward, with Orvil S. Cox as bishop, and Anson Call as his counselor. [^3]

Colonization EffortsHC476In the fall of 1847 Hector C. Haight with one of his sons wintered and herded cattle on the present site of Farmington. In the spring of 1848 he removed from the site of his winter encampment on "North Cottowood Creek" (now "Big Creek"), and settled with his family on another stream about three miles to the northwest, which was called "Haight's Creek." Farmington rose in a few years on the site of Haight's winter camp on "Big Creek," and subsequently became the county seat of Davis county. The town of Kaysville was founded a few miles to the northeast of Haight's encampment, on what was called at first, "Sandy Creek," but later "Kay's Creek," after William Kay, who in company with Edward Philips and John H. Green, settled there in the spring of 1850. In September following the settlers were organized into an ecclesiastical ward, with William Kay as the bishop, and the settlement took its name, Kaysville, from its first bishop.

THE FOUNDING OF OGDEN

Colonization EffortsHCIn the early spring of 1848 the Goodyear claim to a tract of land at the mouth of Weber canon, said to be twenty miles square, was purchased by Captain James Brown, of Mormon Battalion fame—and recently returned from California, where he had been to collect the pay of the Pueblo detachments of the battalion. The sum of $1,950 was paid for the tract, "cash down." Captain Brown made the purchase "by advice of the council," says John Smith, president of the Salt Lake high council," says John Smith, president of the Salt Lake high council in a letter to Brigham Young under date of March 6th, 1848. [^4] The tract is specifically described as commencing at the mouth of Weber canon, thence following the base of the Wasatch Mountains north to the hot springs; thence westward to the shores of the Salt Lake; along the shore southward to a point opposite Weber canon; thence eastward to the point of beginning. [^5] Goodyear was supposed to have held this tract of land on which Ogden City now stands, by virtue of a Mexican grant. This, however, it was subsequently discovered, was not the case. Goodyear's title amounted to no more than a squatter's claim, as there were evidently no Mexican grants of land in the eastern and northern parts of the territory ceded to the United States by Mexico that rested upon any clearly valid evidence of title from Mexico; and the government of the United States, in subsequent years, refused to recognize the validity of the so-called Mexican grant of Goodyear's, and insisted that title inhered in the government of the United States alone, and that by virtue of the cession of the territory to the United States. [^6]

Colonization EffortsHCAs a squatter's claim, Goodyear's boundaries were ridiculous because of their extent; but whatever his rights were, they were purchased, as detailed above, and James Brown and his family, with a brother Chilton Brown, Mr. Myers, Mr. Therlkill—of the Mississippi company of saints,—and their families, moved to the Goodyear purchase. It was the Mormon Battalion money that was paid to Mr. Brown in California that enabled the colonists, under instruction from the council of the twelve, to make this important purchase.

Colonization EffortsHCOgden City, taking its name from the river of the same name, after Salt Lake City, soon became one of the largest and most prosperous colonies of the Latter-day Saints. Before the end of the first year of its existence as a settlement, a substantial log structure was completed for combined use as a school house and meeting house, and a place for social community functions. The site for the present city between the Weber and Ogden rivers was chosen by Brigham Young on the 3rd of September, 1849. [^7] Soon afterwards the colony began the building of a wall about their town, as a protection against the Indians, [^8] and by 1851, the settlement had so increased in numbers that it was divided into two ecclesiastical wards, and organized into a stake of Zion, with Lorin Farr as president and R. Dana, and David B. Dillie as his counselors. [^9] On the 6th of February following the city was incorporated by act of the legislature of "Deseret."

Colonization EffortsHC479In 1851 a settlement was formed on Box Elder Creek, about fourteen miles north of Ogden, by Simeon A. Carter. A number of Welsh and Scandinavian emigrants joined him, and near this settlement a town site was surveyed that became "Brigham City." This gathering on Box Elder Creek marked the most northerly settlement founded during the existence of the "State of Deseret."

THE SETTLEMENTS FORMED IN THE SOUTH—PROVO

Colonization EffortsHCOn the 17th of March, 1849, a company of thirty men organized for the purpose of settling in Utah valley. John S. Higbee was chosen president; and Isaac Higbee, his brother, and Dimick B. Huntington were chosen counselors. [^10] The whole company numbered about one hundred and fifty souls. This was the company of settlers referred to in the chapter preceding this one, as being stopped by the Timpanogos Indians about three miles north of Provo river and required to enter into formal covenant that they "would not drive the Indians from their lands, nor deprive them of their rights." In April they were reported to be settled in Utah valley on the Provo river, about two miles northwest of the present site of the city of Provo, where in the months of April and May, under instructions from President Young, they built a fort, mounted cannon, and were watchful of the Indians who gathered in large numbers about the settlements, but appeared friendly, though from Fort Bridger came warnings of threatened uprisings. [^11]

Colonization EffortsHC480About the middle of September Fort Utah was visited by the first presidency of the church and other leading elders. A site for a city was selected, "about two miles southeast of Fort Utah—the present site of Provo. [^12] The city was incorporated on the 6th of February, 1851. In March of the same year it was organized as a stake of Zion. [^13]

Colonization EffortsHC480At the conclusion of the Indian difficulties, already detailed, settlements sprang up very rapidly in Utah valley, and before the "State of Deseret" ceased to exist, the settlements of Battle Creek, since known as Pleasant Grove; American Fork; Evansville, afterwards called Lehi; Springville, and Payson were all founded. [^14]

NEPHI ON "SALT CREEK"

Colonization EffortsHCTwenty miles south of the last named settlement, in a neighboring valley, on a stream called "Salt Creek," because in part fed by salt springs in a canon through which it ran, a settlement was formed in 1851, which developed into the county seat of Juab county and was called "Nephi," the Book of Mormon name for an ancient American city. The modern "Nephi" was on the southern route to California. Joseph L. Heywood was the leading spirit in founding the settlement. A town was regularly laid out into lots, and before the close of the year 1851, twenty-three cabins were built, chiefly of willows and mud. Brigham Young had directed the founders to begin the settlement by building a fort, but this was neglected. [^15]

SETTLEMENTS OF SAN PETE—MANTI

Colonization EffortsHCIn October, 1849, a company of brethren under the leadership of Isaac Morley left the Salt Lake colony to settle in San Pete valley, sometimes called San Pitch valley—variations of the same name borne by a Utah Indian chief in that region (sometimes written Sanpete). The sending of this colony to San Pete was in fulfillment of the promise made to Walker, the Utah chief, that settlers would be sent into his country in "six moons" or "maybe sooner," from the time of the peace smoke in June, to teach his people the white man's way of living. [^16] The place of location was about one hundred miles south of Salt Lake City, and certainly was a bold step in colonization, since it was so far removed from the main colonly, and in the very heart of the Indian country, and among the most war-like bands of the Utahs. [^17] The settlement was visited by President Young in August, 1850, when the site for a city was selected and surveyed by William Lemon. The plat shows 110 blocks, each 26 rods square, the streets six rods wide. [^18] The town thus laid out was named Manti, a Book of Mormon name for an ancient Nephite city. [^19] The city was given a charter of incorporation on the 6th of February, 1851, by act of the legislature of "Deseret." [^20] Other prosperous settlements soon sprang up in other parts of the San Pete valley.

SETTLEMENTS OF "LITTLE SALT LAKE" VALLEY—PAROWAN

Colonization EffortsHCIn December, 1850, a company which numbered 118 men, in which there were thirty families, with 101 wagons, left the Salt Lake colony for "Little Salt Lake valley," to make a settlement. The "valley" takes its name from a small body of saline water on the east side of what is now Iron county, and just east of the Escalante wide, desert valley. This undertaking was in further fulfillment of the promise made to Walker, the Utah chief, that settlers would be sent to his country. The party was under the leadership of George A. Smith, cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and a very practical, sturdy character, henceforth active and prominent in nearly all the colonizing movements in southern Utah. [^21]

Colonization EffortsHCThe company of settlers arrived in Little Salt Lake valley, over 200 miles south of Salt Lake City, on the 13th of January, 1851, and settled on a mountain stream "about three yards wide, one foot deep, with rapid current, and gravel bottom and banks;" afterwards called "Center Creek." The first site of the settlement, after thorough exploration of the surrounding country, was made permanent, and named Parowan, after a Utah Indian chief of the vicinity. The settlers were welcomed by Chief Peteeneet and his people, a miserable tribe known as "Piedes," [^22] who expressed themselves as pleased that the brethren were settling in their valley. Peteeneet said his tribes owned the country—a declaration afterwards confirmed by Chief Walker. The pipe of peace was smoked by the Indians and whites.

Colonization EffortsHC483Canarrah, another Piede chief, having first sent in one of his braves to ascertain if it would be safe for him to venture into the settlers' camp, paid them a visit. "His apparel consisted of a pair of moccasins, short leggings, and a kind of small cloak made of rabbit-skins. He was tall and stately in appearance, though apparently suffering from hunger. His followers were not as well dressed, being really specimens of humanity in its most degraded form." [^23]

Colonization EffortsHC483In March Chiefs Walker and Peteeneet and about seventy braves visited the settlement and smoked the peace pipe with President George A. Smith. Walker was very friendly and expressed the desire to build a house and teach his children to work. He represented that he had visited all the Indian bands in the surrounding country and advised them to be friendly with the colonists, and not disturb even a brute belonging to them. The object of his visit was to exchange horses for cattle as his people were in need of beef. Walker made known his intention of making a raid into California, but President George A. Smith persuaded him not to go, warning him of the likelihood of coming in contact with United States troops. [^24]

Colonization EffortsHC484In the first year the settlers built a fort, at Parowan, inclosing a stockade for their cattle and horses, and on the bastions of the fort placed their cannon in such manner as to command two sides of the fort. [^25] Later other settlements sprang up in Little Salt Lake valley, [^26] but Parowan marked the southern limits of the settlements founded during the actual existence of the "State of Deseret."

Colonization EffortsHC484In May, 1851, the settlement was visited by Brigham Young and a party of church leaders. They were met some distance from the Center Creek settlement by a large company of horsemen and escorted into the fort, amid the salute of cannons and the rejoicing of the people. Public meetings were held through three successive days—11th, 12th and 13th of May. The counsel of President Young to these settlers was of unusual interest, and is thus recorded by himself:

Colonization EffortsHC484"I spoke upon the importance of the Iron county mission and the advantages of the brethren fulfilling it. I advised them to buy up the Lamanite children as fast as they could, and educate them, and teach them the gospel, so that not many generations would pass ere they would become a white and delightsome people, and said that the Lord could not have devised a better plan than to have put us where we were, in order to accomplish that thing. I knew the Indians would dwindle away, but let a remnant of the seed of Joseph be saved. I told the brethren to have the logs or pickets of their fort so close that the Indians could not shoot arrows through. I recommended the adoption of the Indian name Parowan for the city." [^27]

Colonization EffortsHC484Parowan became one of the five incorporated cities under charters enacted by the general assembly of the "State of Deseret," February 6th, 1851.

WESTWARD SETTLEMENT—TOOELE

Colonization EffortsHCThe most westerly settlement founded during the existence of the "State of Deseret" was Tooele City, in the valley immediately west of the valley of the "Utah Outlet," about twenty-five miles southwesterly from Salt Lake City, and reached from the latter place via the southern shore of the Great Salt Lake, there turning the point of the mountain range into the valley of "tule," or bulrushes, from which the settlement took its name; but the word "tule," being misspelled by President Young's secretary, Thomas Bullock, it is written "Tooele," in our annals and maps, and has passed into common acceptance. It was first settled by John Rowberry and Cyrus Tolman in the autumn of 1849.

EARLY EXPLORATIONS—SOUTHWARD—THE RIO VIRGIN

Colonization EffortsHCIt has already been noted that seven counties had been organized in the state, extending from Weber in the north to Iron county in the south. Explorations of the country, however, had extended far beyond this organized territory. As early as the summer of 1847 Cache valley had been explored and reported upon as an available stock range; well watered and of rich soil. [^28] In November, 1849, a southern exploring company of about fifty persons was commissioned by the governor and legislative assembly of "Deseret" and organized with Parley P. Pratt as leader, to explore the southern country. The purpose of the expedition was to pass over the southern "rim of the Great Basin," to become acquainted with the character of the country beyond, and ascertain its availability as a place for settlement. [^29] The explorers reached Manti early in December, thence followed up the Sevier river to the point where it issued through an impassable canon; from which point the party explored a road through the mountains westerly to Little Salt Lake valley. The task occupied five days. Here the company divided, part remaining in Little Salt Lake valley to recruit the worn out oxen and make local explorations in the region, while the other division with the horses and mules continued southward. Thirty remained in the Little Salt Lake region, under the leadership of David Fullmer, while Elder Pratt with nineteen others continued the southern journey. Three hundred and eleven miles from Salt Lake they passed over the "rim of the basin;" and by a rapid descent reached the Rio Virgin. "Southwardly for about eighty miles" they had come through "a wide expanse of chaotic matter; huge hills, high sandy deserts, grassless, waterless plains, perpendicular rocks, loose, barren clay and dissolving beds of sandstone; in short, through a country in ruins, dissolved by the pelting storms of ages, or turned inside out, or upside down by terrible convulsion." [^30]

Colonization EffortsHC486The company traveled down the Rio Virgin, whose bottoms expanded to about a mile in width, the soil being loose, sandy, fertile, and easily irrigated, to the mouth of Rio Santa Clara. At this point, though in the midwinter (January), the climate was like that of early spring, the buds of the trees were swelling and new grass springing fresh to life, the days were warm with occasional showers.

Colonization EffortsHCThe exploring party began its return from this point, passing up the Santa Clara stream, followed by shy bands of Indians, prompted apparently by idle curiosity concerning their strange visitors; and who, as fear gave way before assurances of friendship, invited the white men to come and settle among them. Passing over the "rim of the basin" on the return journey, the explorers came upon Captain Hunt's California road, then passed through the valley subsequently known as "Mountain Meadows"—of sad and painful memory—and rejoined the other division of the exploring expedition in Little Salt Lake valley. [^31] The reunited party started upon the return journey to Salt Lake valley, where, after experiencing great suffering from the severity of the cold and the snow storms encountered, they arrived in scattering groups during February and March. [^32]

Colonization EffortsHC487Thus from the angle of territory formed by the juncture of the Rio Virgin,—flowing southwesterly—with Rio Santa Clara—flowing south and southeasterly—the present site of St. George, in the extreme southwesterly part of the state of Utah, to Bear river in the north, a distance of 350 miles in extent, was the intermountain country explored under the authority of the "State of Deseret." [^33]

SUMMARY OF ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER THE "STATE OF DESERET"

The line of settlements described in this chapter, extending almost due north and south for an extent of two hundred and fifty miles, had a population, when the "State of Deseret" went out of existence, of about 15,000; [^34] and if all the circumstances of the planting of these colonies be taken into account—the length of the initial journey from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake valley, which all had to make—the poverty of the people—the distance of some of the settlements from the principal colony—the precarious bases of supplies—the uncertain temper of the Indian tribes—the multiplied burdens of irrigated farming—all these combine to make the planting of these mountain colonies within the first four years from the arrival of Brigham Young in Salt Lake valley, the most remarkable colonizing achievement of modern times. Doubtless one of the greatest contributing causes of that success was the "State of Deseret." It represented the organized forces of the people. It gave confidence and strength and stability to all these colonizing movements. Its strength was apparent through the military legion it had organized, and the promptness and effectiveness of its movements in giving protection to the settlers. Wisdom was manifested through its legislation; notes of statesmanship were struck by the regular and occasional messages of the governor to the state's general legislative assembly; in proof of which, let the following excerpts from the message of Governor Young of December 2nd, 1850, bear witness.

After reviewing the very satisfactory conditions obtaining in the state generally; announcing the fact that the United States congress had passed an enabling act for a territorial government; rejoicing in the freedom of the state from debt,—largely due to the fact that her legislators and state officers had served the state free of cost and urging economy in public funds, expenditures, and the avoidance of bonded indebtedness by urging rather the assessment of a tax "at once" sufficient to meet all "the necessary expenditures of government, than permit an accumulation of indebtedness to harass every department, and the consequent necessity of forced and temporary loans." Then, regarding the things necessary for the development of the state, he said:

GOVERNOR YOUNG'S MESSAGE TO THE "STATE OF DESERET'S" LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, 1850

Of Manufactures:

"It is highly desirable that the capitalists of this state should introduce machinery for the manufacturing of all kinds of machinery, that will hereafter be wanted for factories, etc.; also stoves, and other articles of heavy exportation should be manufactured by our own enterprise and industry. Incalculable benefits would result to this community, if they would engage in almost every kind of manufacture, not only of iron, but paper, books, woolen cloth, leather, crockery, stone-ware, and sugar. Upon this last named article I will submit a single estimate for your consideration. Not more than twenty thousand persons would use 456,250 pounds, allowing only one ounce a day to each person; the expense of the transportation alone, at the low rate of ten cents a pound, would amount to $45,625; a sum adequate to construct the most, extensive sugar manufactory; and when considered in connection with the superior quality of the beet, and facility with which it can be raised in these valleys, renders it almost a suicidal policy for us to be dependent upon other than our own resources for that article."

Of Guarded State Assistance to Struggling Industries:

490"There is no doubt but that the demand and price consequent upon the distance of any successful competition, will prove sufficient inducement for the capitalists to invest their means, in whatever will necessarily prove a safe investment and insure an abundant return; any and all kinds of encouragement, by throwing around them an energetic and efficient government, should unquestionably be given. It is wisdom to let capital be associated in infant settlements, because there is a necessity for it, for a time; but to lay the foundation for monied capitalists to monopolize against labor, is no part of my policy, politics or religion. To encourage enterprise in constructing works of magnitude, it may be well to grant privileges; but they should be so guarded, as to be made amenable to the power granting them at all times for the abuse of the powers granted, or diverting them to any other object than the one designed."

490Of Iron Manufactures and Railroads:

490"In the neighborhood of what has usually been termed 'Little Salt Lake,' (now Iron county) our exploring party of last winter, discovered inexhaustible beds of the very best of iron ore. A settlement is now being made at that point. * * * From this city [Salt Lake] a railroad will most probably be constructed to Iron county, as also continuously to Southern California, terminating at San Diego. Whatever encouragement you may find it in your power to extend to an object so full of interest to our citizens, I shall most readily acquiesce therein, being within the range of my constitutional duties."

490The Policy in Founding Colonies:

490"In extending, and making new settlements, one uniform course has been recommended; that of building and settling in forts, in the first instance, and farming in one enclosure. This course has proven highly successful."

490Education:

"Under the fostering care of the government, ['State of Deseret' of course] the subject education is fast assuming an importance that will reflect great credit upon our exertions. The board of chancellors and regents of the university have already established schools in various parts of the state, mostly, however, without incurring any expense to the institution. The enlightened course pursued by that board, will unquestionably redound to the benefit of the institution, as well as to a general system of education, throughout the state; and must certainly meet with your cordial approval and warmest encouragement. The situation, [location] selected for educational purposes upon the eastern side of the city, will probably be enclosed the ensuing winter; and suitable buildings erected as soon as the necessary funds can be obtained for that purpose." [^35]

Pride in Economic Government:

491"We have the proud satisfaction of having sustained a quiet, yet energetic government, under all the vicissitudes incident to new and untried localities; and when the general government shall have assumed to pay the expenditures consequent upon the Indian expeditions—of being comparatively free from debt.

491Unlike the golden browed neighbors of our sister state, [California] no agent of ours is hawking about our state bonds, to obtain the necessary means to defray the sixteen dollars per diem allowance of the members of the legislature! In this state, no expense has been incurred by any of the departments of government, for services rendered. The auditor's report will show, the amounts paid out, being almost exclusively for public improvements, or articles purchased for public use." [^36]

491Approaching the conclusion of his message he said:

491"'Deseret' is not yet three years old, and yet such has been the rapidity of her growth, the extent of her improvements, and the development of her resources, as to command the admiration, and the respect of all whose lot has been cast within her bounds, and those afar off, hearing the glad tidings, are stretching forth their itching palms, towards another of those free states where the oppressed go free, and the poor, through ordinary industry, find ample provision.

Forgive a single allusion to the past. The oppressed became the oppressor, [alluding to the early intolerant Americans of New England] and the oppressed again go forth to form new communities, new settlements, and new governments. Hence are we here, amid these vast mountains and solitary plains; hence are we here, assembled in solemn council to frame laws for the organization and rule of communities; and, what gives zest to the picture, devise such laws, and regulations as shall perpetuate, guarantee, and sustain in time to come, our free and glorious institutions to the latest generation."

492Pride in their state government, when these things could be truthfully said of it, may be pardoned in the early settlers of the Salt Lake valley; but while there is evidence of strong attachment for the "State of Deseret," the local pride and loyalty did not diminish their larger pride and loyalty to the greater republic, the American Union of States. "Deseret" was a loyal and patriotic state of the Union. From the first and always her people recognized her as destined to be a member of that Union, whatever action congress might now take upon "Deseret's" petition for admission into the sisterhood of states. Her people knew she could have no political life apart from the national political life; the proof of which lies, first, in the fact of their persistence in seeking admission into the Union; and, second, in the state's willing and cheerful selfeffacement in order to give place to the territorial form of government determined upon by the national congress.

492LOYALTY OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS TO THE UNITED STATES

Under the regime of the "State of Deseret" the people were wont to give expression to their loyalty, and voice their patriotic sentiments in song and speech and public festivities. Naturally, to these early Utah colonists, the greatest thing within their experience was their deliverance from what had been to them intolerance, oppression, and a sense of bondage; and their safe arrival in the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains. And this event, as the anniversaries of it recurred, they celebrated; but in those celebrations, unconsciously, as I judge to be the case, they went beyond themselves and voiced the larger loyalty and patriotism that was in them, by bringing into a merely local event the celebration of the greater events, which resulted in the founding of the United States. In evidence of this view I introduce in part the account of their celebration of the second anniversary of the advent of the Pioneers under Brigham Young's leadership into Salt Lake valley. The account of this celebration was published in the Frontier Guardian of September 19th, 1849.

CELEBRATION OF THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF ENTRANCE INTO SALT LAKE VALLEY JULY 24TH, 1849

"July 24th being the anniversary of the arrival of Presidents Young and Kimball, with the Pioneers in the valley, the inhabitants were awoke by the firing of cannon, accompanied by music; the brass band, playing martial airs, were then carried through the city in two carriages, returning to the bowery by seven o'clock. The bowery is a building 100 feet long by 60 wide, built on 104 posts, and covered with boards; but, for the services of this day, a canopy or awning was extended about 100 feet from each side of the bowery, to accommodate the vast multitude at dinner.

493At half past seven the large national flag, [^37] measuring sixty-five feet in length, was unfurled at the top of the liberty pole, which is 104 feet high, and was saluted with the firing of six guns, the ringing of the Nauvoo bell, and spirit-stirring airs from the band.

493At eight o'clock [a. m. of July 24th] the multitude were called together by the firing of guns and music, the bishops of the several wards arranging themselves in the sides of the aisle, with the banners of their wards unfurled, each bearing some appropriate inscription.

493At a quarter past eight, the presidency of the stake, twelve, and bands went to prepare the escort in the following order, at the house of President Brigham Young, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, J. M. Grant, and F. D. Richards:

494PROCESSION

494Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform.

494Brass band.

494Twelve bishops, bearing banners of their wards.

494Twenty-four young men, dressed in white, with white scarfs on their right shoulders, and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his hands the Declaration of Independence and Constitution of the United States, and swords sheathed in their left hands; one of them carrying a beautiful banner, inscribed on it—

494The Zion of the Lord.

494Twenty-four young ladies, dressed in white, with white scarfs on their right shoulders, and a wreath of white roses on their heads, each carrying the Bible and Book of Mormon; and one bearing a very neat banner,—

494Hail to our Chieftain.

494Newel K. Whitney, Bishop. Thomas Bullock, Clerk.

494John Smith, Patriarch.

494Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Charles C. Rich, Daniel Spencer, Willard Richards, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Erastus Snow, D. Fullmer, Willard Snow.

494Twelve bishops, carrying flags of their wards.

494Twenty-four silver greys, led by Isaac Morley, patriarch, each having a staff, painted red on the upper part, and a branch of white ribbon fastened at the top, one of them carrying the flag with the stars and stripes, and the inscription—

494Liberty and Truth.

494The procession started from the house at nine o'clock. The young men and young ladies in passing through the streets, sang a hymn—the cannons kept up one continual roar—the musketry rolled—the Nauvoo bell pealed forth its silvery notes—and the air was filled by the sweet strains of the brass band playing a slow march. On arriving at the bowery, the escort was received with loud shouts of 'Hosannah to God and the Lamb,' which made the air reverberate. While Presidents Young, Kimball, and Richards, John Smith, Newel K. Whitney, and Thomas Bullock were proceeding down the aisle, cheers were given, and 'Hail to the Governor of Deseret.' On being seated by the committee on the stand, the escort passed round the assembly singing a hymn of praise, when they also marched down the aisle, and were seated in double rows on each side. The vast multitude were called to order by Mr. J. M. Grant, and when they were seated Mr. Erastus Snow offered a prayer of thanksgiving to our heavenly Father.

494Richard Ballantyne, one of the twenty-four young men, then came forward to the stand, his coronet glittering as if with rubies, and in a neat speech presented the Declaration of Independence and Constitution of the United States, in a respectful manner, to shouts, led on by President Young, of:—

494'May it Live Forever and Ever!'

494The Declaration of Independence was then read by Mr. Erastus Snow, after which the band struck up a lively air.

495Mr. Bullock arose and read the poem, The Mountain Standard, composed by P. P. Pratt. [^38]

495At the conclusion of the reading, the multitude rose and shouted three times: 'Hosannah, Hosannah, Hosannah, to God and the Lamb, forever and ever, Amen;' President Young leading, while the banners were waved by the bishops.

495This was followed by the band playing a lively air, after which Mr. Bullock arose and read the following:

495ODE TO LIBERTY. fn Fairest spirit of the skies, Fairest child of Paradise, Now Columbia's lawful prize, Glorious Liberty. 'Twas for thee our Fathers sought, For thy sake our heroes fought, Thee our bleeding patriots bought, Precious Liberty. Never, never cease to wave, O'er the ashes of the brave, Shield, oh! shield the patriot's grave, Flag of Liberty. While thy banner waves abroad, All may freely worship God, Fearless of the tyrant's rod, Sacred Liberty. Should oppression ever dare, From thy brow, the wreath to tear, Righteous vengeance shall not spare Thy foes, oh, Liberty. Sooner than to bondage yield, Boldly in the battle field, Let the sons of freedom wield, The sword of Liberty."

495The foregoing Ode was then sung by the twenty-four silver greys, to the tune of Bruce's Address to His Army.

495This was followed by speeches, the principal one by President Young, in the course of which he said:

PRESIDENT YOUNG'S SPEECH

"Why do we not celebrate the 4th of July? The Declaration of Independence is just as precious to me today as it was twenty days ago! Has it not the same validity that it had in 1776? Is it not as good today as it was twenty days ago? We chose this day that we might have a little bread to set on our tables; today we can see the bread, cucumbers, and beets, that we could not have seen twenty days ago. Inasmuch as there are some strangers in our midst, I want you to give them their dinner, for they rejoice to see us happy, and I say they are welcome, heartily welcome."

496After the public speaking a procession was formed and marched to the waiting and feast-laden tables, when—

496"Several thousand of the saints dined sumptuously on the fruits of the earth, produced by their own hands, who invited several hundreds of the emigrants [to eat with them] even all who were in the valley. A company who came in during the dinner were stopped, dismounted, placed at one of the tables, and were astonished by the warmth of their reception. Two or three score of Indians also partook of the repast; indeed such a feast of the body, coupled with a feast of the soul, has not been experienced on this continent for a length of time.

496At a quarter past three p. m., the band, the bishops with their banners, the young men and young ladies, and the silver greys were formed into the line of escort, and again promenaded round the vast assemblage, singing the songs of Zion, while the Nauvoo bell continued pealing, musketry rolling, and the cannon roaring. President Young declared he had never seen such a dinner in his life. Mr. Rich said that it was almost a marvelous thing that everybody was satisfied, and many greyheaded veterans from different countries in the old world, united in declaring they had often sat down to the festive board in the United States, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Norway and Denmark, but had never enjoyed such a day as this. Not an oath was uttered—not a man intoxicated—not a jar or disturbance occurred to mar the union, peace, and harmony of the day."

496After the feast a second public meeting was held at which there was a great variety of toasts given, some after careful preparation, and others extemporaneously expressed. Among these, national patriotic sentiment was frequently voiced, as witness the following:

496"The Constitution of the United States: The Mercury of American Liberty:—Patriotism, virtue, and honesty raise it to the summer heat of happiness and prosperity; but corruption, vice, and treachery sink it below the zero of misery and wretchedness.

496The President of the United, and the Governors of the several States:—Wise stewards make virtue exalt a nation, and sin a reproach to the people.

496Our God, our Country, and our Rights:—May we fear and love Him, honor and serve That, and merit and enjoy These.

496The Goddess of Liberty.—We welcome her safe arrival to the valleys of the mountains. May she never have cause to repent her emigrating hither, or hide her radiant smiles from the children of 'Deseret.'"

497A like celebration to this was held again in 1850, when Willard Richards was the chief orator of the occasion; [^39] and again in 1851, amid the closing weeks of "Deseret's" expiring authority, for by this time the federal appointees to the territory, who resided outside of Utah, had arrived. [^40] Elder W. W. Phelps, regent of the university and Daniel H. Wells were the speakers of the occasion. The oration of Squire Wells has become historical, since it gave offense to the newly arrived United States territorial officers on the one hand (of which more in another chapter), and proclaimed the loyalty of the saints on the other, and in a manner worthy of perpetuation; these paragraphs of the speech—offensive parts omitted—were as follows: [^41]

HISTORIC SPEECH OF DANIEL H. WELLS—LOYALTY OF THE SAINTS

"It has been thought by some, that this people—abused, maltreated, insulted, robbed, plundered, murdered, and finally disfranchised and expatriated—would naturally feel reluctant to again unite their destiny with the American republic. * * * No wonder that it was thought by some that we would not again submit ourselves (even while we were yet scorned and ridiculed) to return to our allegiance to our native country. Remember, that it was by the act of our country, not ours, that we were expatriated; and then consider the opportunity we had of forming other ties. Let this pass while we lift the veil and show institutions, were all ours; they are still ours. Our fathers were heroes of the Revolution. Under the master spirits of an Adams, a Jefferson, and a Washington, they declared and maintained their independence and under the guidance of the spirit of truth they fulfilled their mission whereunto they were sent from the presence of the Father. Because demagogues have arisen and seized the reins of power, should we relinquish our interest in that country made dear to us by every tie of association and con-sanguinity? * * * Those who have indulged such sentiments concerning us, have not read 'Mormonism' aright; for never will we be found arrayed by the side of her enemies, although she herself may cherish them in her own bosom. Although she may launch forth the thunder bolts of war, which may return and spend their fury upon her own head, never, no never, will we permit the weakness of human nature to triumph over our love of country, our devotion to her institutions, handed down to us by our honored sires, made dear by a thousand tender recollections."

REFLECTIONS UPON THE "STATE OF DESERET"

The "State of Deseret" continued her existence about two and a half years, then passed into history. She was but a provisional state, and her authority could have no sanctions except in the voluntary submission of the people to her ordinances, and the judicial and administrative acts of her officers. Not until the legislative assembly and the governor of the territory of Utah, by enactment, declared that such of her laws as were not in conflict with the organic act of the territory of Utah, were approved and should remain until superceded by other enactments, was legal sanction given to the proceeding of the "State of Deseret." But notwithstanding these facts, the "State of Deseret," her rise and rule until displaced by a territorial government is an instructive chapter in the history of civil government in our country. Her creation and triumphant and peaceful reign for more than two years over the intermountain colonies, proclaim with singular force the ability of her people for self-government. And if the instructor in the science of civil government seeks an illustration of the evolution of civil government from society—from its early beginnings to the free development of a highly complex, political organization, competent to deal with many and varied conditions; with large and diversified interests; and at the same time prove itself efficient in conserving the liberty of the individual, and in giving peace and security to community life—then he may not do better than to use the "State of Deseret" as an object lesson.

Footnotes

"The following is a condensed report of the enumeration of the inhabitants of Utah territory, taken February, 1856:

Counties. Males. Females. Total.

Great Salt Lake————— 12,730 13,074 25,804

Utah————— 6,951 7,614 14,565

Davis————— 4,765 4,575 9,340

Weber————— 3,486 3,585 7,071

Iron————— 2,474 2,943 5,417

Tooele————— 1,315 1,673 2,988

San Pete————— 1,110 1,133 2,243

Juab————— 807 1,034 1,841

Box Elder————— 822 717 1,539

Washington————— 742 778 1,520

Millard————— 544 512 1,056

Green River————— 394 345 739

Cedar————— 312 369 681

Malad————— 259 208 467

Cache————— 240 223 463

Beaver————— 118 126 244

Shambip————— 83 64 147

Salt Lake Islands————— 125 85 210 ———— ——— ———

37,277 39,058 76,335

Great Salt Lake City, March 1st, 1856.

I do hereby certify that the above is a correct enumeration of the white inhabitants of Utah territory, according to the reports furnished by my assistants, and which are now on file in my office.

[Signed] "Leonard W. Hardy, Census Agent."

"Great Salt Lake City, September 13th, 1860.

The above is a correct transcript from the originals on file in the Historians' Office.

"Thomas Bullock, Clerk."

In 1858 the peace commissioners sent to Utah territory reported that the saints did not exceed 40,000 to 50,000 souls, half of them foreigners, and that they could bring 7,000 men, of whom 1,000 were valuable for cavalry, into the field. In 1859, M. Remy made out the number of saints in Utah territory—not including Nevada to be 80,000 souls, and the total in the world 186,000. By far too large an estimate.

---
Notas:
[^1] Civil Government in the United States, Fiske, pp. 191-2.
[^2] Toulmin Smith's Local Self-Government and Centralization, London, 1851, p. 12. Quoted with approval by Fiske, as a definition of "local self-government." (See Civil Government in the United States, pp. 302-303). Fiske also quotes our author's definition of "centralization," as follows: "Centralization is that system of government under which the smallest number of minds, and those knowing the least, and bearing the fewest opportunities of knowing about the special matter in hand, and having the smallest interest in its well-working, have the management of it, or control over it."
[^3] To prove which, let the facts, condensed from the Declaration of Independence, be submitted:
[^4] The date of the appointments is given as the 20th of September by Bancroft in History of Utah, p. 456. As the 28th of September, in Rocky Mountain Saints, Stenhouse, p. 274. Bernhisel under date of Oct. 3rd, 1850, in a letter to Erastus Snow, announces an accompanying list of territorial officers, hence the appointment was made previous to that date. (Millennial Star, vol xii, p. 330).
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., January and February entries, for 1851, pp. 6-7.
[^6] Deseret News, for 19th April, 1851, p. 244.
[^7] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for July, 1851, pp. 55. The party which included Dr. J. M. Bernhisel and Almon W. Babbitt, were detained by high water at the Elkhorn. (Ibid).
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1851, p. 59. See also Congressional Globe, first Session of 32nd Congress, Appendix, new series, vol. xxv, p. 84, et seq.
[^9] "At which time also Willard Richards had been appointed postmaster, Salt Lake City," (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, p. 117; and Deseret News of Nov. 30, 1850).
[^10] See Report of Governor Young to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, first Session of 32nd Congress, new series, vol. xxv, p. 91. The organic act did not require a full census, but only "an enumeration of the inhabitants." (Ibid). The non-arrival of instructions and blanks, etc., the governor attributes to a "total miscarriage" of them. (Ibid). Later we shall see that the United States officials of the territory who left their posts in Utah reported that there had been no satisfactory census of the territory taken up to the time of their arrival; upon which point Brigham Young in March, 1852, records the following in his Ms. History: "Mr. Kennedy, superintendent of the 7th census, having on two different occasions expressed himself much pleased with the manner and accuracy with which I had taken the census of our territory, and the returned officers having denied in their report that the census was taken at all, Mr. Kennedy wrote to our delegate a very satisfactory letter upon the subject." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for March, 1852, p. 32).
[^11] The Proclamation is published in full in Deseret News of July 12th, 1851. The election was to be conducted "in accordance with the existing laws of the provisional government of the 'State of Deseret' regulating elections," passed by the general assembly of that state in 1849. There were to be 13 councilors and 26 representatives apportioned as follows: Salt Lake county, 6 councilors and 13 representatives; Weber county, 2 councilors and 3 representatives; Davis county, 1 councilor, 3 representatives; Tooele county, 1 representative; Utah county, 2 councilors and 3 representatives; Sanpete county, 1 councilor and 2 representatives; Iron county, 1 councilor and 2 representatives. At the same time and place the delegate to congress was to be chosen. The day of the election was appointed on the same day that county and precinct officers were to be elected under the law of the "State of Deseret," and the people were urged to elect these officers as usual. (Deseret News for July 12th, 1851).
[^12] "Hence my anxiety," he adds, "to proceed with as little delay as possible in obtaining the enumeration of the inhabitants, preparatory to apportioning the members of the council and house of representatives to be elected from each." (Report of Governor Young to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, new series, vol, xxv, p. 91).
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] This would include the present counties of Millard, the western part, at least, of Juab, Tooele, and Box Elder; and much of the territory of the present state of Nevada.
[^15] This was practically the eastern half of the territory which then included the western half of the present state of Colorado.
[^16] This would include the southwest portion of the present state of Utah and much of the southern part of the present state of Nevada.
[^17] Deseret News of July 26, 1851, where the Proclamation will be found in extenso.
[^18] For Proclamation, see Deseret News, Aug. 19th, 1851.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., date of 7th Sept., 1851.
[^21] Stansbury's Report, p. 144; see also Journal of Discourses, passim.
[^22] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. i. Also the other revelations of the same book, passim.
[^23] "We would esteem a territorial government of our own, as one of the richest boons of earth." (Letter of the Council, signed by Brigham Young, to President Polk, Aug. 9th, 1846. See Note 5, end of chapter lxxiii).
[^24] See chapter lxxxix, especially Note 2 at the end of the chapter. It will be remembered that Colonel Kane withdrew the first application for a territorial government when he found the Washington authorities disposed to appoint officers for the proposed territory from others than the local community.
[^25] The facts are stated in this History, ante, chapter lxxxix.
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, pp. 127-130. In the letter which informed Governor Young of the failure of the appointment of the above list of territorial officers, Dr. Bernhisel said: "I greatly regret that all the officers were not appointed from among our number. At my first interview with the president in relation to the appointees he promised he would not appoint any man who was not friendly disposed toward our people. * * * I am gratified to be able to inform you that the president has evinced the most liberal and friendly feelings toward our people." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, pp. 127-130). Nevertheless, as already noted, he mixed the appointments for Utah, four from the local community, five—counting the subagents in the Indian service—from the east.
[^27] Stansbury's Report to the Government of the United States, 1852, pp. 146-147.
[^28] Gunnison's The Mormons, pp. 154-5.
[^29] The Utah colonists after the lapse of those five years, could well have used the language to the administration at Washington that Puritans employed to King James of England when applying for the privilege of planting a largely self-governing colony in America: "With characteristic simplicity and honesty of purpose they represented to him that they were well weaned from the delicate milk of their mother country, and inured to the difficulties of a strange land that they were knit together in a strict and sacred bond, by virtue of which they held themselves bound to take care of the good of each other and of the whole; that it was not with them as with other men, whom small things could discourage, or small discontent cause to with themselves at home again." (History of the United States, Marcus Wilson, Appendix to the Colonial History, p. 288).
[^30] Stansbury's Report, pp. 146-7.
[^31] New York Herald of March 9th, 1852.
[^32] Organic Act of Utah, sec. 11.
[^33] In a communication to President Fillmore, which was his report of conditions in Utah after the "flight" of Judge Brandebury, Brocchus, et al., from Utah, Governor Young in a fine vein of sarcasm takes the measure of this first group of "foreign" appointees to territorial offices. "In the appointment of new officers, if you will pardon me for making a suggestion, I would propose," the Governor goes on to say, "that such men be selected as will reside within the territory, or have a general and extended knowledge of men and things as well as of the elementary and fundamental principles of law and legislation; men who have lived and practiced outside, as well as indoors, and whose information extends to the duties of a justice of the peace, as well as the well-known passages and districts of the court room." (Governor Young's Letter to President Fillmore, date of September 29, 1851, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 92).
[^34] "Who of worth," asks the writer of a letter to the New York Herald—March 9th, 1852—signed by Jedediah M. Grant, Great Salt Lake City's first mayor—"Who of worth and standing at home would venture out to our distant and undescribed country? Accordingly, the offices went begging among all the small-fry politicians who could be suspected of being fit to fill them." The matter of the offices going begging is emphasized by the fact that even after the office of chief justice was given to Joseph Buffington, of Pennsylvania, he refused to serve. (Ante, p.
[^35] The Grant-signed Letters, p. 3. (They were published in pamphlet form, now rare). The linen of the judge was matter of jest and he was often referred to as "the great unwashed." (Ibid, p. 7, and passim).
[^36] History of Utah, Bancroft, p. 456.
[^37] The Grant-signed Letters, p. 8.
[^38] The judge "denied that he came here (i. e. to Utah) with the view of being elected delegate to congress, but had expressed his willingness to accept that office, if elected, and that he thought he could do us good in that way." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 8th Sept., 1851, pp. 61-69). In referring again to the matter, in a letter to the judge under date of Sept. 20th, 1851, Governor Young represented that it was "reported, and on pretty good authority," that Brocchus had said that, "if the citizens of Utah do not send me as their delegate to Washington, by G—d, I'll use all my influence against them, and will crush them. I have the influence and the power to do it, and I will accomplish it if they do not make me their delegate." (The letter from which the above is quoted, with three others by Brigham Young to Judge Brocchus, and two of the judge's to Brigham Young, were published in the New York Herald, and reproduced in the Deseret News of Oct. 16, 1852).
[^39] Grant-signed Letters, p. 3.
[^40] Governor Young's Report to President Fillmore, Appendix, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 92.
[^41] Ibid, p. 92.
