B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

499CHAPTER XCII

499THE TERRITORY OF UTAH AND THE CHURCH-GENERAL CHARACTER OF FEDERAL APPOINTEES TO OFFICE IN UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHC499THE history of the Church of the Latter-day Saints is inseparably associated with the history of the territory of Utah. Hence the history of the one must largely include the history of the other. In the treatment of the incidents that go to the making of that dual history certain principles, that deserve to be regarded as essentially American, must be presented and held constantly in view, else there will be no right understanding had of those things that are to be considered.

499THE RIGHT OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

Among the things thus to be held in consciousness is the American principle of the right of local self-government. This right is inherent in the doctrine that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. The declaration of the ability of people for self-government, holds within it the implied right of local self-government, which one may say, so largely enters into the American system. Hence the delegation of part of the sovereign power of the people to the national government and to the state governments respectively; with the residue of power granted neither to the nation nor to the states, but reserved to the people. The powers granted to the nation are exercised in affairs purely national; the powers granted to the states, respectively, are employed in affairs pertaining to a state—a concession to the right of local self-government. And in order that government in its practical administration may be exercised as nearly as possible by the people of a vicinage, municipal and county governments obtain. Not that sovereignty belongs to municipal or county governments; for over the county and township governments the state exercises a general supervision; "indeed it clothes them with their authority." [^1] Government that exists by the consent of the governed and bears directly upon the citizen, to be of first rate value to him, must be local government, as surely as trial by jury, to be of real value in the preservation of liberty, must be a jury of one's peers and of the vicinage; so that, in the latter case, one accused of crime may rest assured that he will be tried by men who will view the facts which go to the making up of his alleged crime in harmony with the conceptions and ideals that obtain in the community where the accused lives, and in which the alleged offense was committed: so, also, the value and purpose of local self-government is that its administration may be in harmony with local conceptions of rights and duties; and also that government may be administered by a system "under which the greatest number of minds knowing the most, and having the fullest opportunities of knowing it, about the special matter in hand, and having the greatest interest in its well-working, have the management of it or control over it." [^2]

Political and Legal AffairsHCAs it was the violations of the right of local self-government which went so far in making up the long list of grievances of the American colonies against the imperial government of Great Britain, [^3] so, for well-nigh half a century, did violations of the right of local self-government in the case of Utah constitute the chief source of the trouble between the people of the territory and the government of the United States.

THE CREATION OF THE TERRITORY OF UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHCOf the alternative propositions presented by the Salt Lake colonists to congress, the ratification of the provisional state government formed by them, or the creation of a territorial government, congress acted upon the second. The organic act which created the territory was approved on the 9th of September, 1850. A full set of territorial officers was shortly afterwards [^4] appointed by President Fillmore, with the advice and consent of the senate of which the following is the list:

Political and Legal AffairsHC501Governor, Brigham Young, of Utah; Secretary, Broughton D. Harris, of Vermont; Chief Justice, Joseph Buffington, of Pennsylvania; Associate Justices, Perry E. Brocchus, of Alabama; Zerubbabel Snow, of Ohio, a "Mormon;" United States Attorney, Seth M. Blair, of Utah; United States Marshal, Joseph L. Heywood, of Utah.

Political and Legal AffairsHC502Brigham Young was also appointed Indian agent for the territory, and Stephen B. Rose and Henry R. Day sub-Indian agents; the subagents were not residents of Utah, nor "Mormons." The four officers in the above list whose residence is given as Utah and Ohio, were members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints; the other three were non-"Mormons." Joseph Buffington, however, refused to serve, and Lemuel H. Brandebury, of Pennsylvania, was appointed chief justice in his place. The news of these appointments reached Salt Lake City on the 27th of January, 1850; and on the 3rd of February following, Brigham Young qualified by taking the oath of office as governor of Utah, before Daniel H. Wells, chief justice of the "State of Deseret." [^5] The list of the appointments was contained in the New York Tribune of the 11th of October, which reached Salt Lake on the above date; and it was upon that information that Governor Young proceeded. Joseph L. Heywood, appointed to be United States marshal, was the first to receive his commission, which came in April, and he at once filed his bond with the secretary of the "State of Deseret," ready to be delivered to the secretary of the territory, when the latter officer should arrive, and immediately entered upon the duties of his office. [^6]

THE ARRIVAL OF TERRITORIAL OFFICERS

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe other officers were absent from the territory, but arrived on the following dates: Chief Justice Brandebury, on the 7th of June; Judge Snow, Secretary Broughton D. Harris, Stephen B. Rose, and Henry R. Day, the last two the sub-Indian agents for the territory, on the 19th of July, 1851; [^7] and Judge Brocchus on the 17th of August. [^8] With the officers who arrived on the 19th of July came also Almon W. Babbitt, who had been entrusted with $20,000 appropriated by congress for the erection of suitable public buildings at the seat of the territorial government; and Dr. Bernhisel, who had been appointed by President Fillmore to purchase a library for Utah, for which purpose congress had appropriated $5,000. Secretary Harris also brought with him the $24,000 congress had appropriated for the expenses of the legislature.

THE TERRITORIAL CENSUS

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe organic act creating the territory required that the governor should "cause a census or enumeration of the inhabitants of the several counties and districts of the territory to be taken," and the first election to be "held at such time and places, and be conducted in such manner, as the governor shall appoint and direct." Governor Young learning from the eastern mail in November, 1850, that he had been appointed to take a "census of 'Deseret'," [^9] notwithstanding the non-arrival of special instructions and blanks, proceeded to do so, directing his "assistants to make out two sets of returns, one for the United States as census agent for 'Deseret,' and one for Utah." [^10] This work in the governor's judgment was sufficiently advanced early in July to warrant his issuing a proclamation apportioning the representation of the several counties in the territorial legislative assembly, and fixing upon the first Monday in August as the time of the election. [^11]

PREMATURE ACTION OF GOVERNOR YOUNG IN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE

Political and Legal AffairsHCAll this was done before the arrival of the secretary of the territory, and, therefore, without his seal and signature to any of the documents of the several acts of procedure, and technically not strictly in legal order. Governor Young's justification for proceeding in these preliminary steps in the inauguration of the territorial regime was that the election of a delegate to congress might be held in time to admit of his departure for Washington "before the lateness of the season would render the long and arduous journey dangerous, if not impracticable." [^12] He also calls attention to the fact that although the secretary, with the other territorial officers had been appointed in the fall of 1850, they did not make their appearance in Utah until nearly one year afterwards; [^13] and when it is remembered that the colonists of "Deseret" had been without any recognized government since their arrival in Salt Lake valley, four years before, it is not matter for wonderment if they manifested some impatience for the inauguration of the government now authorized by congress and the administration of their civil affairs through it.

INDIAN AGENCIES AND AGENTS

On the arrival of the sub-Indian agents Governor Young by proclamation divided the territory into three agencies: the first to be known as the "Parvan Agency," to include all the territory "west of the Shoshone [Indian] nation, and north of the Parvan valley;" [^14] the second to be known as the "Uintah Agency," to include all the Snake or Shoshones, the Uintah Yampa, and other tribes south within said territory, and east of the eastern rim of the Great Basin; [^15] the third to be known as the "Parowan Agency," to include all the country lying west of the eastern rim of the Great Basin, and south of the south line of the Parvan valley to the western bounds of the territory. [^16] The two subagents having arrived on the 19th of July, the above divisions of the territory into agencies was announced by proclamation of Governor Young on the 21st. Henry R. Day was apopinted to the Parvan Agency; and Stephen B. Rose to the Uintah Agency. [^17]

JUDICIAL DISTRICTS MARKED OFF AND PROCLAIMED

Political and Legal AffairsHCWith nearly equal promptness Governor Young announced the judicial districts of the territory. Chief Justice Brandebury had been in Salt Lake City since early in June. The arrival of Judge Snow on the 19th of July made a majority of the judiciary present in the territory, and on the 8th of August Governor Young issued a proclamation dividing the territory into three judicial districts, and appointing the judges as follows: The first district comprised Salt Lake and Tooele counties and the adjacent territory east and west to the boundaries of the territory including Bridger precinct; this district was assigned to Judge Brandebury. The second district comprised Weber and Davis counties and the adjacent territory east and west, and north to the boundary of the territory, to which Judge Snow was assigned. The third district comprised Utah, Sanpete, and Iron counties, and the adjacent territory east and west, and south to the boundary of the territory, to which Judge Brocchus was assigned. [^18] To the proclamation creating these districts and making these appointments the signature of the secretary of the territory was attached. [^19]

THE ELECTION OF THE LEGISLATURE AND THE DELEGATE TO CONGRESS

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe election of the members to the legislature, the delegate to congress, and the county and precinct officers, took place on the first Monday in August, and it would seem that the whole setting for the peaceful inauguration of the territorial government was completed. It was at this juncture, however, that the evil effects of violating the right of local self-government became apparent. In the very beginning of territorial government the clash came between the people of Utah and the officers not of the vicinage, men in no way in sympathy with the people among whom they had come to administer the law; but, on the contrary, utterly opposed to them in sentiment, in habits of thought, and in customs. Inasmuch as this first clash between the people of Utah and such United States officers contains all the elements that enter into many other subsequent conflicts, extending through nearly half a century, I think this an appropriate place to consider those elements, and it will obviate the necessity of referring to them later.

THE MENTAL ATTITUDE OF THE SAINTS TOWARDS THE UNITED STATES

The Latter-day Saints themselves were a people of many grievances, and had many just causes of complaint,—as we have abundantly seen in previous chapters of this work—against the local communities in which they had lived, as also against the state governments of Missouri and Illinois; which governments had not only refused them the protection guaranteed by the Constitutions and laws of those states, but the chief executives of both states, with other high state officials in each, had sided with the tormentors of the saints, made common cause with the mobs against them, and became factors in effecting their expulsion from the states named, and of their final expatriation from the republic. To all this, and because of the frequent appeals and petitions for redress of grievances made to it, the general government was a witness, but took no steps to rescue the saints from the manifest injustice of mob violence, nor to interfere with the course of the state governments, either when those states withheld the protection of constitutional provisions and the state laws, or gave their official sanctions to the procedure of mobs, on the sufficient plea of constitutional limitations to federal authority.

In nursing remembrance of these grievances, made vivid by the toils, and sufferings, and deaths incident to their exodus from the United States, and their subsequent settlement in the Great Basin, it is not to be marveled at if the Latter-day Saints sometimes spoke bitterly, even the wisest and best of them; and that they did not always, and perhaps not at all, make nice distinctions as to where responsibility began and ended for the injustice heaped upon them. The general government, seemingly, to them, was clothed with great and even sufficient power to prevent injustice in a state; or, failing in that, possessed of power to redress the injured of their grievances: then to remain inactive, and even refuse to exert its supposed authority when appealed to, was in the view of the saints equivalent to giving sanction to, and becoming responsible for, the crimes committed in the state, and especially for those committed or sanctioned by the state officials. And such was often the argument when charging responsibility for their sufferings to the general government. Such was the argument made by President Young on the 7th of September, in the presence of the recently arrived United States territorial officials. [^20] Such in effect was his argument when answering Judge Brocchus, when the judge in a public meeting had taken exception to these remarks, and to the speech of D. H. Wells to the same effect on the 24th of July previous. Governor Young in the latter instance said: "It is well known to every man in this community, and has become a matter of history throughout the enlightened world, that the government of the United States looked on the scenes of robbing, driving, and murdering of this people and said nothing about the matter, but by silence gave sanction to the lawless proceedings. Hundreds of women and children have been laid in the tomb prematurely in consequence thereof, and their blood cries to the Father for vengeance against those who have caused or consented to their death." Stansbury makes a true and temperate statement of the case, balancing against the necessary notice of the error of the saints, a declaration of their loyalty:

508"That a deep and abiding resentment of injuries received and wrongs endured in Missouri and Illinois pervades the whole Mormon community, is perfectly true; and that among many of the less informed, and, I regret to add, some even whose intelligence and education ought to have enabled them to form more correct opinions, this exasperation has extended itself to the general government, because of its refusal to interpose for their protection at the time of these difficulties, is also true; but, from all that I saw and heard, I deem it but simple justice to say, that notwithstanding these causes of irritation, a more loyal and patriotic people cannot be found within the limits of the Union." [^21]

The saints were also a people with a mission—a mission to proclaim a New Dispensation of the gospel and its righteousness—to the world, and to give warnings of judgments against wickedness. [^22] This led them to take advanced ground with reference to the law of righteousness; and whoever yet heard of a people so commissioned, and conscious of it, that under all circumstances were temperate in delivering their message, and wisely discriminating in denouncing judgments against iniquity?

509"A TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT OF OUR OWN"

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe church leaders had repeatedly expressed their willingness to accept a territorial government; and, as we have seen, in their petition for the admission of the "State of Deseret" into the Union, they had suggested the alternative of a territorial form of government, which was now granted to them, and with which, it may be argued, they ought to have been contented. But the territorial government they contemplated was always a "territorial government of our own," [^23] that is, officered by men from their own community. They appear not to have been aware of the likelihood of "strangers" being appointed from other communities to administer the law among them, and perhaps harass them by their assumed self-importance and political intrigues. Not until their friend and political advisor, Colonel Kane, warned them of this danger did they seem to sense it. [^24] Then, as we have seen, they hastened to withdraw all petitions for a territorial government, and concentrated their efforts upon obtaining a state government; [^25] but meantime the territory of Utah had been created. When the creation of the territory became an accomplished fact the agent of the colonists, Dr. John M. Bernhisel, and their political friends in Washington, did what they could to secure the appointment of men resident in the territory. On September the 15th Dr. Bernhisel submitted to President Fillmore "as the choice of the people of Utah territory for the officers in the gift of the national executive, the following named gentlemen: Governor, Brigham Young; Secretary, Willard Richards; Chief Justice, Zerubbabel Snow; Associate Justices, Heber C. Kimball, Newel K. Whitney; Attorney, Seth M. Blair; Marshal, Joseph L. Heywood."

Political and Legal AffairsHC510After recommending, individually, these gentlemen, the doctor concluded his letter to President Fillmore as follows:

Political and Legal AffairsHC510"The people of Utah cannot but consider it their right, as American citizens, to be governed by men of their own choice, entitled to their confidence, and united with them in opinion and feeling; but the undersigned will add that for especial and important reasons which grow out of the peculiar circumstances of the community of 'Deseret,' and its government, the people are prepared to esteem as a high favor the nomination by the president of the entire list of officers above submitted, as it stands, and will not fail to evince that they remember it with gratitude." [^26]

Political and Legal AffairsHC510Part of the "peculiar circumstances" which Dr. Bernhisel had in mind are admirably stated by Captain Stansbury in his approving comment upon the appointment of Brigham Young as governor of Utah. He said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"With all due deference, then, I feel constrained to say, that in my opinion the appointment of the president of the Mormon church, and head of the Mormon community, in preference to any other person to the high office of governor of the territory, independent of its political bearings—with which I have nothing to do—was a measure dictated alike by justice and by sound policy. * * * No other man could have so entirely secured the confidence of the people; and this selection by the executive of the man of their choice, besides being highly gratifying to them, is recognized as an assurance that they shall hereafter receive at the hands of the general government that justice and consideration to which they are entitled. Their confident hope now is that, no longer fugitives and outlaws, but dwelling beneath the broad shadow of the national aegis, they will be subject no more to the violence and outrage which drove them to seek habitation in this far, distant wilderness. * * * From all I saw and heard, I am firmly of opinion that the appointment of any other man to the office of governor would have been regarded by the whole people, not only as a sanction, but as in some sort of a renewal, on the part of the general government, of that series of persecutions to which they had already been subjected, and would have operated to create distrust and suspicion in minds prepared to hail with joy the admission of the new territory to the protection of the supreme government." [^27]

Political and Legal AffairsHC511Stansbury's associate, Lieutenant Gunnison, also makes an important comment on the right of the Salt Lake colonists to "local self-government," and truly represents the views of the colonists upon the subject:

Political and Legal AffairsHC511"The Mormons regard themselves as placed in the position of our colonial fathers; with this difference, that the latter felt the burden of taxation without representation; the Mormons an injustice in enforcing law upon them by foreigners. They have formed everything on the model of a republican state; adopted a constitution, liberal, free, and tolerant of conscience in religion; and have a criminal code which applies to their peculiar situation and feelings. It is not to be presumed that lawyers, though eminent at home, fresh from crowded cities, and long drilled municipal laws suited to old societies, can have a just appreciation of the statutes of this wild country, which have a peculiar religious sanction from the dependence of the civil code on revelation. Nor will the community place the same confidence in such judges, as in those whose acquaintance with their views and opinions is a matter of experience; and whose interests and sympathies are bound up together. And, too, we must remember, that it is a matter of conscience to bring all subjects of contention before the heads of their family, the household of the church.

Political and Legal AffairsHC511So long, therefore, as they demean themselves as good, industrious citizens of the United States, being geographically separated from other society, with no admiralty causes to adjudicate, and pay their portion of the indirect taxation for the support of the government, they feel a right to demand confidence enough to be allowed to have persons resident among themselves appointed to administer the laws over them, and fill official stations. And they can well laugh at all attempts to control them otherwise, though they may submit in appearance, to prevent collision.

Political and Legal AffairsHCAnd then comes up the question is not this after all a matter of political etiquette? and is it wise to make a case of treason on such a point? They acknowledge the binding force of the Constitution, claim to be American citizens, and also to have a right that this courtesy be allowed them, after so many privations and sufferings endured, to make the wilderness and desert a habitable abode. To enforce rulers over them from aboard, by the power of bayonet, will entail perpetual war, or necessitate the raising a force, and making the expenditure of funds such as has never been called for at one time since our national existence." [^28]

Political and Legal AffairsHC512These comments were made sometime after the first clash came between the people of Utah and the United States judges, and when the resentment of the people to the impertinence of the judges, was spoken of in some quarters as "treason." But the passage is a propos the right of local self-government here discussed.

ATTACHMENT OF THE SAINTS TO THEIR RELIGIOUS LEADERS

Another of the "peculiar circumstances" to which Dr. Bernhisel could not fail to have had in mind would be the attachment the saints would possess for their religious leaders, under whose exclusive jurisdiction they had lived since the expulsion from Illinois, early in 1846. This would be, counting up to the time when the territorial government went into force among them, in the later months of 1851, a period of about five years. In that time they had become "well weaned" [^29]—and that through no fault of theirs—from government other than that administered by their own trusted, religious leaders. A broad and enlightened statesmanship would fully have recognized that condition and acted upon it, rather than to have sent "strangers" among them to administer the laws, which could have no other effect than to awaken resentments, and either thwart entirely the ends of government, or, if there was submission to the felt injustice, occasion frequent recurrence of ebullitions of indignation, that, under all the circumstances, it would be too much to expect would always be restrained; and that must result in irritation, and even in serious conflicts.

Nor could it be otherwise. What chance, for instance, would any man have had sent from the eastern states as governor of Utah against Brigham Young? The latter a born leader among men, and founder of the "State of Deseret," possessing the full confidence of his people, what an indignity to the people of Utah it would have been to have appointed any other man governor of the territory! "Intimately connected with them from their exodus from Illinois," remarks Captain Stansbury, "this man (Brigham Young) has been indeed their Moses, leading them through the wilderness to a remote and unknown land, where they have since set up their tabernacle, and where they are now building their temple. Resolute, in danger, firm and sagacious in council, prompt and energetic in emergency, and enthusiastically devoted to the honor and interests of his people, he had won their unlimited confidence, esteem, and veneration, and held an unrivaled place in their hearts. Upon the establishment of the provisional government, he had been unanimously chosen as their highest civil magistrate, and even before his appointment by the president, he combined in his own person the triple character of confidential advisor, temporal ruler, and prophet of God. Intimately acquainted with their character, capacities, wants, and weaknesses; identified now with their prosperity, as he had formerly shared to the full in their adversity and sorrows; honored, trusted, the whole wealth of the community placed in his hands for the advancement both of the spiritual and temporal interests of the infant settlement, he was, surely, of all others, the man best fitted to preside, under the auspices of the general government, over a colony of which he may justly be said to have been the founder." [^30] Under such circumstances as these it would have been a wanton political blunder to have appointed any other man governor of Utah; and it was equally a mistake—though varying somewhat in degree—to appoint other officers of the territory outside of the local community, when there were men in the local community of character and ability equal with and even superior to the "outsider" receiving the appointment.

514The cause that produced irritations and conflicts was the course events followed in Utah for well-nigh half a century—the direct result of the persistent violation, by the authorities at Washington, of the American principle of the right of local self-government; and this, in large part, through systematic misrepresentation of the facts in the case as we shall see in the unfolding of the history of those years.

514On the other hand there was "the stranger" appointed to office in the territory. He could but feel that he was unwelcome, as an officeholder; that he was an "intruder," a "stranger" and a "foreigner" in the commonwealth; sent from a distance to administer its laws, among a people conscious of their ability for self-government; and who had lost none of their rights as citizens of the United States by reason of their removal to the mountain wilderness over which now the Constitution of their country had been extended, and where, of right, American principles should prevail. The "stranger" officeholder had little and perhaps no sympathy with the community into which he had intruded. Certainly he was a disbeliever in, and usually opposed to their religious beliefs, worship, and conceptions of life and its duties.

THE MEASURE OF CHARACTER OF THE "FOREIGN" APPOINTEES

Political and Legal AffairsHCWith rare exceptions the "foreign" appointees were not men of large character-caliber. That may be determined to some extent by the fact of their seeking the appointment to the offices, which they must know would bring them into antagonistic relations with the people among whom they must live; [^31] that they must certainly be regarded as intruders, the instruments through which the violations of the American principle of "home rule" was being effected. And this thankless position they were willing to assume for a very meager salary. These first appointees from the east, for instance, the chief justice, the associate justices, and the secretary of the territory, received each, $1,800 per annum. [^32] And for that consideration they would leave the practice of a profession, or other vocation in the east, to accept such a salary, and work under the conditions above described! A deduction from the premises by the writer is not necessary, each reader will make his own. [^33]

Political and Legal AffairsHCMoreover, among these "foreign" appointees were adventurers who sought these appointments, not so much to serve the people among whom they were sent; nor to uphold the dignity, and national authority that appointed them; but to make their appointment a stepping stone to some personal advantage, political or otherwise. Others came for mere love of novelty and adventure. Others still in the hope that change of climate would arrest the progress of failing health, if not restore it; others being worn out, political hacks in their own community, accepted the appointment as the last reward for political party service. Others came with the idea that there was a mission attachment to their office by which they were authorized and expected to engage in a crusade against the religion and the Church of the Latter-day Saints. All this, however, is said under recognition of the fact that there were honorable exceptions to this classification of the Utah "foreign" appointees, though it must be said in candor, that the exceptions were rare.

THE FIRST GROUP OF FEDERAL APPOINTEES FOR UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHCOf these several varieties a number were present in the first batch of appointees. The whole group could best be described as politically and in every other respect nonentities. [^34] So completely is this the case with reference to the one appointed chief justice that little or nothing is known of him except that he seems to have been the pupil and protege of a "Pennsylvania county court lawyer," whose political influence, it is presumed, being a Whig, was sufficient with the administration to secure his pupil the appointment to the office of chief justice! In Utah the chief justice was known for his unsocial habits, and slovenliness in dress. [^35]

Political and Legal AffairsHCJudge Brocchus is spoken of by Bancroft as a "vain and ambitious man, full of self-importance, fond of intrigue, corrupt, revengeful, hypocritical." [^36] He represented the class above referred to who came to seek political preferment, being ambitious to be elected delegate to congress from the territory, informing,—en route to Utah—the "Mormon" people at Kanesville of his ambition, representing that it was his only purpose in going to Utah, and he really began his campaign there, and continued it across the plains, only to learn, before reaching Salt Lake City, that the people of Utah had elected Dr. John M. Bernhisel to that office. [^37] It is only justice to the judge to say that he disclaimed being more than a "receptive candidate." [^38]

Political and Legal AffairsHC517Secretary Harris is described as "a smart youngster from a Vermont printing office." [^39] He represented in this first group of United States "foreign" officials, the class that conceived a mission attachment to their territorial office appointment. Mr. Harris soon after his arrival in Utah informed Governor Young "that he had private instructions designed for no eye but his own, to watch every movement and not pay out any funds unless the same should be strictly legal, according to his own judgment." [^40]

Political and Legal AffairsHC517Whereupon the governor remarked in his communication to President Fillmore:

Political and Legal AffairsHC517"Is it true that officers coming here by virtue of an appointment by the president, have private instructions that so far control their actions as to induce the belief that their main object is not the strict and legal performance of their respective duties, but rather to watch for iniquity, to catch at shadows, and make a man 'an offender for a word;' to spy out our liberties, and, by manifold misrepresentations, seek to prejudice the minds of the people against us? If such is the case, better, far better would it be for us, to live under the organization of our provisional government, and entirely depending upon our own resources, as we have hitherto done, until such time as we can be admitted as a state." [^41]

THE SECOND GROUP OF "FOREIGN" APPOINTEES

Political and Legal AffairsHCIn the second group of "strangers" appointed to office, one, Mr. Benjamin G. Ferris, appointed to be secretary of the territory, admitted that it was merely "a curiosity, long cherished, to visit a portion of the world about which marvelous accounts had been given, that induced" him "to accept the vacant post." He remained six months which he employed in gathering materials for writing his book, Utah and the Mormons, which appeared two years later. [^42]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe two judges of the second group of "strangers" receiving appointment to office in Utah represent the class of invalids who came to Utah to recoup their failing health. Mr. Lazarus H. Reid of New York, who was appointed as chief justice, after remaining in Utah a year returned to his home in Bath, Steuben county, on a visit, where he died, though but forty years of age. [^43] Leonidas Shaver, said to be of southern birth, was a sufferer from some affection of the head and died very suddenly. [^44] So suddenly in fact that it gave rise to unfounded rumors that he had been poisoned, on account of a supposed difficulty with the governor of Utah, of which difficulty, however, there exists not the slightest evidence; and Brigham Young speaks of the judge in the most complimentary terms, alluding to him as "a straight forward, judicious, upright man." [^45] The cause of his death was thoroughly investigated, with the result above stated, viz., that he died "of a disease of the head." The judge was buried at Salt Lake City with "processional honors."

Political and Legal AffairsHC519Thus it will be seen that in the first and second group of "stranger" officers, Utah had all the classes represented that are enumerated in preceding paragraphs of this chapter; and quite generally it may be said in truth, the territory from first to last, had present in the personnel of United States officials, the majority of these classes constantly represented. I have already indicated [^46] that there were also nearly always some "honorable exceptions" present.

Footnotes

The king of Great Britain has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless they would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their public records.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly. He has refused for a long time to cause others to be elected.

He has obstructed the administration of justice by refusing to give his assent to laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their office.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers to harass the people.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies without the consent of our legislature.

He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our Constitution.

He has imposed taxes upon them without their consent.

He deprived them, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury.

He transported them beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses.

He suspended their own legislatures and declared the British parliament invested with power to legislate for the colonies in all cases whatsoever.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter xci. Religious liberty, including the right of individuals to establish and maintain, as well as to bestow ecclesiastical titles upon, a church hierarchy, as far as themselves judge proper.—Upon which, our stand is with the Roman Catholics.
[^2] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 19, 1851. Political liberty, admitting the largest possible power of self-government in the community, and the entire independence of its domestic institutions.—Upon which we stand with the opponents of centralization and advocates of states' rights, and, at the present time, with the south.
[^3] President Young when he replied to the speech of Judge Brocchus, said: "I know Zachary Taylor, he is dead and damned and I cannot help it." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Sept. 1851, pp. 61-65). According to Brocchus the remark of President Young was: "Zachary Taylor is dead, and in hell, and I am glad of it." (Utah Officials' Report to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 87). And for all beyond this, we contradict every single statement of the delinquent officers, and by wage of law or battle will equally rejoice to be brought to prove their falsehood.—We call for the examination under oath.—Of this we put ourselves upon the country.—Our last cry is, trial!"
[^4] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry 7th Sept., 1851.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry Sept. 7, 8, 9, 1851, p. 62.
[^6] Deseret News of Oct. 16th, 1852, where the whole correspondence appears, copied from the New York Herald in which it was first published.
[^7] The incident happened during a suspension of the publication of the Deseret News, which extended from August 19, 1851, to November 15th, 1851, which explains why the speech or a synopsis of it does not appear in that periodical. Tullidge says the speech of Judge Brocchus is not extant, nor is there to be found any report of that exciting conference, for it was before the existence of the Deseret News. (History of Salt Lake City, p. 9). Clearly an error, since the News began its existence on June 22, 1850, though there is an interval from 19th of August to November 15th, 1851, when no paper was published. Tullidge seems to have overlooked the account of the conference in the History of Brigham Young, Ms.; also in Woodruff's Journal, an account of the conference is given under the dates it covered, 7th, 8th, 9th of September, 1851.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for September 8th, 1851, pp. 61-64. As sustaining the substantial accuracy of the above report, I also give another account of these two speeches which created a great sensation throughout the United States at the time they were reported. The second account is from a separate and independent source of information, viz., the Journal of Wilford Woodruff, and not elsewhere published. (See Note, end of chapter).
[^9] Letter of Brigham Young to Judge Brocchus, Deseret News, Oct. 16, 1852.
[^10] Governor Young's Letter to Brocchus of Sept. 21st, 1851, published in Deseret News, Oct. 16th, 1852. On this remark the governor commented as follows: "Let me ask you, most seriously, my dear sir, how could you hope thus? How could you hope that those 'dear creatures,' some of whose acts of benevolence to the stranger drew tears from your eyes while you were yet speaking—how could you hope —what possible chance was there for you to hope—they would become virtuous? Had you ever proved them unvirtuous? If so, you could have but a faint hope of their reformation. But, if you had not proved them unvirtuous, what testimony had you of their lack of virtue? And if they were unvirtuous, how could they 'become virtuous'? Sir, your hope was of the most damning dye, and your very expression tended to convey the assertion that those ladies you then and there addressed were prostitutes—unvirtuous—to that extent you could only hope, but the probability was they were so far gone in wickedness you dare not believe they ever could become virtuous. And now, sir, let your good sense, if you have a spark left, answer—could you, had you mustered all the force that hell could lend you—could you have committed a greater indignity and outrage on the feelings of the most virtuous and sensible assemblage of ladies that your eyes ever beheld? If you could, tell me how. If you could not, you are at liberty to remain silent. Shall such insults remain unrequited, unatoned for?" (Deseret News of Oct. 16th, 1852).
[^11] Captain Howard Stansbury, after a year's residence among the saints in Salt Lake and Utah valley, 1849-1850, bears most important testimony upon this point: "If a man, once married, desires to take him a second helpmate, he must first, as with us, obtain the consent of the lady intended, and that of her parents or guardians and afterward the approval of the seer or president, without which the matter cannot proceed. The woman is then 'sealed' to him under the solemn sanction of the church, and stands, in all respects in the same relation to the man, as the wife that was first married. The union thus formed is considered a perfectly virtuous and honorable one, and the lady maintains, without blemish, the same position in society to which she would be entitled were she the sole wife of her husband. Indeed, the connection being under the sanction of the only true priesthood, is deemed infinitely more sacred and binding than any marriage among the Gentile world, not only on account of its higher and more sacred authority, but inasmuch as it bears directly upon the future state of existence of both the man and the woman. * * * All idea of sensuality as the motive of such unions, is most indignantly repudiated; the avowed object being to raise up, as rapidly as possible, 'a holy generation to the Lord,' who shall build up his kingdom on the earth. Purity of life, in all the domestic relations, is strenuously inculcated; and they do not hesitate to declare, that when they shall obtain the uncontrolled power of making their own civil laws, (which will be when they are admitted as one of the states of the Union), they will punish the departure from chastity in the severest manner, even by death." (Stansbury's Report, Executive Document, No. 3, pp. 136-7). The testimony of Lieutenant Gunnison on the same subject and during the same period of time is not less important: "Infidelity and licentiousness are held up for abhorrence; and when the 'plurality' law shall be promulgated, they will be punished by the decapitation of the offender and the severest chastity inculcated upon one sex, and rigid continence on the other during the gestation and nursing of children. Thus the time of weaning will again become a feast of joy, next to the celebration of the nuptial rite, and patriarchal times return. * * * The addition of wives, after the first, to a man's family, is called a 'sealing to him.' This constitutes a relation with all the rights and sanctions of matrimony. * * * Thus guarded in the motive, and denounced as sin for other consideration than divine, the practical working of the system, so far as now extended, has every appearance of decorum. * * * That the wives find the relation often a lonesome and burdensome one, is certain; though usually the surface of society wears a smiling countenance, and to all who consent from a sense of duty or enthusiasm the yoke is easy. * * * We must conclude that the regulation of the new 'plurality' has not yet become perfect, and that the virtues claimed as pertaining to it are not in complete vigor; but we may add that the community had every appearance of good morals, so that any equal number of persons in the states can scarcely exhibit greater decorum." (The History of the Mormons, Gunnison, pp. 69-73).
[^12] Letters to Brigham Young of Sept. 19, 1851, Deseret News, Oct. 16, 1852.
[^13] Report of Messrs. Brandebury, Bricchus, et al, to the president of the United States, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 88.
[^14] In his letter to Governor Young in answer to one inviting him to apologize to the people for his 8th of September speech, Judge Brocchus said: "My sole design, in the branch of my remarks which seems to be the source of offense, was to vindicate the government of the United States from those feelings of prejudice and that spirit of defection which seemed to pervade the public sentiment. That duty I attempted to perform in a manner faithful to the government of which I am a citizen, and to which I owe a patriotic allegiance, without unjustly causing a chord to vibrate painfully in the bosom of my hearers." (Deseret News, Oct. 16th, 1852).
[^15] The Rocky Mountain Saints, 1873, pp. 277-8.
[^16] History of Salt Lake City in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, vol. iii, p. 92.
[^17] This alleged misuse of money is stated in the official report as follows: "Congress appropriated twenty thousand dollars, to be applied under the direction of the governor and legislature in the erection of public buildings. The governor no sooner received this money than he appropriated and used every dollar of it, or a greater portion of it, in payment of debts due by the Mormon church, and in a few days after its arrival in the valley it was on its way to the United States in other hands. We were not present at its actual payment, but it was a matter of public notoriety and talked of by the gentleman who received it. This occurred about the last of July." (Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 88). According to the enabling act this sum of $20,000 was granted by congress to the territory of Utah "to be applied by the governor and legislative assembly to the erection of suitable public buildings at the seat of government." (Organic Act, sec. 12). The money was used by Governor Young towards the purchase of the "State House of Deseret," often called the "Council House," until the public buildings at the capital—then designed to be at Fillmore City, Millard county—could be completed. "The State House purchased," remarks the Deseret News, "cost $45,000. It consists of two spacious halls, and four offices, two of which are occupied by the books of the Utah library and as reading rooms." The News manifests some indignation that there should be a charge of "squandering" the public money connected with this transaction. (See Deseret News, impression of 7th February, 1852. An engraving of the Council House accompanies this chapter.
[^18] Grant-signed Letters, No. 2. As stated in a previous note the letters were signed by Jedediah M. Grant, Salt Lake City's first mayor; but the internal evidence is overwhelmingly against his authorship of them. Stenhouse, after referring to the fact that Grant was not the author of them, says it was "painful" to him to learn that "two of Pennsylvania's honored sons, already alluded to in this work [i.e., Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints]—one no less than an ex-vice-president of the United States, and the other enjoying a military title—were the inspiration and authors of the famous letters" (p. 278). This points directly to ex-Vice-President George M. Dallas and Colonel Thomas L. Kane. There is much of internal evidence that would justify belief in the colonel's part in the authorship. The letters themselves are a rare bit of vigorous English, in masterful, biting style, bold, free, enjoyable, but unfortunately, though they held up to deserved scorn the "run-a-way officials," and made them, for the time, the laughing stock of the nation, the writers did not meet seriously and convincingly the issues presented by the "Report" of those same officials. The "Letters" are three in number, the first of which only was published in the New York Herald. The editor said of the first that "the pith of the charges against Governor Young and his community is not answered;" and declined to publish the others, of which he would doubtless hold the same view. The series, however, was completed and published in pamphlet form, and given wide circulation. There was also an Appendix, including a letter to President Fillmore, accompanying copies of the pamphlet to him; extracts of a letter of Judge Brocchus' to parties in the east; an account of the murder of Joseph Smith; the "Mormon" war in Missouri; Haun's Mill Massacre; the Far West troubles, and General Clark's address to the "Mormons" at that place. The whole case for the saints in Utah is presented in three brief and numbered paragraphs in the letter to President Fillmore; and indeed one may catch the spirit of the whole series by those paragraphs, to wit: "We claim," say the writers, "in the broadest sense, the rights of—
[^19] See Utah Officials' Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 8. Relative to the election of "officers not authorized by the organic act," it should be said that the election of such officers was not ordered by the governor's proclamation. The officers in question were "Deseret" county probate judges, county recorders, justices of the peace, sheriffs, and constables. As the first territorial election had been appointed to take place on the first Monday in August,—the regular election day appointed by law in the provisional state government,—an editorial in the Deseret News urged that these local officers be elected; and accordingly they were elected at the same time and in the same manner as the territorial officers designated in the governor's proclamation. The organic act provided that "the governor may appoint all township, district, and county offices, not otherwise provided for in the organic act. * * * Who shall hold their offices until the end of the first session of the legislative assembly." (Sec. 7). Apparently the governor preferred that such officers—"State of Deseret" officers—should be elected by the people instead of appointed by himself.
[^20] Young's Letter to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 91.
[^21] Governor Young's Report to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 91.
[^22] Young's Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 92. The secretary assigns the neglect to Young's inclination to disregard "the plain directions of the organic act in this particular, as in almost all others." (Ibid, p. 32).
[^23] Here again the governor and the secretary are in disagreement. The latter says, "that proclamation, however, was never published." The governor said: "I caused it to be done (i.e. proclamation of the election made), and sent it to him for his signature and impress of the seal of the territory—intending for him to keep the manuscript thus furnished, and return a copy suitable for publication. Much to my astonishment, he placed the seal and signature to the manuscript thus furnished, not even filing a copy for record. It was published, however." (See Proclamation, No. 4, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 92).
[^24] The secretary says this message was "afterwards, for some reason, suppressed," and that none of the officials leaving the territory "were able to procure a copy." (Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 89). Yet Brigham Young forwarded a copy to President Fillmore, and refers to it as an accompanying document to his letter, under the title of "No. 5," (Congressional Globe, as above, p. 92). The message, however, is not published in the collection of documents in the Congressional Globe, nor elsewhere as far as the writer knows.
[^25] From this decision Judge Snow dissented on the grounds: (1) "There was not any law fixing the time and place of holding the supreme court; and (2) The supreme court had not original jurisdiction, and the district court had, which was provided for in the governor's proclamation." (History of Salt Lake City, p. 92. The documents in the case will be found in extenso in Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, pp. 88-91). In the "'run-a-way officials" report is also detailed the arrest of Almon W. Babbitt, who, with his family, had started for 'the states.'" The arrest was made under a warrant issued by a justice of the peace, authorizing the wagons and effects of said Babbitt to be searched for "a sum of money, probably gold, to the amount of $24,000, and for the seal of the territory of Utah. The supposition was that these things had been entrusted to Mr. Babbitt for conveyance from the territory. Copy of the warrant on which Babbitt was arrested and his wagons and effects searched, is included with the documents accompanying the "run-a-way officials'" report to the president. Governor Young states that A. W. Babbitt was arrested and brought back to the city after starting for the states—overtaken two days' journey out—for resisting an officer who was arresting Joseph L. Babbitt for debt, the supreme court released A. W. Babbitt on a writ of habeas corpus." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept. 24th, 1851, p. 98).
[^26] The first verse and chorus follow:
[^27] St. Louis Republican, 25th November, 1851, reproduced in Deseret News of February 7, 1852.
[^28] These were Seth M. Blair, United States attorney; Joseph L. Heywood, United States marshal; and Judge Z. Snow, an associate justice of the supreme court. The last named gentlemen wrote personally to President Fillmore under date of 22nd of September, informing him of the intention of the returning officials to leave the territory within a few days—"for reasons satisfactory to themselves;" and announcing his own intention to remain in the territory unless in the opinion of the president or congress,—in the event of an inquiry into the facts being made,—he ought to return. The judge also states that he used all his influence to bring about a reconciliation between the parties, "but failed." He makes no statement of the causes leading to this "unhappy incident," relying upon the statements of the retiring officials and the Utah delegate, Dr. Bernhisel, to furnish the president with the necessary information. (Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 86).
[^29] The only point at which the colonel's defense of Governor Young shows any weakness in the light of subsequent events, is in the matter of the practice of plural marriage by President Young and some other of the Utah colonists. The colonel evades the issue presented, but implies monogamy as the marriage relation maintained by Governor Young; and as it is generally assumed that the colonel's intimacy with the "Mormon" leaders at Council Bluffs, in 1846, must have made him aware of the existence of the plural wife relations among them, he is viciously assailed as a prevaricator in these letters to President Fillmore, by anti-"Mormon" writers. (The letters are published in extenso in Millennial Star, vol. xiii, pp. 341-344). It is quite within possibility, however, that the colonel was not so far taken into the confidence of the "Mormon" leaders as to be made aware of the plural marriage relations existing among them when he was their guest for some months on the banks of the Missouri, nor made aware of it since their arrival in Salt Lake valley; for it must be remembered that the doctrine of plural marriage had not even yet (1851) been publicly proclaimed as a doctrine of the church. I judge Colonel Kane's lack of knowledge of the matter to be the true solution of his position in the Fillmore letters; and, if he had a share in responsibility for authorship of the "Grant-signed" Letters—as I believe him to have had—then in those letters also; for there the question is discussed very much from the same point of view, except that at one point the argument, and for the sake of the argument, granting the charge of plural marriages to be true,—"whose business is it?" the letter writer asks. "Does the Constitution forbid it? Is there anything in the [organic] act for the government of the territory forbidding it? And where else can we find it written down as a crime?" The subsequent announcement of the institution by the church, as we shall see, did not deprive the Utah colonists of the friendship of Colonel Kane.
[^30] The act was approved Oct. 4, 1851, Utah Legislative Enactments, 1851.
[^31] Excerpt from a letter of Judge Snow's published in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake, 1885, p. 94.
[^32] "Regular bred lawyer" is President Young's way of putting it in his History, Ms. He also adds: "President Kimball could have been appointed if he had been a limb of the law. Dr. Bernhisel regarded the nomination of Elder Hyde by President Fillmore as a great triumph, because it showed the president discredited the report of the fugitive officers and by that act placed the seal of his condemnation upon the same." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept., 1852, p. 80).
[^33] Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, pp. 92-3. The paragraph dealing with the question is worth reproducing: "Feeling cautious against any possible future removals like those which now embarrass us with the want of the territorial seal and funds to meet constantly accruing expenses, and also the want of a full supreme court of the United States for Utah territory, and desirous to dwell in peace and unfeigned loyalty to the Constitution and general government of the United States—your memorialists do therefore pray our highly-honored chief magistrate to appoint men to fill the aforesaid vacancies, by and with the consent of the senate, who are indeed residents among us, in order that we may enjoy the full administration of every department of government speedily as the prosperity of the territory shall require. And your memorialists, as in duty bound, will ever pray."
[^34] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for May 22nd, 1852.
[^35] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1852, pp. 11-13. A block of Utah stone, oolitic lime stone, was finally sent to be placed in the Washington Monument, namely, in 1853. There was carved upon it the Bee Hive beneath which was the word "Deseret," "Holiness to the Lord," and other emblems cut by a Mr. Ward, and forwarded in compliance with the resolution of the "State of Deseret" referred to in a former chapter. (See Liverpool Route, p. 108. Also History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1853, p. 50).
[^36] Deseret News of June 12, 1852.
[^37] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for September, 1852, pp. 80 and 81.
[^38] The judge "denied that he came here (i. e. to Utah) with the view of being elected delegate to congress, but had expressed his willingness to accept that office, if elected, and that he thought he could do us good in that way." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 8th Sept., 1851, pp. 61-69). In referring again to the matter, in a letter to the judge under date of Sept. 20th, 1851, Governor Young represented that it was "reported, and on pretty good authority," that Brocchus had said that, "if the citizens of Utah do not send me as their delegate to Washington, by G—d, I'll use all my influence against them, and will crush them. I have the influence and the power to do it, and I will accomplish it if they do not make me their delegate." (The letter from which the above is quoted, with three others by Brigham Young to Judge Brocchus, and two of the judge's to Brigham Young, were published in the New York Herald, and reproduced in the Deseret News of Oct. 16, 1852).
[^39] Grant-signed Letters, p. 3.
[^40] Governor Young's Report to President Fillmore, Appendix, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 92.
[^41] Ibid, p. 92.
[^42] Utah and the Mormons, Ferris, 1854, see Preface.
[^43] Waite's The Mormon Prophet, p. 25.
[^44] Richards' Ms., quoted by Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 461. "Judge Shaver, apparently in good health at night was found the next morning dead in his bed." Relative both to the "gossipping" rumor of a supposed difficulty with Governor Young and the poisoning of the judge, Stenhouse remarks, that he "has never seen any ground for such a suspicion." (Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 279). Beadle says that the "Mormons" believed him to be an opium eater, and that "he died from suddenly being deprived of that drug." (Life in Utah, p. 170). It was Doctors Hurt and French at the inquest who testified that the judge was addicted to the use of opium. (See Deseret News of July 4th, 1855. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, p. 279). The rumor of misunderstanding with the governor rests alone on the gratuitous statement of Waite. (The Mormon Prophet, p. 24).
[^45] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 461, note. He quotes Richard's Incidents in Utah History, Ms., p. 78. Geo. A. Smith in a public speech said of Judge Shaver that he was "a worthy man and profound jurist, who by his upright course has honored his profession. His studious attention to his duty, his fine intellect, polished education and gentlemanly bearing won for him the universal admiration and respect of this community." (Deseret News of July 18, 1855, p. 146). Nor did this esteem rise from any subserviency on the part of the judge to the church leaders. The chief justice of the territory, Judge J. F. Kinney, in his eulogy of him at the public funeral services, said: "With judicial ability, was blended the most scrupulous honesty, and that which is equal to either, a firmness of purpose and a moral power, which enabled him to enunciate the law regardless of consequences or the opinions of men. Ability, integrity, firmness and moral courage are qualifications which ever have and ever must adorn the bench, all are necessary, none dispensable. It is but due to the departed to remark that he possessed these to an eminent degree. I have seen all these virtues severely tested. Of the many important cases tried by the lamented judge, involving, as some of them did, the feelings of the entire community, no person, however much interested, has ever been able to detect the slightest bias or prejudice or shrinking from the announcement of a decision adverse perhaps to the wishes of the church and community. And no higher meed of praise can be awarded the memory of our departed brother than this, that, notwithstanding these decisions, the prominent members of the church are among the most ardent admirers of his judicial character." (Deseret News, July 4th, 1855, p. 132). Which was a compliment both to the deceased jurist and to the "Mormon" church leaders. Bancroft says the judge's death occurred "soon after his arrival" in Utah. (History of Utah, p. 461). A mistake, he was a resident and officer in Utah nearly three years. (News, as above).
[^46] After referring to what he calls "imbecile appointments from the time of Fillmore until Lincoln's administration," J. H. Beadle, an anti-"Mormon" writer of some repute, records the disgraceful actions of some of the early Utah "foreign" judges as follows: "The first judge, Perry E. Brocchus, was incautious in his attacks upon polygamy; and, having been led to believe that his life was in danger, left the territory. Another official was detected in immorality, and resigned to avoid exposure; another disgraced his office by taking a prostitute upon the bench with him; another impaired his efficiency by secret drinking; and still another allowed himself to be completely entrapped by two of Brigham's (?) 'decoy women.' One of these delinquents was followed into Weber canon by a self-appointed committee of 'Mormon boys,' and received at their hands a severe castigation." (Life in Utah, or the Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism, an Expose, National Publishing Co., Phil., 1870, p. 394). Colonel Steptoe, to whom was tendered the office of governor of Utah (of which more later) is supposed to be the victim of "Brigham's decoy women;" Bancroft says, "there is no grounds for such a statement." (History of Utah, note, p. 493); but, Steptoe omitted, the list of delinquents among United States officials in Utah, up to the time referred to by Beadle, is long enough, and the nature of their offendings black enough, to awaken the indignation of the people against the persistent violations of the right of local self-government by having such officers sent among them to administer the law. Beadle further remarks of the period beginning with 1854, that "Utah now began to be regarded as the 'Botany Bay' of worn out politicians; if a man was fit for nothing else, and yet had to be rewarded for political services, he was sent to Utah." (Life in Utah, p. 171).
