B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 3 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XCIII

THE FIRST CLASH BETWEEN UNITED STATES "FOREIGN"

APPOINTEES AND THE CHURCH AUTHORITIES

IN THIS chapter I propose to deal with the first incidents of disagreement between the people of Utah and United States officials. Judge Brocchus was the first to bring on a conflict. On the 24th of July, preceding the judge's arrival, Daniel H. Wells had delivered an oration on the Utah Pioneers, recounting the events leading up to the necessity for their journey into the western wilderness, to which oration reference has already been made in a previous chapter. [^1] This oration was one of the instances when proper distinctions were not made between the utterances of irresponsible individuals, and mobs, and the United States, represented by the general government; and the statement was made in the aforesaid oration, that the country that could have the barbarity, under such peculiar circumstances, to make such a requirement [i.e. for the Mormon Battalion] "could have no other object in view than to finish, by utter extermination, the work which had so ruthlessly begun"—i.e., by mobs.

520This oration was published in full two days after the arrival of Judge Brocchus. [^2] President Young it would appear also, on the same occasion, had made some uncomplimentary remarks about the then late Zachary Taylor. [^3]

CLASH OF FEDERAL OFFICIALS AND CHURCH AUTHORITIES

A special conference of the church was held on the 7th, 8th and 9th of September following. On the 7th President Young in addressing the conference referred to the general government of the United States in severe terms for its apparent sanction, from his viewpoint, to the killing of Joseph Smith. The United States was the first nation to which the New Dispensation of the gospel was preached, and they had killed the Prophet that God had sent unto them, and would be under condemnation. [^4]

521These incidents seemed to furnish Judge Brocchus an occasion to pose as the defender of the government of the United States against a "Mormon attack." Accordingly he asked permission to address the conference. President Young inquired what would be the nature of his remarks, but received no very satisfactory answer. According to Governor Young the Judge's reply was "he did not know;" [^5] although in his subsequent correspondence with the governor on the subject, the judge said, "my speech in all its parts was the result of deliberation and care—not proceeding from a heated imagination, or a sudden impulse, as seems to be the general impression. I intended to say what I did say." [^6]

It is to be deplored that no full and exact report of the judge's speech is extant, but what is doubtless a very good synopsis of his remarks is to be found in the History of Brigham Young, Ms., together with a synopsis of President Young's reply, both of which I give herewith. [^7] The speech of Judge Brocchus is thus introduced by President Young: "On the 7th 8th, and 9th I attended conference in the bowery. The Hon. Perry E. Brocchus, associate justice for the territory, requested the privilege of addressing the assembly. On being asked what would be his subject, he replied that he did not know. The privilege was granted, and on the second day of the conference he appeared in company with Judge Brandebury, Indian Superintendent Day, and several others of his friends, and addressed the congregation.

PRESIDENT YOUNG'S SYNOPSIS OF JUDGE BROCCHUS' SPEECH

"He expressed his everlasting gratitude for the kindness and hospitality of our people to him when sick and a stranger. He bore testimony to the peacefulness of the inhabitants of the territory, and their submission to the tribunals of their own choice, and prayed to God that all the United States might soon have such tribunals as were in this territory, and then it would always bring peace to the hearts of those who had to be judged. He hoped there would be no litigation. He denied that he came here with the view of being elected delegate to congress, but had expressed his willingness to accept that office, if elected, and that he thought he could do us good in that way. He was an honorable man, or he would not have been appointed to office in the territory. He appeared before his audience, under a commission by the board of managers of the National Washington Monument, to ask the territory to contribute a block of marble towards the erection of that building. He cursorily reviewed the career and character of George Washington. He then referred to the oration of Hon. D. H. Wells on the 24th of July, and objected to some portions of it. The government made no imperative demand for 500 of our best men for service in the Mexican war, and had no evil intentions in asking for them, nor was it responsible for the persecutions in Missouri and Illinois. President Polk expressed decided disapprobation of those deeds, he [Brocchus] felt indignant about them, and he believed the mass of the people, at the time, boiled with rage towards the perpetrators. The federal government had not injured us. The president could not lay a private wrong before congress. To those states [i.e. Missouri and Illinois], we should look for redress. The speaker regretted to hear in our midst such expressions as that the United States were a stink in our nostrils. He was pained to hear it said that the government of the United States was going to hell as fast as possible. He said that if the people of Utah could not offer a block [i.e. of marble] for the Washington Monument in full fellowship with the United States, it were better to leave it unquarried in the bosom of its native mountain. He directed a portion of his discourse towards the ladies, and, libertine as he boasted himself, strongly recommended them to become virtuous."

GOVERNOR YOUNG'S REPLY

"I arose and spoke substantially as follows:—Judge Brocchus is either profoundly ignorant, or wilfully wicked, one of the two. There are several gentlemen on this platform who would be glad to prove the statements referred to in relation to him, and much more, if I would let them have the stand. His speech is designed to have political bearing. If I permit discussion to arise here, there may be either pulling of hair or a cutting of throats. It is well known to every man in this community, and has become a matter of history throughout the enlightened world, that the government of the United States looked on the scenes of robbing, driving, and murdering of this people and said nothing about the matter, but by silence gave sanction to the lawless proceedings. Hundreds of women and children have been laid in the tomb prematurely in consequence thereof, and their blood cries to the Father for vengeance against those who have caused or consented to their death. George Washington was not dandled in the cradle of ease, but schooled to a life of hardship in exploring and surveying the mountains and defending the frontier settlers, even in his early youth, from the tomahawk and the scalping knife. It was God that dictated him and enabled him to assert and maintain the independence of the country. It is the same God that leads this people. I love the government and the Constitution of the United States, but I do not love the d——rascals who administer the government.

523I know Zachary Taylor, he is dead and damned, and I cannot help it. I am indignant at such corrupt fellows as Judge Brocchus coming here to lecture us on morality and virtue. I could buy a thousand of such men and put them into a bandbox. Ladies and gentlemen, here we learn principle and good manners. It is an insult to this congregation to throw out such insinuations. I say it is an insult, and I will say no more." [^8]

523THE YOUNG-BROCCHUS CORRESPONDENCE

This conference incident was followed by a correspondence between the governor and the judge that has become historical. The former, on the 19th of September, wrote the judge respectfully inviting him to attend the following Sunday service and address the same people before whom he had spoken on the 8th inst. "And if your honor," said the governor, "shall then and there explain, satisfy, or apologize to the satisfaction of the ladies who heard your address on the 8th, so that those feelings of kindness that you so dearly prized in your address can be reciprocated by them, I shall esteem it a duty and a pleasure to make every apology and satisfaction for my observations which you as a gentleman can claim or desire at my hands." [^9]

524It is very generally held that Judge Brocchus in his address attacked the practice of plural marriage among the people, but if so it was solely by innuendo, as neither in President Young's account, nor in Elder Woodruff's, nor in the correspondence which followed between Governor Young and the judge is there any allusion to that subject, except for the exhortation of the judge to the ladies of the audience in which he expressed "the hope," that they "would become virtuous." [^10] This expression was most offensive, and aroused great indignation.

524If it was the intent of Judge Brocchus in this remark to allude to the marriage relation in question, then his error was a most gross one, for it not only cast opprobrium upon the women present, who had entered into that order of marriage, but it cast reproach upon a principle accepted, under the circumstances and within the limitations fixed by the church, as a profoundly religious institution, and was wholly untainted with sensuality, or immorality in any of its phases. [^11]

It is only fair to Judge Brocchus to say that he disclaimed any "design to offer indignity and insult" [^12] to his audience; and subsequently in the report which he and his associate officers of the territory made to the president of the United States, he declared that his address on the occasion here considered "was entirely free from any allusions, even the most remote, to the peculiar religion of the community, or any of their domestic or social customs. It contained not a single expression of bravado or unkindness or harsh rebuke, or any sentiment that could have been tortured into a design on the part of the speakerly to inflict wantonly a wound upon the hearts of his hearers." [^13] With this theory of the nature of his remarks it is difficult to reconcile the judge's admonition to the ladies of his audience "to become virtuous." [^14]

526Moreover, the whole procedure of Judge Brocchus was out of character and standing for a judicial officer, unwarranted in every way. Whatever misconceptions of historical facts may have been entertained, and whatever radical utterances may have been made by Utah leaders, the sequel proves that it was not the prerogative of Judge Brocchus to call them to task from the platform of their own church conference meetings, nor from any public forum save that of a court room, and in the trial of cases.

526THE "RUN-A-WAY OFFICERS" AND THE "GRANT-SIGNED" LETTERS

It is said by some writers upon "Mormon" history that in one or other of their reports in the east, of which it is claimed there were several, these federal officers declared that "polygamy monopolized all the women, which made it very inconvenient for the federal officers to live here" (i.e. in Utah). "Loose as people might suppose frontier life to be," comments Stenhouse in his chronicle of this alleged report, "no one anticipated that representatives of the federal government would thus express themselves." [^15] It does indeed seem incredible that such a remark should have been made. Tullidge, however, declares that the "federal officers expected to be applauded by the public, and sustained by the government, their assault being against polygamy;" but that they indiscreetly stated in "their communication to the government" [^16] the remark attributed to them, and he then quotes the comment above by Stenhouse.

Again it is only fair to the "run-a-way officers" to say that in their report to the president, the matter of plurality of wives is not made a principal part of that report. It is only mentioned as an incident, and disposed of in a single paragraph of twenty-eight lines in a report covering nearly five of the three column pages of the Congressional Globe. The rest of the report deals with Latter-day Saint charges of the responsibility of the general government for persecutions their church had endured; with the apparent spirit of prejudice and defection as a consequence of that attitude; the alleged squandering by Governor Young of $20,000 appropriated by congress for the erection of public buildings; [^17] and also the alleged irregularities of Governor Young in the inauguration of the territorial government. As for their alleged indiscreet remark concerning polygamy resulting in an inconvenience to the federal officers, it certainly is not found in their official report as claimed by Tullidge. Frankly, I do not think it is of record; and chiefly for the reason that the Utah delegate to congress in his several communications to President Young made no reference to it; nor in the "Grant-signed" Letters to the New York Herald,—in which the "run-a-way officers" are most severely handled—is there any allusion made to such a remark, although the writer of those letters refers to "three successive versions" of what is called their "Report;" [^18] and when the caustic character of those letters is remembered, I think it utterly impossible that the writers of them would miss a statement of the kind had such an utterance escaped the said officials and become extant.

GRIEVANCES OF MR. HARRIS, SECRETARY OF THE TERRITORY

This speech of Judge Brocchus disposed of, the other incidents of the first clash between Brigham Young and the "foreign appointees" is soon told, and chiefly concerns the secretary of the territory, Mr. Harris. He was not satisfied with the proceedings of the governor in taking "the enumeration of the inhabitants of the territory," preceding the first election, required by the organic act, and for the purpose of apportioning the number of representatives and councilors to the several counties. He was not satisfied with the manner of the election; Brigham Young had issued a proclamation designating the election districts, apportioning the number to be elected to each branch of the legislature, also ordering at the same time and at the same places the election of a delegate to congress; and directing that the election be held under the existing laws of the provisional government of the "State of Deseret"—and all this "without the seal of the territory or signature of the secretary!" No notice was given in the proclamation, he further pointed out, "as to the qualification of voters and those who were eligible to office." "The consequence was," according to the secretary's statement, "that unnaturalized foreigners officiated at the elections, voted, and were elected as representatives, and to offices not authorized by the organic act." [^19]

530The governor's answer to these alleged irregularities in the matter of the elections was that he had been actuated by a desire to hold the first election sufficiently early in the season that "a delegate might be legally returned to congress before the lateness of the season should render the long and arduous journey dangerous if not impracticable." That as the United States census agent he was engaged in taking the census of the "State of Deseret"—the work having been delayed by the miscarriage of blanks, instructions, etc.,—when the act of congress passed, requiring "an enumeration of the inhabitants of the territory" preceding the first election in said territory. The information obtained in taking the above named United States census was so far advanced early in July, 1851, that from the information of that census the governor was able to make the apportionment and order the election. "This being previous to the arrival of the secretary," he explains, "of course his seal and signature was not attached." The governor also calls attention to the fact that nearly a year had elapsed since the appointment of the territorial officers, during which time the people of Utah, nevertheless, were living without authorized government.

530As evidence of the governor's disposition to proceed in order under the organic act, it may be observed that on the arrival of a majority of the justices of the supreme court he issued his proclamation designating the judicial districts and appointing the respective judges to take charge of them, which proclamation, the secretary having at last arrived, bore both the signature of Mr. Harris and the impress of the seal of the territory. [^20]

EFFORTS TO COMPOSE THE DIFFERENCES THAT HAD ARISEN

Learning that the "foreign appointees" to office in the territory had determined to leave for the east, in resentment of the conditions prevailing in Utah and the treatment accorded them, Governor Young personally waited upon them and tried to dissuade them from their purpose. But in this he was not successful. Secretary Harris declared his intention to carry back with him all the funds with which he had been entrusted for the payment of legislative expenses, as also the seal, records, documents, etc., pertaining to his office. "I considered this course illegal," said Brigham Young, "wholly unauthorized, and uncalled for by any pretext whatever. I therefore concluded that I would use all legal efforts that should seem practicable for the retention of the property and money belonging to the United States in the secretary's hands, designed for the use of the territory." [^21]

531The governor's first move in carrying out this expressed determination was to hasten the assembling of the legislature. Although the election had taken place on the first Monday in August, no proclamation had been issued up to mid-September, declaring the result of the election, without which the election itself was incomplete, since the organic act required such proclamation. This delay the governor charges to a misunderstanding with the secretary as to which of them would "make out the declaration of the members elect, and prepare the proclamation." [^22] As the secretary did not prepare it, Governor Young did, on the 18th of September, declaring the results of the election and calling the legislature to assemble on the 22nd of that month. This proclamation was sent to the secretary to be signed by him, and was so signed, and received the seal of the territory. So signed, and certified by the seal of the territory, the proclamation was published. [^23]

532Any publication of the election results, and a proclamation issuing on the 19th of September, calling the legislature into session on the 22nd of the same month—the extent and scattered condition of the settlements considered—must be conceded to be an inadequate notification and proclamation; but two days before the publication of the election results and of the proclamation, a private notice was sent to each member elect, together with the date and hour when the first session of the legislature was appointed to convene.

532Brief as was the notice, at the time appointed every member of the council was present, and all the members of the house but one—the member from Iron county. Secretary Harris did not attend, nor did he furnish the roll of the members. His neglect was made good by the governor. The roll of members was called and they qualified before Judge Snow of the supreme court. The governor's message was next in order, and was accordingly read. [^24]

PROCEEDING UNDER THE LAW

Two days later the legislature passed a joint resolution authorizing the United States marshal to take into his custody all papers, records, documents and property of every kind pertaining to said office of secretary, as also all money in his possession belonging to said territory, and safely keep the same until the legislature should order otherwise. This resolution was presented to Mr. Harris together with an order for five hundred dollars to defray the incidental expenses of the legislative assembly. But he flatly refused to comply with either of these requirements, giving his reasons at length in writing for such refusal; and in as much as the marshal by the resolution of the legislature was instructed to arrest the secretary in case he refused to surrender the property, documents, or money demanded by the resolution, "and him safely keep in custody until he shall comply with the foregoing resolution," that gentleman applied to the supreme court for an injunction "forbidding the marshal and others from seizing or intermeddling with the funds and other property of the United States in the custody of the secretary," which was granted. [^25] Mr. Harris succeeded in keeping in his possession both the territorial seal and the sum of money in question, and on his arrival in St. Louis deposited the money with the assistant treasurer to the credit of the United States.

When Governor Young heard of the supreme court being in session—the first and only session it ever held under these judges—and then called into session merely to grant the injunction against the procedure of the marshal in taking possession of the above sum of money, and the seal of the territory—he addressed a note to the judges "asking their opinion" in regard to his duty, "having reference to the organic act which requires the governor to see that the laws are faithfully executed, and requiring the secretary to reside in the territory." Having determined to abide the decision of the judges in the case, the governor next directed the district attorney to file a petition which would cause them to give an opinion on the subject; but that day, 28th of September, two of the judges, Brandebury and Brocchus, Mr. Harris, the secretary, and Mr. Day, sub-Indian agent, took their departure for the eastern states.

THE FLIGHT REGARDED AS A FIASCO

In Utah the episode of the "run-a-way officials" was not taken very seriously. No one seemed to sympathize with their course. Indeed, Mrs. Eliza R. Snow, a local poetess of note, made merry over the incident in her song rendered with great eclat at the following 4th of July celebration. [^26] In the east, also, while their return and reports created a sensation that it is no exaggeration to call tremendous, still there could be but little sympathy with officers who had run away from their posts of duty, apparently without sufficient cause even if all they reported of the course of Brigham Young and the Utah colonists were true. Nay, if true, all the more need that they should have remained to assert and maintain the honor and dignity of the federal government, and the true American spirit. But they were not men of that caliber. The St. Louis Republican, in an editorial review of the course followed by the "run-a-way officials"—and in the main facts these first reports did not materially differ from their official report made to the president of the United States—this editorial, perhaps, best represents what finally became the crystallized public sentiment of the country with reference to the course of these officials, and this, be it observed, upon the basis of accepting all their statements as true. The essential paragraphs of the Republican editorial follow:

535EDITORIAL OPINION OF THE "RUN-A-WAY OFFICERS'" CASE

535"No official statement has yet been made, though this is promised upon the arrival of the officers in Washington; nor are we informed to which of the number the paternity of these defenses is to be ascribed. It is not important for our purpose to know, further than that the facts set forth are the leading and main grounds on which these officers justify their leaving their posts. If there are other and better reasons, we will be prepared to give them due consideration when we know what they are and to what extent they go.

535In the first place, the chief justice of the United States court, L.G. Brandebury, Perry E. Brocchus, associate justice, B. D. Harris, secretary of Utah territory, and H. R. Day, sub-Indian agent to the Utah Indians have left their posts and returned to the United States. The public will inquire why and for what reasons. According to the published statements they are these:

535The governor of the territory, Brigham Young, and the Mormon elders and community, have been acting very improperly, in the use of abusive and seditious language towards the United States government. They are guilty of polygamy, or having many wives, and exhibiting them in the streets. The governor is further guilty in having squandered $20,000, placed in his hands by the United States; and is guilty of the omission of having appointed county sheriffs, as the organic law requires.

This is the substance of the charges brought against the governor and people of that territory. They are grievous charges: and we are not disposed to defend them nor shield them from the odium due to their acts. On the contrary, if Governor Young has uttered the language ascribed to him, or has encouraged such sentiments towards the United States government as are imputed, he is unworthy of being the governor of the territory, and should be removed from office. As to the immorality of life, profane language, plurality of wives, and such like matters, we presume these are subjects for the territorial legislature to attend to. As yet, we believe congress has passed no statute for the states or territories on these subjects. If the governor is a defaulter, we have no doubt the accounting officers at Washington will know it, and punish him as such, if they can. Of all these charges, so much at war with, and so repugnant to all our feelings of right and propriety, we could not, if disposed, attempt a justification or excuse. We only know their existence through the publication alluded to, and admitting their truth (as at this writing we are compelled to do), we inquire what has been the conduct of the United States officers? and how far is their conduct justifiable? The community will draw the distinction between the evil and bad practices of the governor [Young], and justification of leaving their posts, set up by these officers.

536It will, at the first reading, strike everyone that the defense of these returning officers is fatally insufficient in the outset, in this: there is no overt act or crime charged or alleged to have been committed. The judges of the United States court go there, are well received, and from the time of their arrival to their coming away, no attempt is alleged to have been made, to infringe upon their jurisdiction, or refuse obedience to their decisions. On the contrary, as far as the statements go, there seems to have been a disposition to submit to their decisions, as in the case of the secretary and the funds in his hands. Threats were made that they should not hold a court—but words are only empty sounds—and no fact is presented, showing an effort to prevent their holding court, and exercising their proper jurisdiction.

536What would be thought of a United States judge, who, in times of excitement, deserted his post and fled the state, because the governor thereof, and other persons, in office and out of it, had used intemperate and improper language towards the United States government and her officers. It is at such times, amidst such excitement, when the popular feeling may run riot or wrong, that the judge, with his unsullied ermine, his purity of purpose, his rectitude of character, his freedom from transient or party impulses, his learning and official position, is expected to sit in judgement, above the storm of error or popular prejudice, and enforce the law. If his decisions and orders are set at naught, and not enforced—if, by personal or actual resistance he finds himself powerless—then, and only then would he be justified in leaving his post. How has it been in this case?

THE JUDGE WITH A MISSION EXTRA JUDICIAL

"But these judges—at least one of them, Judge Brocchus, seems to have considered that new duties were added to his judicial functions. In the states, and well regulated communities, it is considered to be decorus, and the duty of the judges, to keep entirely free from popular excitement—that they may stand forth as the arbiters between the community and the government, and between man and man. Judge Brocchus it seems, summoned the people to assemble: they listen to him respectfully: whilst he made a speech against them and their criminal practices. This may be the province of a territorial judge, but we are at a loss for the statute requiring it. It could hardly be expected, that a fanatical and misled people—such as we all believe the Mormons to be—would not be roused to anger, and indeed to make violent demonstrations, by such an assault upon them and their leaders. * * * We think the judges should have remained at their posts, proceeded regularly with their courts, kept out of excitement, and when cases occurred requiring the exercise of their official authority, exercised it fearlessly and without favor or affection. If they had done this, and their authority had been resisted, then, and not until then, the public would have been prepared to excuse their retreat.

537For Mr. Harris, there is quite as little excuse. So far as the published statements go, he does not seem to have been seriously interfered with in anything except the effort to take money which he had the legal custody of. In all his other acts he had no opposition, and in this case, when the court decided in his favor, the governor and his people submitted.

537But, what surpasses our comprehension is, what a subagent of the Utah Indians has to do with the civil or political affairs of the people of the Utah territory, unless they conflict in some way with the Indians. Yet Mr. Day also finds an apology in this seditious language, to leave the Indians to the mercies of these corrupt and seditious people and come back to the states. One would have supposed that he could have discharged his duties to the Indians at least, even if Governor Young had committed treason, and been hanged for it." [^27]

537This editorial view also seems to have been about the view taken by the administration at Washington, since no action was taken against the governor of Utah, or the other remaining officers of the territory appointed by the president. [^28] In fact President Fillmore had been prepared somewhat for this "explosion" in respect of Utah affairs by an incident happening about midsummer of that same year.

A PREVIOUS ATTACK ON BRIGHAM YOUNG

A number of eastern papers published a most vicious attack upon Brigham Young's character on the ground of his alleged record both in Illinois and Utah; and asserting that President Fillmore had known of this record and the "immoralities" charged against Utah's governor before appointing him to office. This article President Fillmore sent to Colonel Thomas L. Kane, together with a polite note, reminding him that as president he had relied much upon him "for the moral character and standing of Mr. Young." "You knew him," said the president, and "I doubt not will truly state whether these charges against him are true." To this Colonel Kane made the following answer:

COLONEL KANE'S DEFENSE OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

"Philadelphia, July 11, 1851.

538My Dear Sir:—I have no wish to evade the responsibility of having vouched for the character of Mr. Brigham Young, of Utah, and his fitness for the station he now occupies. I reiterate without reserve, the statement of his excellent capacity, energy, and integrity, which I made you prior to his appointment. I am willing to say I volunteered to communicate to you facts by which I was convinced of his patriotism, and devotion to the interests of the Union. I made no qualification when I assured you of his irreproachable moral character, because I was able to speak of this from my own intimate, personal knowledge.

538If any show or shadow of evidence can be adduced in support of the charges of your anonymous assailant, the next mail from Utah shall bring you their complete and circumstantial refutation. Meanwhile I am ready to offer this assurance for publication in any form you care to indicate, and challenge contradiction from any respectable authority.

538I am, Sir, with high respect and esteem, your most obedient servant,

538[Signed] "THOMAS L. KANE."

538The president."

This note was accompanied by a letter to the president marked "personal," in which the charges against Brigham Young were more freely discussed. Apart from the charges of levying "high and unjust taxes on men selling property at Salt Lake, to aid them on their journey," the colonel saw nothing new in the accusations against Governor Young. "The other accusations," he remarks. "are a mere rehash of old libels," to which the successor of Joseph Smith had fallen heir. He referred the president to Senator Douglas "for the best account of the charges in Illinois against Mr. Young, which, I presume, may be taken to mean divers bills ignored by different grand juries in the circuit over which Judge Douglas presided, and which included Nauvoo and the Mormon precinct." "I have equal pleasure," the colonel continues, "in directing your attention to the fine refutation of the charge of 'insult to the California emigrants,' afforded by the cards of emigrant companies, published in various western newspapers, thanking the Mormons for hospitality and succor in distress."

539The rest of the letter is largely devoted to the defense of the loyalty of Brigham Young to the Union as manifested in the battalion affair, and other circumstances already considered in a previous chapter. [^29]

Now to conclude this subject: Judge Snow, the sole remaining justice of the supreme court in the territory was authorized by act of the legislature to hold court in all three districts into which the same act divided the territory, "until a full bench of the supreme court of the United States for the territory of Utah shall be supplied by the president and senate of the United States." [^30]

540At the first session of his court, Judge Snow examined and reviewed the proceedings of the governor of the territory in calling the legislative assembly, "and held them to be legal, though somewhat informal." This was reported to the department of state of which Daniel Webster was then the secretary. "He," says Judge Snow, "sustained Governor Young and myself." [^31]

How far this was true may be judged somewhat by the fact that President Fillmore nominated Orson Hyde for one of the vacancies of the supreme court of Utah, but the nomination was not confirmed by the senate, because it appeared that Hyde was not a professional lawyer. [^32] This appointment was doubtless made by the president in deference to the petition both of the territorial legislature and of the colonists of Utah. The legislature, in the early days of its first session—on the 29th day of September, 1851, to be exact—petitioned the president that in filling the vacancies occasioned by the departure of the retiring officers, and in order to avoid the recurrence of the inconveniences and embarrassment occasioned by such departure—"to appoint men to fill the aforesaid vacancies who are indeed residents among us." [^33] The petition of the people, to the same effect was forwarded in May, 1852, and bore 3,488 signatures. [^34]

541President Young himself took very strong ground on the issue raised by the action of the "run-a-way federal appointees."

541Dr. Bernhisel was disposed to be despondent over the course of events in respect of the territory, whereupon Governor Young wrote him a most noble spirited letter; and as it will materially aid the reader to understand future events to be dealt with in this History, and as it throws a strong light upon the character of Brigham Young, and the spirit in which he, at his best worked, and as it has nowhere else been published, so far as I know, I consider it necessary to produce it here, in extenso, as it is recorded in the History of Brigham Young, Ms.

PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG'S ATTITUDE ON THE UTAH SITUATION

"Feb. 22nd [1852]. The mail arrived from the east on the 22nd. Letters from Dr. J. M. Bernhisel, Washington, were received as to the reported difficulties in Utah between United States officials and the governor and inhabitants of the territory.

541On the 28th, I wrote to Dr. Bernhisel that we did not feel anywise alarmed as to the final issue of the matter. The government might, if they saw proper, be so influenced by the returned officers as to take strong ground against us, sending troops to overawe us, and governors and judges to rule us; but the people of Utah would certainly protest against such proceedings, if any such were contemplated.

541We had dug our way into these mountains where none but the destitute 'Mormon,' who, being instructed by his past sad experience of the danger of seeking a location on the rich and fertile lands of the United States, sought out and had settled—in the language of Captain Stansbury—that 'God forsaken country in which none but a Mormon could live;' and even preferred these wild and barren wastes to the rich vales of California or the sunny south, for the love of quietness and peace.

I reminded the doctor that we had lived before the territorial charter was extended to us, and that we could do so again, though we would like to have it continued if it could, upon righteous principles; but if not, the people would readopt the provisional government of 'Desert,' and apply again for admission as a free and sovereign state, and recall their delegate.

542As for my own feelings I was perfectly assured that all would be right, when matters were explained and considered; but suppose the reverse should happen, and we again were compelled to seek another location to free ourselves from bondage and oppression and though many of us might fall into our graves, victims to exposure and hardships thereby encountered, if our work is accomplished, and the Lord wills it, all right; to die is nothing. I should a thousand times rather encounter the 'grim monster' than to have my religion, and the love and adoration which I feel towards God become of secondary consideration with me. And I wished all men, whether presidents, or kings, congressmen or noblemen to know, that I sought first the mind and will of God, and all my acts had to become subservient thereto.

542I also reminded Dr. Bernhisel that all the rights and immunities we sought might be enjoyed under the wise and faithful administration of the laws and glorious Constitution of the United States which was designed to shield the sincere worshipper of every religion, and also guaranteed the free expression of sentiments and opinions upon any subject, whether religious or political, that might arise for the consideration of any person. These were privileges of which I was not willing to be denied, and for the enjoyment of which I would seek a shelter in some far distant corner of the earth's surface, where the bleak, barren and inhospitable features should be so apparent, as to cause the cupidity of the most eager aspirant to revolt, and leave this so recently and so ardently sought asylum to its wonted desolation, without an inhabitant to sing the requiem of departed liberty.

542I exhorted the doctor not to be afraid to tell the president, nor any other person, whether in or out of congress of our rights as free people, who are not indifferent to the majesty and glory of our common country, and who are and ever have been its true supporters; and that now to be accused of defection, and required to send a block of marble to the Washington Monument as a test of our loyalty, was an insult not to be borne nor easily forgotten." [^35]

TRIUMPH OF GOVERNOR YOUNG AND THE PEOPLE OF UTAH

VS. THE "RUN-A-WAY OFFICIALS"

The friends of the Utah colonists in Washington at that time, including in the number the powerful secretary of state, Mr. Daniel Webster; ex-Vice-President Geo. M. Dallas, later to be United States Minister to the Court of St. James (1856-1861); Colonel Kane, and, as yet, Senator Stephen A. Douglas, were too strong at Washington for the opponents of the saints in Utah, and this important incident in the history of the territory and of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, was brought to a close by Mr. Webster addressing a letter to the "run-a-way officials" requesting them to repair forthwith to the scene of their duties or resign. [^36] They chose the latter alternative and their successors were appointed; and although this second group of appointees were not residents of Utah, they were not known to be unfriendly to the saints. Dr. Bernhisel in announcing the appointments to Governor Young said the new appointees were "gentlemen who were highly recommended for integrity and high, moral character, and as being unprejudiced." The delegate added that "President Fillmore was our friend and had done all he could for the interests of Utah." [^37]

543Sometime previous to this—in July—the Utah delegate wrote Governor Young to the effect "that although the returned officers had been beaten at every point, and their libelous report was not noticed by congress, [still] Utah did not stand as well in the eyes of the nation as before the explosion." [^38]

NOTE

THE BROCCHUS INCIDENT FROM WILFORD WOODRUFF'S JOURNAL

"Monday morning, 8th [i.e. of September, 1851]: Judge Brocchus requested the privilege of addressing the people. It was granted him. He arose and commenced his speech by testifying of his kind reception among this people. He had been sick among them and been kindly treated; the flies had been brushed from his face by a lady, and he was thankful. He referred to the judiciary and requested the people to sustain it, and professed to be very sorry that he was going to leave it. He then referred to a report in circulation that he came here for the prospect of being returned a delegate to Washington and other things that were reported against him, etc. He then took up the subject of his appointment and said that President Fillmore had appointed him although he [Brocchus] was a Democrat, and said he should not have received his appointment had he not been a capable, virtuous, good man. He then addressed the ladies upon the subject of the Washington Monument, wished them to procure a block and present it to Washington. Also wished them to donate for the building of the monument; talked much about the virtues of Washington and his battles and good deeds. He spoke of the persecution of the saints, considered them badly treated. Sent to Winter Quarters where our dead was buried and had a sprigot of myrtle plucked. He carried it in his bosom; it was now dried up. He showed it to the congregation. In speaking to the ladies said he hoped they would become a virtuous people. He did not wish them to send the block of marble unless they could do it in full fellowship with each of the separate states. He had read something casting reflections upon the United States government concerning our persecutions. But he would defend the government as long as he had a tongue to speak or hand to lift. And said the government could not do anything for us as they had no power. But if we wanted redress of our wrongs apply to Missouri and Illinois where we had received our [wrongs] (this part of his speech stirred the blood of the whole congregation). Much was said by the speaker which was calculated to stir the blood of the people and offend them. Then he closed.

544President Young then arose and said that Judge Brocchus was either profoundly ignorant or wilfully wicked, in presenting some sentiments which he had to the assembly that day; and had he supposed for a moment that he was going to throw out a challenge upon that stand in a religious meeting and present such sentiments as he had he should not for a moment have given his consent to have had him speak on that occasion. He said several stood by and wished to take up the challenge given by the judge. But he would not permit of it, for some might get their hair pulled if not their throats cut. And he would not have it. He wished this meeting to adjourn until afternoon and present business in the capacity of a conference for which the meeting was called. Meeting adjourned."

Footnotes

President Young remarks upon these letters: "Elder Jedediah M. Grant wrote me from New York, May 13th, that he had ready for circulation his letters to the New York Herald in pamphlet form, a copy of which he was about to send to each member of congress and to the principal editors of the nation. His letters contained a refutation of the charges made by the returned federal officers against myself and the inhabitants of Utah, and were written in a humorous, readable style; for which they were principally indebted to the versatile pen of our friend Colonel Thomas L. Kane." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for June, 1852, p. 56).

"All hail the day Columbia first

The iron chains of bondage burst;

Lo, Utah's valleys now resound

With freedom's tread on western ground.

Chorus

Tho' Brocchus, Day and Brandebury,

And Harris, too, the secretary,

Have gone,—they went—but when they left us,

They only of themselves bereft us."

There are eight verses in all (Deseret News, July 10th, 1852). One of the toasts on the same occasion was: "The officers of the government—both national and state—Uncle Sam expects every man to do his duty, Swartwout, Price, Brocchus & Co., to the contrary, nevertheless, and-also-a-running." (Ibid.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter xci. Religious liberty, including the right of individuals to establish and maintain, as well as to bestow ecclesiastical titles upon, a church hierarchy, as far as themselves judge proper.—Upon which, our stand is with the Roman Catholics.
[^2] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 19, 1851. Political liberty, admitting the largest possible power of self-government in the community, and the entire independence of its domestic institutions.—Upon which we stand with the opponents of centralization and advocates of states' rights, and, at the present time, with the south.
[^3] President Young when he replied to the speech of Judge Brocchus, said: "I know Zachary Taylor, he is dead and damned and I cannot help it." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., Sept. 1851, pp. 61-65). According to Brocchus the remark of President Young was: "Zachary Taylor is dead, and in hell, and I am glad of it." (Utah Officials' Report to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 87). And for all beyond this, we contradict every single statement of the delinquent officers, and by wage of law or battle will equally rejoice to be brought to prove their falsehood.—We call for the examination under oath.—Of this we put ourselves upon the country.—Our last cry is, trial!"
[^4] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry 7th Sept., 1851.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry Sept. 7, 8, 9, 1851, p. 62.
[^6] Deseret News of Oct. 16th, 1852, where the whole correspondence appears, copied from the New York Herald in which it was first published.
[^7] The incident happened during a suspension of the publication of the Deseret News, which extended from August 19, 1851, to November 15th, 1851, which explains why the speech or a synopsis of it does not appear in that periodical. Tullidge says the speech of Judge Brocchus is not extant, nor is there to be found any report of that exciting conference, for it was before the existence of the Deseret News. (History of Salt Lake City, p. 9). Clearly an error, since the News began its existence on June 22, 1850, though there is an interval from 19th of August to November 15th, 1851, when no paper was published. Tullidge seems to have overlooked the account of the conference in the History of Brigham Young, Ms.; also in Woodruff's Journal, an account of the conference is given under the dates it covered, 7th, 8th, 9th of September, 1851.
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for September 8th, 1851, pp. 61-64. As sustaining the substantial accuracy of the above report, I also give another account of these two speeches which created a great sensation throughout the United States at the time they were reported. The second account is from a separate and independent source of information, viz., the Journal of Wilford Woodruff, and not elsewhere published. (See Note, end of chapter).
[^9] Letter of Brigham Young to Judge Brocchus, Deseret News, Oct. 16, 1852.
[^10] Governor Young's Letter to Brocchus of Sept. 21st, 1851, published in Deseret News, Oct. 16th, 1852. On this remark the governor commented as follows: "Let me ask you, most seriously, my dear sir, how could you hope thus? How could you hope that those 'dear creatures,' some of whose acts of benevolence to the stranger drew tears from your eyes while you were yet speaking—how could you hope —what possible chance was there for you to hope—they would become virtuous? Had you ever proved them unvirtuous? If so, you could have but a faint hope of their reformation. But, if you had not proved them unvirtuous, what testimony had you of their lack of virtue? And if they were unvirtuous, how could they 'become virtuous'? Sir, your hope was of the most damning dye, and your very expression tended to convey the assertion that those ladies you then and there addressed were prostitutes—unvirtuous—to that extent you could only hope, but the probability was they were so far gone in wickedness you dare not believe they ever could become virtuous. And now, sir, let your good sense, if you have a spark left, answer—could you, had you mustered all the force that hell could lend you—could you have committed a greater indignity and outrage on the feelings of the most virtuous and sensible assemblage of ladies that your eyes ever beheld? If you could, tell me how. If you could not, you are at liberty to remain silent. Shall such insults remain unrequited, unatoned for?" (Deseret News of Oct. 16th, 1852).
[^11] Captain Howard Stansbury, after a year's residence among the saints in Salt Lake and Utah valley, 1849-1850, bears most important testimony upon this point: "If a man, once married, desires to take him a second helpmate, he must first, as with us, obtain the consent of the lady intended, and that of her parents or guardians and afterward the approval of the seer or president, without which the matter cannot proceed. The woman is then 'sealed' to him under the solemn sanction of the church, and stands, in all respects in the same relation to the man, as the wife that was first married. The union thus formed is considered a perfectly virtuous and honorable one, and the lady maintains, without blemish, the same position in society to which she would be entitled were she the sole wife of her husband. Indeed, the connection being under the sanction of the only true priesthood, is deemed infinitely more sacred and binding than any marriage among the Gentile world, not only on account of its higher and more sacred authority, but inasmuch as it bears directly upon the future state of existence of both the man and the woman. * * * All idea of sensuality as the motive of such unions, is most indignantly repudiated; the avowed object being to raise up, as rapidly as possible, 'a holy generation to the Lord,' who shall build up his kingdom on the earth. Purity of life, in all the domestic relations, is strenuously inculcated; and they do not hesitate to declare, that when they shall obtain the uncontrolled power of making their own civil laws, (which will be when they are admitted as one of the states of the Union), they will punish the departure from chastity in the severest manner, even by death." (Stansbury's Report, Executive Document, No. 3, pp. 136-7). The testimony of Lieutenant Gunnison on the same subject and during the same period of time is not less important: "Infidelity and licentiousness are held up for abhorrence; and when the 'plurality' law shall be promulgated, they will be punished by the decapitation of the offender and the severest chastity inculcated upon one sex, and rigid continence on the other during the gestation and nursing of children. Thus the time of weaning will again become a feast of joy, next to the celebration of the nuptial rite, and patriarchal times return. * * * The addition of wives, after the first, to a man's family, is called a 'sealing to him.' This constitutes a relation with all the rights and sanctions of matrimony. * * * Thus guarded in the motive, and denounced as sin for other consideration than divine, the practical working of the system, so far as now extended, has every appearance of decorum. * * * That the wives find the relation often a lonesome and burdensome one, is certain; though usually the surface of society wears a smiling countenance, and to all who consent from a sense of duty or enthusiasm the yoke is easy. * * * We must conclude that the regulation of the new 'plurality' has not yet become perfect, and that the virtues claimed as pertaining to it are not in complete vigor; but we may add that the community had every appearance of good morals, so that any equal number of persons in the states can scarcely exhibit greater decorum." (The History of the Mormons, Gunnison, pp. 69-73).
[^12] Letters to Brigham Young of Sept. 19, 1851, Deseret News, Oct. 16, 1852.
[^13] Report of Messrs. Brandebury, Bricchus, et al, to the president of the United States, Congressional Globe, new series, vol. xxv, p. 88.
[^14] In his letter to Governor Young in answer to one inviting him to apologize to the people for his 8th of September speech, Judge Brocchus said: "My sole design, in the branch of my remarks which seems to be the source of offense, was to vindicate the government of the United States from those feelings of prejudice and that spirit of defection which seemed to pervade the public sentiment. That duty I attempted to perform in a manner faithful to the government of which I am a citizen, and to which I owe a patriotic allegiance, without unjustly causing a chord to vibrate painfully in the bosom of my hearers." (Deseret News, Oct. 16th, 1852).
[^15] The Rocky Mountain Saints, 1873, pp. 277-8.
[^16] History of Salt Lake City in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, vol. iii, p. 92.
[^17] This alleged misuse of money is stated in the official report as follows: "Congress appropriated twenty thousand dollars, to be applied under the direction of the governor and legislature in the erection of public buildings. The governor no sooner received this money than he appropriated and used every dollar of it, or a greater portion of it, in payment of debts due by the Mormon church, and in a few days after its arrival in the valley it was on its way to the United States in other hands. We were not present at its actual payment, but it was a matter of public notoriety and talked of by the gentleman who received it. This occurred about the last of July." (Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 88). According to the enabling act this sum of $20,000 was granted by congress to the territory of Utah "to be applied by the governor and legislative assembly to the erection of suitable public buildings at the seat of government." (Organic Act, sec. 12). The money was used by Governor Young towards the purchase of the "State House of Deseret," often called the "Council House," until the public buildings at the capital—then designed to be at Fillmore City, Millard county—could be completed. "The State House purchased," remarks the Deseret News, "cost $45,000. It consists of two spacious halls, and four offices, two of which are occupied by the books of the Utah library and as reading rooms." The News manifests some indignation that there should be a charge of "squandering" the public money connected with this transaction. (See Deseret News, impression of 7th February, 1852. An engraving of the Council House accompanies this chapter.
[^18] Grant-signed Letters, No. 2. As stated in a previous note the letters were signed by Jedediah M. Grant, Salt Lake City's first mayor; but the internal evidence is overwhelmingly against his authorship of them. Stenhouse, after referring to the fact that Grant was not the author of them, says it was "painful" to him to learn that "two of Pennsylvania's honored sons, already alluded to in this work [i.e., Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints]—one no less than an ex-vice-president of the United States, and the other enjoying a military title—were the inspiration and authors of the famous letters" (p. 278). This points directly to ex-Vice-President George M. Dallas and Colonel Thomas L. Kane. There is much of internal evidence that would justify belief in the colonel's part in the authorship. The letters themselves are a rare bit of vigorous English, in masterful, biting style, bold, free, enjoyable, but unfortunately, though they held up to deserved scorn the "run-a-way officials," and made them, for the time, the laughing stock of the nation, the writers did not meet seriously and convincingly the issues presented by the "Report" of those same officials. The "Letters" are three in number, the first of which only was published in the New York Herald. The editor said of the first that "the pith of the charges against Governor Young and his community is not answered;" and declined to publish the others, of which he would doubtless hold the same view. The series, however, was completed and published in pamphlet form, and given wide circulation. There was also an Appendix, including a letter to President Fillmore, accompanying copies of the pamphlet to him; extracts of a letter of Judge Brocchus' to parties in the east; an account of the murder of Joseph Smith; the "Mormon" war in Missouri; Haun's Mill Massacre; the Far West troubles, and General Clark's address to the "Mormons" at that place. The whole case for the saints in Utah is presented in three brief and numbered paragraphs in the letter to President Fillmore; and indeed one may catch the spirit of the whole series by those paragraphs, to wit: "We claim," say the writers, "in the broadest sense, the rights of—
[^19] See Utah Officials' Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 8. Relative to the election of "officers not authorized by the organic act," it should be said that the election of such officers was not ordered by the governor's proclamation. The officers in question were "Deseret" county probate judges, county recorders, justices of the peace, sheriffs, and constables. As the first territorial election had been appointed to take place on the first Monday in August,—the regular election day appointed by law in the provisional state government,—an editorial in the Deseret News urged that these local officers be elected; and accordingly they were elected at the same time and in the same manner as the territorial officers designated in the governor's proclamation. The organic act provided that "the governor may appoint all township, district, and county offices, not otherwise provided for in the organic act. * * * Who shall hold their offices until the end of the first session of the legislative assembly." (Sec. 7). Apparently the governor preferred that such officers—"State of Deseret" officers—should be elected by the people instead of appointed by himself.
[^20] Young's Letter to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 91.
[^21] Governor Young's Report to President Fillmore, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 91.
[^22] Young's Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 92. The secretary assigns the neglect to Young's inclination to disregard "the plain directions of the organic act in this particular, as in almost all others." (Ibid, p. 32).
[^23] Here again the governor and the secretary are in disagreement. The latter says, "that proclamation, however, was never published." The governor said: "I caused it to be done (i.e. proclamation of the election made), and sent it to him for his signature and impress of the seal of the territory—intending for him to keep the manuscript thus furnished, and return a copy suitable for publication. Much to my astonishment, he placed the seal and signature to the manuscript thus furnished, not even filing a copy for record. It was published, however." (See Proclamation, No. 4, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 92).
[^24] The secretary says this message was "afterwards, for some reason, suppressed," and that none of the officials leaving the territory "were able to procure a copy." (Report, Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 89). Yet Brigham Young forwarded a copy to President Fillmore, and refers to it as an accompanying document to his letter, under the title of "No. 5," (Congressional Globe, as above, p. 92). The message, however, is not published in the collection of documents in the Congressional Globe, nor elsewhere as far as the writer knows.
[^25] From this decision Judge Snow dissented on the grounds: (1) "There was not any law fixing the time and place of holding the supreme court; and (2) The supreme court had not original jurisdiction, and the district court had, which was provided for in the governor's proclamation." (History of Salt Lake City, p. 92. The documents in the case will be found in extenso in Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, pp. 88-91). In the "'run-a-way officials" report is also detailed the arrest of Almon W. Babbitt, who, with his family, had started for 'the states.'" The arrest was made under a warrant issued by a justice of the peace, authorizing the wagons and effects of said Babbitt to be searched for "a sum of money, probably gold, to the amount of $24,000, and for the seal of the territory of Utah. The supposition was that these things had been entrusted to Mr. Babbitt for conveyance from the territory. Copy of the warrant on which Babbitt was arrested and his wagons and effects searched, is included with the documents accompanying the "run-a-way officials'" report to the president. Governor Young states that A. W. Babbitt was arrested and brought back to the city after starting for the states—overtaken two days' journey out—for resisting an officer who was arresting Joseph L. Babbitt for debt, the supreme court released A. W. Babbitt on a writ of habeas corpus." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept. 24th, 1851, p. 98).
[^26] The first verse and chorus follow:
[^27] St. Louis Republican, 25th November, 1851, reproduced in Deseret News of February 7, 1852.
[^28] These were Seth M. Blair, United States attorney; Joseph L. Heywood, United States marshal; and Judge Z. Snow, an associate justice of the supreme court. The last named gentlemen wrote personally to President Fillmore under date of 22nd of September, informing him of the intention of the returning officials to leave the territory within a few days—"for reasons satisfactory to themselves;" and announcing his own intention to remain in the territory unless in the opinion of the president or congress,—in the event of an inquiry into the facts being made,—he ought to return. The judge also states that he used all his influence to bring about a reconciliation between the parties, "but failed." He makes no statement of the causes leading to this "unhappy incident," relying upon the statements of the retiring officials and the Utah delegate, Dr. Bernhisel, to furnish the president with the necessary information. (Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, p. 86).
[^29] The only point at which the colonel's defense of Governor Young shows any weakness in the light of subsequent events, is in the matter of the practice of plural marriage by President Young and some other of the Utah colonists. The colonel evades the issue presented, but implies monogamy as the marriage relation maintained by Governor Young; and as it is generally assumed that the colonel's intimacy with the "Mormon" leaders at Council Bluffs, in 1846, must have made him aware of the existence of the plural wife relations among them, he is viciously assailed as a prevaricator in these letters to President Fillmore, by anti-"Mormon" writers. (The letters are published in extenso in Millennial Star, vol. xiii, pp. 341-344). It is quite within possibility, however, that the colonel was not so far taken into the confidence of the "Mormon" leaders as to be made aware of the plural marriage relations existing among them when he was their guest for some months on the banks of the Missouri, nor made aware of it since their arrival in Salt Lake valley; for it must be remembered that the doctrine of plural marriage had not even yet (1851) been publicly proclaimed as a doctrine of the church. I judge Colonel Kane's lack of knowledge of the matter to be the true solution of his position in the Fillmore letters; and, if he had a share in responsibility for authorship of the "Grant-signed" Letters—as I believe him to have had—then in those letters also; for there the question is discussed very much from the same point of view, except that at one point the argument, and for the sake of the argument, granting the charge of plural marriages to be true,—"whose business is it?" the letter writer asks. "Does the Constitution forbid it? Is there anything in the [organic] act for the government of the territory forbidding it? And where else can we find it written down as a crime?" The subsequent announcement of the institution by the church, as we shall see, did not deprive the Utah colonists of the friendship of Colonel Kane.
[^30] The act was approved Oct. 4, 1851, Utah Legislative Enactments, 1851.
[^31] Excerpt from a letter of Judge Snow's published in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake, 1885, p. 94.
[^32] "Regular bred lawyer" is President Young's way of putting it in his History, Ms. He also adds: "President Kimball could have been appointed if he had been a limb of the law. Dr. Bernhisel regarded the nomination of Elder Hyde by President Fillmore as a great triumph, because it showed the president discredited the report of the fugitive officers and by that act placed the seal of his condemnation upon the same." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sept., 1852, p. 80).
[^33] Congressional Globe, vol. xxv, new series, pp. 92-3. The paragraph dealing with the question is worth reproducing: "Feeling cautious against any possible future removals like those which now embarrass us with the want of the territorial seal and funds to meet constantly accruing expenses, and also the want of a full supreme court of the United States for Utah territory, and desirous to dwell in peace and unfeigned loyalty to the Constitution and general government of the United States—your memorialists do therefore pray our highly-honored chief magistrate to appoint men to fill the aforesaid vacancies, by and with the consent of the senate, who are indeed residents among us, in order that we may enjoy the full administration of every department of government speedily as the prosperity of the territory shall require. And your memorialists, as in duty bound, will ever pray."
[^34] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for May 22nd, 1852.
[^35] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1852, pp. 11-13. A block of Utah stone, oolitic lime stone, was finally sent to be placed in the Washington Monument, namely, in 1853. There was carved upon it the Bee Hive beneath which was the word "Deseret," "Holiness to the Lord," and other emblems cut by a Mr. Ward, and forwarded in compliance with the resolution of the "State of Deseret" referred to in a former chapter. (See Liverpool Route, p. 108. Also History of Brigham Young, Ms., for 1853, p. 50).
[^36] Deseret News of June 12, 1852.
[^37] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for September, 1852, pp. 80 and 81.
[^38] The judge "denied that he came here (i. e. to Utah) with the view of being elected delegate to congress, but had expressed his willingness to accept that office, if elected, and that he thought he could do us good in that way." (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 8th Sept., 1851, pp. 61-69). In referring again to the matter, in a letter to the judge under date of Sept. 20th, 1851, Governor Young represented that it was "reported, and on pretty good authority," that Brocchus had said that, "if the citizens of Utah do not send me as their delegate to Washington, by G—d, I'll use all my influence against them, and will crush them. I have the influence and the power to do it, and I will accomplish it if they do not make me their delegate." (The letter from which the above is quoted, with three others by Brigham Young to Judge Brocchus, and two of the judge's to Brigham Young, were published in the New York Herald, and reproduced in the Deseret News of Oct. 16, 1852).
