In March 2002 I sent a letter to the address in the Liahona, and in July I received a response from the Ukraine Kyiv Mission. It contained literature regarding The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I want to thank the First Presidency for the magnanimity shown in relations with other religions, notwithstanding the persecutions experienced by the Church at the time of its organization. This speaks of humanity and Christian charity. Currently in Kirovohrad we have something akin to New York in 1820—all congregations contending among themselves. But I firmly believe in the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Unfortunately, the Church is not yet represented in my city, but I believe it is only a question of time.
Grigoriy Ivanovich Timchenko, Kirovohrad, Ukraine

My family joined the Church when I was seven years old, and it was because of my reading and valuing the Liahona that I met my husband.

When I receive the monthly issue of the magazine, I take it with me everywhere so I can read it. One day I was calmly reading it on the bus to work when a young man stopped at my side and asked, “Are you a member of the Church?” I didn’t quite trust him, so I answered yes, then asked him what stake he belonged to. (I assumed if he wasn’t a member he wouldn’t know what a stake was.) He told me the name of his stake, and we talked until we got off the bus.

Some time after this, a regional choir was organized to prepare for the visit of the prophet. That was when this young man and I started to see each other more frequently. Later we were married and went to the Guatemala City temple to be sealed. We’ve been married for almost three years. The gospel has given me the opportunity to have a very special husband, who is faithful in the Church. I am very happy to have the gospel in my life.
Rebeca Sierra de Zelaya, Fraternidad Ward, Tegucigalpa Honduras Stake

Since I was baptized into the Church in Japan, I have had experiences that have helped me become a disciple of Jesus Christ. I know that to live a Christlike life is not easy, but when I study the scriptures with all my heart, I feel good spiritually. The Liahona has helped me understand what Heavenly Father desires of me. I love to read the First Presidency Message and the experiences of members who love this gospel.
Kawano Hitoshi, BYU—Hawaii 11th Ward, BYU—Hawaii First Stake

Have you had an experience that would inspire other members to prepare themselves for temple worship or to increase their temple attendance? If you would like to share a true story with other readers, please send it to Temple Experiences, Liahona, Room 2420, 50 East North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3220, USA; or e-mail to liahona@ldschurch.org.
