After a family home evening lesson on obedience, four-year-old Brandon was anxious to try harder to obey his mom and dad. He and his mom decided that a reminder might help him. Brandon would repeat, “If I choose to obey, I’ll be happy all day!”

One day Brandon wanted to play at his friend’s house. He raced across the yard when suddenly the words “If I choose to obey, I’ll be happy all day!” came to his mind. Remembering that he should ask his mom first, Brandon headed back to his house.

When he turned eight, Brandon was baptized and received the gift of the Holy Ghost. He read in his scriptures that the Holy Ghost would show him all things he should do (see 2 Ne. 32:5). Brandon knew the Holy Ghost would remind him to follow Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ set the perfect example for us. The scriptures teach us that “blessed is every one that … walketh in [the Lord’s] ways. … Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee” (Ps. 128:1–2). When we follow Jesus Christ, we will be happy not only all day but throughout all eternity!

In the Sermon on the Mount (see Matt. 5; 3 Ne. 12) Jesus taught us how to live so we can be happy. Some of these teachings are known as the Beatitudes. Beatitude means “happiness” or “blessing.” To make a Beatitude Book, glue page F7 on a sheet of paper. Cut on the solid lines. Glue the second strip to the tab on the first strip. Fold back and forth on the dotted lines.

Sermon on the Mount
The Teachings of Jesus

I will follow my Savior’s example.
“Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven” (3 Ne. 12:3; see also Matt. 5:3).

I will trust the Lord. The Holy Ghost will bring me comfort and peace.
“Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted” (Matt. 5:4).

I will obey Heavenly Father’s commandments.
“Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth” (Matt. 5:5).

I will study the scriptures daily.
“Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost” (3 Ne. 12:6; see also Matt. 5:6).

I will forgive others.
“Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy” (Matt. 5:7).

I will keep my baptismal covenants.
“Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God” (Matt. 5:8).

I will be kind and not show anger to others.
“Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God” (Matt. 5:9).

I will bear my testimony in word and deed.
“Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 5:10).

I will be happy when I follow the teachings of Jesus Christ.
Jesus gave the same teachings to both the Jews (see Matt. 5–7) and the Nephites (see 3 Ne. 12–14).

1.  Prepare and hide wordstrips with the following words: The, Holy Ghost, Will, Help, Me, To, Follow, Jesus Christ. Get the children’s attention by whispering, “Listen to my voice, and I will help you find some wordstrips.” Whisper directions and help a child to find each wordstrip. Then whisper directions to help the children put them in order. Recite the sentence together. Remind the children that the Holy Ghost also speaks softly and helps us follow Jesus Christ. Show the children a picture of the First Presidency, and read the first two paragraphs on page 1 of the Faith in God guidebook. Show a picture of the Savior, and read about baptismal covenants on pages 2 and 3. Have the children discover and write the three promises we make when we are baptized: to keep His commandments, take His name upon us, and always remember Him. If we keep our baptismal covenants, the Holy Ghost will always be with us. Invite adults or children to share experiences of how listening to the Holy Ghost has helped them. Ask the children to think of the Savior’s love as they sing a song or hymn.

2.  Play the game Leader Says. Have the children listen closely to your commands and follow only when you say, “leader says,” first (for example, “leader says walk in place”; “stop walking”—children should continue to walk because you didn’t say, “leader says,” first). Tell the children they were great followers, and explain that there is someone else they should listen closely to and follow. Read together John 13:15. Post the Savior’s picture. Around His picture, list songs or hymns that tell how we can follow Him. Encourage older and younger children to work together as you divide them into groups. Give each group a scripture reference (for example, Eph. 4:32; 1 Jn. 4:11; Mosiah 1:6–7; D&C 21:1, 4–5). Have them (1) Read the scripture out loud and explain the principle we should follow; (2) Choose a song or hymn that matches Jesus Christ’s teaching and lead the Primary in singing it; (3) Act out ways we can follow Jesus Christ’s teaching and let others guess what they are doing; (4) Explain how we will be happy by keeping this commandment.
