Clovis Livu Shiku from Kolwezi made history by becoming the first student in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to be awarded a bachelor’s degree through BYU–Pathway Worldwide. He received a bachelor of science degree in applied technology from BYU–Idaho at the end of 2022. He and five other students enrolled in PathwayConnect (BYU–Pathway’s bridging course) in 2019 and started working tirelessly, taking many classes each semester.

At the end of 2022, he fulfilled all the requirements for the bachelor’s degree. I had the privilege of meeting him and his wife, Raissa, who is doing her first certificate with BYU–Idaho. Clovis says it took a lot of fasting, prayer, and hard work to earn his degree. “I remember facing challenges with internet access, a computer, and frequent power cuts, but with determination and the help of the Lord, I pulled through,” he said. “It is a miracle,” he added. Clovis works as a technical support engineer for a company that provides services to several mining companies in his province and has been promoted due to his newly acquired skills from his studies. Clovis serves as a stake technology specialist in the Kolwezi Democratic Republic of the Congo Stake. He and Raissa are helping several other students through their calling as senior service missionaries for BYU–Pathway Worldwide. These two are great examples of what it means to walk with the Lord. They have developed the faith to move mountains in their lives.

In January 2023, a ceremony to recognize all students who have reached a significant milestone in their journey to improve their education was held at the Kolwezi stake centre. Recipients of EnglishConnect and PathwayConnect certificates and associate and bachelor’s degrees from Ensign College and BYU–Idaho were recognized. Elder Sylvain Kongolo, an Area Seventy, presided over the event. A provincial minister of education also attended the ceremony and spoke highly of the Church’s efforts to improve the Congolese people’s education.

Each new semester we are witnessing a remarkable increase in enrollment throughout Africa. For example, slightly over 2000 new students enrolled in PathwayConnect in the January 2023 semester in the Africa Central and Africa South Areas, an increase of about 30 percent from last year. Information about enrollment and the certificates and degrees on offer is available at www.byupathway.org.
