We send our love and greetings to you. Each of you is a child of our Heavenly Father. We know that He loves you and wants you to be happy. He placed you on the earth so you can grow and learn. He has given you the right to choose what kind of a life you want to live. He wants you to learn about our Savior, Jesus Christ, and follow his example.

When you left heaven to come to earth, our Heavenly Father gave you some special people to help you make right choices. He gave you parents and families to teach you the gospel of Jesus Christ and to love you. He also gave you Church leaders, such as your bishop and Primary leaders and teachers, to help you. He gave you the scriptures to read at home with your family and friends and in Primary. As you read the scriptures, you learn about righteous leaders. You can follow their good examples. You can also learn about gospel principles, such as prayer, honesty,and kindness, from the scriptures.

If you are almost eight years old we hope that you are preparing for your baptism and your confirmation, when you will receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost will guide you when you need to make a choice. Listen to the still, small voice. If you do, you will make wise decisions and choose the right way to live.

Our Heavenly Father wants you to pray often. Go to him in prayer and ask for his guidance. Thank him for the blessings he has given you. Ask him to help you know what to do in your life. Ask him to bless others who need help.

Remember that our Heavenly Father gave you commandments to bless you. It is by obeying the commandments that you will have joy in your life. Develop your own testimony of the gospel. Be of service to your families and friends. Help others, and be kind to everyone. Be good so you can be happy.

Always remember that you are a precious child of God. He knows you. He knows your name. He loves you. We love you, too, and pray for your happiness and peace.

Michaelene P. Grassli

Betty Jo Jepsen

Ruth B. Wright
