Julie was sad. Grandma was in the hospital, and Mother had gone to visit her.

“What’s wrong, Julie?” Angie, her older sister, asked.

“Is Grandma going to get better?” Julie wondered.

“I don’t know,” Angie replied.

“Why aren’t you upset? Don’t you love Grandma?” Julie asked.

“Of course I love her,” Angie said. “But even if she dies, we can be together forever.”

“I thought being together forever meant none of us would ever die,” Julie said.

Angie smiled. “Being together forever means we can be together as a family in Heavenly Father’s kingdom.”

Julie sighed. “I don’t understand.”

“Next month Mark and I are going to be married,” Angie explained. “Do you know where?”

“In the temple,” Julie answered. “You’ve been planning it for months.”

“Actually, I’ve planned on being married in the temple for as long as I can remember,” Angie explained. “In the temple we will be sealed together as an eternal family unit. Because Grandma and Grandpa were sealed in the temple and Mom and Dad were sealed in the temple, we are all sealed together as a family even after this life.”

“And that’s all there is to it?” Julie asked.

“We also have to try to live as an eternal family now. We need to live the gospel, love one another, and help each other.”

“I’m glad you are my sister forever,” Julie said.

“So am I,” Angie responded.

Remove page 5 from the magazine, and glue it onto heavy paper. Cut off the temple background section along the dotted line. Cut slits along the dotted lines in the temple and in front of the temple. Fold the background piece along the solid line. Fold out the three tabs created by the slits. Cut out the family figures, and glue them to the tabs (see illustration). Cut out the shrubs. On the blank shrub, write something you will do to prepare to go to the temple one day. Put the shrubs into the slits on the temple grounds. They will remind you of things your family can do to be a forever family.

1.  Divide the children into five groups. Have each group read one of the following scripture passages: (1) Moses 5:2, 12; (2) 1 Ne. 1:13; 1 Ne. 2:1–4; (3) Mosiah 27:11–16; (4) Hel. 5:12–14; (5) Alma 56:47–48. Have the groups discuss how the parents in these scriptures helped their children. Have each group illustrate and present its scripture. Sing songs or hymns that relate to each scripture. Help the children understand and memorize “Honour thy father and thy mother” (Ex. 20:12).

2.  Explain that children can help their families be together forever by being understanding. Talk about Solomon, who asked God for an understanding heart (see 1 Kgs. 3:5, 9–12). Discuss what it means to have an understanding heart. Cut out several paper hearts, and write a situation on each one. For example: (1) Your brother has hurt his arm; (2) Your mother is late making dinner because she helped a neighbor; (3) Your friend wants you to play, but you see your father working in the yard. Explain to the children that they have understanding hearts, and ask what they would do in each situation. Sing a song or hymn about families. Help the children make cards to take to their families. On the front, write, “I can have an understanding heart by …” Have the children write or draw inside the cards what they can do to be more understanding.
