In early 2022, Brother Michael MacDonald, of the Bangor 2nd Ward in the Belfast Northern Ireland Stake, was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. He committed to change his lifestyle to try and reverse the diagnosis. As part of his journey to a healthier lifestyle, he received help and support from family and friends.

Following discussions with some family members, Brother MacDonald decided to take on the challenge to climb five peaks in five days—to hike the five tallest mountains in the UK and Ireland in five consecutive days. His brother, Jonathan MacDonald, brother-in-law, Gerrard Doherty, and friend and member of Michael’s ward, Steven Murphy, thought it a good idea to join him.

Brother MacDonald’s son, Joel, is diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and is educationally statemented. Michael had the inspirational idea to not only do this challenge for his own benefit, but to also raise funds for Autism Northern Ireland. He states, “I wanted to give something back, in order to thank all who have assisted my son in enabling him to access education and reach his potential.”

On 26 April 2023, they commenced the challenge, starting with the tallest mountain in Northern Ireland, Slieve Donard. Day 2 was then a 300-mile drive to Killarney, where they hiked Carrauntoohil, the tallest mountain in the Republic of Ireland. From there, a 220-mile drive to Dublin Port to catch the ferry to Holyhead Wales. Following a few hours’ sleep, it was now Friday 28 April, and they were ready for Day 3. This took them up Snowdon, the tallest mountain in Wales, followed by another 200-mile car journey up to the beautiful Lake District. On day 4, 29 April, they made it to the top of Scafell Pike, the tallest mountain in England. Their journey continued north with a 256-mile drive to the base of Ben Nevis, the tallest mountain in Scotland and all the British Isles. On day 5, 30 April 2023 this very tired, but very accomplished band of brothers made it to the summit of Ben Nevis.

Over the five days they were all overwhelmed by the outpouring of support and generosity of family, friends and members of the Belfast Northern Ireland Stake and beyond. This terrific accomplishment raised over £5100 for Autism Northern Ireland, which Michael knows will be put to good use, helping children and young people like his son, Joel.
