biochemistry has not provided this kind of evidence.”25

biochemistry has not provided this kind of evidence.”

What Scientists Say What Evolutionists Say What Scientists Say originate a single cell and the time needed to evolve 25 Hoyle origin of life is about as likely as the assemblage of complex life forms from it.

Behe points to the structure of an organ, the human We Ought to See

Behe points to the structure of an organ, the human a [Boeing] 747 by a tornado whirling through a

eye, which would not work unless all its many

eye, which would not work unless all its many junkyard.” The Darwinian theory of evolution fails

components were integrated. To illustrate the concept,

Evolutionists expected that an improved components were integrated. To illustrate the concept, Evolutionists expected that an improved What Evolutionists Say to predict what we actually currently observe.

Evolutionists say that evolution needs to make sense

We Ought to See

understanding of mutations, amino acids and DNA Behe uses a simple mouse trap comprised of five “well- understanding of mutations, amino acids and DNA Behe uses a simple mouse trap comprised of five “well- Schutzenberger, a considerable gap in the neo-Darwinian theory of at the molecular level. If evolution were true, we

should put their theory on firmer ground, but matched, interacting parts that contribute to the basic

the following:

instead biochemistry has raised challenging new ought to observe and explain many things, including should put their theory on firmer ground, but matched, interacting parts that contribute to the basic evolution, and we believe this gap to be of such a

causes the system to effectively cease functioning.” Behe questions. Biochemistry has not confirmed If life originated from chemicals by chance, then causes the system to effectively cease functioning.” Behe

under laboratory conditions we should be able to

• how the nucleic acids and proteins became so

questions. Biochemistry has not confirmed function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts instead biochemistry has raised challenging new function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts nature that it cannot be bridged with the current

see chemicals changing into living organisms today.

macroevolution. Attempts have been made to use argues that no feasible evolutionary explanation exists macroevolution. Attempts have been made to use argues that no feasible evolutionary explanation exists conception of biology.”

complex and well adapted to their highly specific molecular clocks to tell us how long ago each species for some “irreducibly complex systems” [not only in Mathematics should be able to show with

molecular clocks to tell us how long ago each species for some “irreducibly complex systems” [not only in

organs, but] in even the simplest cells and molecular

functions

organs, but] in even the simplest cells and molecular

branched off from its common ancestor of a proposed systems.19 • how evolutionary processes were directed from the branched off from its common ancestor of a proposed reasonable probability that there is adequate time Behe argues that this challenges the whole

systems.19 Behe argues that this challenges the whole

evolutionary tree. But, these molecular clocks run at idea of molecular evolution.

first forms of life—proteins to cells to plants and evolutionary tree. But, these molecular clocks run at for chemicals to combine to produce life and cause idea of molecular evolution.

different rates for different species and for different animals

different rates for different species and for different complex life forms to arise from “primordial soup.” DNA

Psalm 8:3-8; Isaiah 55:8, 9; Colossians 1:17

positions along the DNA molecule. These differences Psalm 8:3-8; Isaiah 55:8, 9; Colossians 1:17

• how mutations work in the DNA molecule

positions along the DNA molecule. These differences If some event, such as a specific mutation in a

produce very large uncertainties in time, and the data • how molecular “clock” findings, used to estimate produce very large uncertainties in time, and the data molecule, has a mathematical probability greater than Hubert Yockey, have not compared well to fossil records, so the

the time since an animal or plant split off from its have not compared well to fossil records, so the zero, the chance that it will occur increases with time. that the information needed to begin life could not

molecular clock’s usefulness is questionable.

common ancestor, can correlate and be consistent molecular clock’s usefulness is questionable. (Similarly, your chance of having a bicycle accident have developed by chance; he suggests that life be

increases with the amount of time you spend on your

Denton34 says, “The really significant finding that with the fossil record

• how comparison of DNA between species, for Denton34 says, “The really significant finding that bike.) Even if the probability of an occurrence is considered a given “quantity,” like matter or energy.

comes to light from comparing the protein’s amino example, humans and apes, can show how closely they comes to light from comparing the protein’s amino extremely small, it can happen, given enough time. He and some other mathematicians have challenged acid sequences is that it is impossible to arrange them are related on a molecular “tree of life.”

acid sequences is that it is impossible to arrange them Scientists were elated in 1952 when Stanley Miller evolutionary biologists by citing the extreme

in any sort of evolutionary series. Thousands of Biochemistry What We Actually Mathematics mixture of simple gases is exposed to a spark-source all known species by random mutations. If the real in any sort of evolutionary series. Thousands of showed that small organic molecules (such as amino improbability of the origin of life by chance chemical

different sequences, protein and nucleic acid, have

different sequences, protein and nucleic acid, have acids, the building blocks of proteins) form when a reactions, and of the improbability of the origin of

now been compared in hundreds of different species

but never has any sequence been found to be in any

The study of chemical processes Observe in Nature now been compared in hundreds of different species of energy. The hope that these molecules would “units of life” are bits of information (that is, the

sense the lineal descendant or ancestor of any other

The use of numbers, symbols and produce life was dashed by decades of subsequent molecule itself), evolutionary biology may take quite a sense the lineal descendant or ancestor of any other

occurring in living plants and animals Microevolution is now observed in molecules, yet an but never has any sequence been found to be in any accumulate into a rich organic "soup" that would messages coded on DNA rather than the DNA sequence. In terms of their biochemistry, none of the

species deemed ‘intermediate’, ‘ancestral’, or ‘primitive’ orderly progression from one species to another is sequence. In terms of their biochemistry, none of the research showing the unlikeliness of this soup-to-life different turn in the future. species deemed ‘intermediate’, ‘ancestral’, or ‘primitive’

by generations of evolutionary biologists, and alluded What the Theory of not clearly supported by biochemistry. equations to study quantities and their theory. What We Actually A very mathematical “information theory” has been

relationships.

to as evidence of sequence in nature, shows any sign mutations are known to be changes in a single “letter” Many by generations of evolutionary biologists, and alluded of their supposed intermediate status.” Evolution Says 28 in a message “written” on a long DNA molecule. For to as evidence of sequence in nature, shows any sign Observe in Nature developed to solve problems in storing and transmitting information, as do computers and

Davis25 says, “ . . . it has proved impossible to arrange example, a person can become quite sick from having of their supposed intermediate status.”28 What the Theory of Evolution Says Davis25 says, “ . . . it has proved impossible to arrange Scientists show that the probability of complex life telecommunication systems. Some scientists are

With the discovery of DNA, the genetic data bank, a slightly different form of some protein, like

protein sequences in a macroevolution series

evolutionists were given new hope that they might hemoglobin (the molecule that carries oxygen in our protein sequences in a macroevolution series (such as plants and animals on earth) evolving by applying information theory to help unravel certain corresponding to the expected transitions, from fish

find evidence supporting evolution of molecules. red blood cells). Biochemists can detect which part of corresponding to the expected transitions, from fish Darwin’s evolutionary model is extremely small, unsolved problems in biology, such as prebiological to amphibian to reptile to mammal.”

Darwin developed his theory at a time when little was the molecule differs from the normal protein and even to amphibian to reptile to mammal.” zero statistically. According to most mathematical selection, similar in concept to the biological natural Scientists can calculate the probabilities of certain

known about the chemical composition of plants and pin the blame on a specific chemical change in the biological changes occurring over a given time. calculations, a universe even 100 billion years old is selection of Darwinism. They are also studying the

animals, even less about chemical reactions within DNA of the gene for hemoglobin structure. Evolutionists assume there was enough time (4.5 still not old enough for a single cell to have Explanations Offered

self-organizing properties of complex chemical

living cells, and nothing at all about the chemistry of

evolve complex life forms from the first living cell. by Creationists RNA, an information carrying molecule, in the minimum complexity needed for life. The goal is to

genes (DNA) and gene products (proteins). by Creationists Can scientists prove that two kinds of animals are billion years) to originate pre-biological life and to Explanations Offered developed on earth. Even attempts to synthesize systems, and searching for ways to reduce the

Creationists credit God with the creation of 10 pioneering Christian Schwabe writes, “Molecular evolution is They think lifeless chemicals were somehow changed not been explained through chemical origins. of life. Nobel Laureate Francis Crick 1953 The double helix structure of DNA,32 discovered in related by observing DNA? Molecular biologist Creationists credit God with the creation of laboratory have also been unsuccessful. Life has find a sensible plausible theory to explain the origin , almost 100 years after Darwin’s

everything that exists, down to the molecular and

everything that exists, down to the molecular and

even the subatomic level. work, cleared up many mysteries. Now we know that about to be accepted as a method superior to into life according to chemical laws that we can A DNA molecule contains Harold Morowitz,36 a biophysicist, compared the honest man, armed with all the knowledge available A DNA molecule contains

even the subatomic level.

to us now, could only state that in some sense, the

each gene is a section of a long DNA molecule paleontology for the discovery of evolutionary observe today. They propose that small molecules massive and complex “genetic information” which,

combined to form larger molecules which organized

containing many genes. Genetic information can exist relationships. As a molecular evolutionist I should be massive and complex “genetic information” which, number of interactions needed to randomly produce a origin of life appears at the moment to be almost a like a blueprint, specifies how one living cell is put

like a blueprint, specifies how one living cell is put

in stable form for thousands of years, yet can be elated. Instead it seems disconcerting that many themselves into a one-celled living organism. But, this living cell with the total number of interactions miracle, so many are the conditions which would have together. Molecular biologists speak of “messages”

simple self-replicating organism (requiring dozens of

copied easily when cells divide. Knowledge exceptions exist to the orderly progression of species together. Molecular biologists speak of “messages” available since the beginning of the universe. The been satisfied to get it going.” and whole “libraries” with information “written” in

the “DNA code” or the “language of proteins.”

a natural process. and whole “libraries” with information “written” in mathematical probabilities are so small that we ought

Lindsay unavailable to Darwin enables genetic engineers to as determined by molecular homologies; so many in molecules) would be extremely difficult to assemble by

35 wrote that the “information in one cell fact that I think the exception, the quirks, may carry the “DNA code” or the “language of proteins.” to see no life at all at this stage of the earth’s history.

manipulate DNA, transfer it from one species to

another, and even clone animals. Therefore, artificially the more important message.”33 Some molecular Lindsay35 wrote that the “information in one cell The probability of assembling amino acid building would fill about a thousand, 600-page books; and,

(or directed) as well as naturally (or random) biologists speak of evidence of directed evolution, would fill about a thousand, 600-page books; and, blocks into a functional protein is also too small to be While evolutionary biology is not very quantitative,

this one cell can be used to reassemble the entire

some laws of chemistry and genetics can be expressed

body . . .” occurring mutations on a single part of a DNA not Darwinian evolution.

body . . .” this one cell can be used to reassemble the entire considered possible. Random assembly is therefore Creationists agree with scientists and

in the form of equations which provide probability ruled out of the question.

molecule are possible sources of biological variation.

Davis says “Darwinists have held high expectations

Davis says “Darwinists have held high expectations

of change over time. This means scientists can

mathematicians that the formation of life through

that biochemistry would provide evidence of gradual

that biochemistry would provide evidence of gradual

estimate the amount of time it would take to

evolution is extremely improbable, in fact,

change between taxonomic groups. However,

change between taxonomic groups. However,

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Creation & Evolution ISBN 9781890947019. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Creation & Evolution ISBN 9781890947019. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on

-9-

-9-

pamphlet reveals the basic lack of proof surrounding Darwinism and delves into the exciting recent findings. Save $5 on your $25 order. the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose pamphlet reveals the basic lack of proof surrounding Darwinism and delves into the exciting recent findings. Save $5 on your $25 order. the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose

Enter coupon code: Enter coupon code: 5EC12 5EC12 at at www.rose-publishing.com. .

www.rose-publishing.com

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Intelligent Design

Intelligent Design is the best short description of

what Intelligent Design (I.D.) is all about and why

many scientists and analytic philosophers today are

embracing it and distancing themselves from Darwin’s

theory of the origin of life.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596363397 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF and in Spanish.

Why Wait?

Why Wait? takes on one of the biggest challenges

among teens and singles: sexual activity. This

bestselling full-color pamphlet presents 24

reasons—12 biblical and 12 medical and emotional—to

think twice before risking health and happiness on sex

outside of marriage.

Pamphlet ............ 9789901980727 ...........$3.99

Creation & Evolution

Also available as PDF, Wall Chart, and PowerPoint®

The bestselling Creation & Evolution pamphlet shows how scientific

findings in the areas of paleontology, genetics, biochemistry, astrophysics

and mathematics cannot be explained by Darwinian Evolution. The

Rose Book of Bible Charts, Maps, Time

full-color glossy pamphlet reveals the basic lack of proof surrounding

Lines, Vol. 1

Darwinism and delves into the exciting recent findings. Teachers, parents

The bestselling Rose Book Of Bible Charts, Maps &

and students will appreciate how the pamphlet takes challenging subject

Time Lines, Vol. 1 is the #1 Bible Reference book sold

matter and makes it easy to use and understand.

in Christian bookstores! This book has more than 180

pages of full-color reproducible Bible charts, maps,

Pamphlet ....................9781890947019 ................$3.99

and time lines.

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Book ................... 9781596360228 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
