Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ISAIAH SAW OUR DAY

More than any other biblical writer, Isaiah is a prophet for today.

As one of scripture's most penetrating voices affirming the divinity of the Savior and heralding his ministry, this Hebrew prophet opens before our eyes the panorama of God's dealings with man in times past, in the present when we ourselves live, and in days to come.

"Great are the words of Isaiah," the Savior declared. (3 Ne. 23:1.) And great is his message to the Latter-day Saints.

He gazed on our day and prophesied concerning it. He saw the restoration of the gospel and the work of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

He foresaw the coming forth of the Book of Mormon as a marvelous work and a wonder, and observed its miraculous effect upon an unbelieving world. Even the blind would read its inspired pages, the deaf would hear its words, and "the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel." (Isa. 29:19.)

He envisioned the Saints in the tops of the mountains and their temple established above the hills. It was the house of the Lord, and all nations flowed unto it.

He saw two capital cities at the opening of the Millennium, Zion in America from which will go the divine law, and the Old Jerusalem—renewed—from which will issue the sacred word of God.

He revealed that the Lord will there "teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths" (Isa. 2:3), and the peace of heaven will descend upon the earth.

But above all else, Isaiah bore a mighty testimony of Christ in a voice that comes down through the centuries to this day when atheism spreads rapidly in the earth, and when strong delusions take men's minds away from the Savior into paths of distress and error.

Isaiah's testimony of Christ, if carefully read now, prepares the faithful against the time when men's hearts shall fail them. He braces us for this present day when intellectualism scoffs at the virgin birth, denies the divine creation, and ridicules the sacred revelation that man is a child of God and may become like him.

Such critics do not fear God, for they do not so much as believe that he exists.

Isaiah foresaw that the Savior would be born of Mary. He described the ministry of Jesus in Palestine, and portrayed the Lord's great humility, his rejection by the world, his death in the midst of the wicked, and his burial with the rich.

He saw also this humble Christ as God Almighty who will return in a glorious second coming to gather his sheep as a shepherd, reassemble the tribes of Israel, establish Zion, and begin his millennial reign.

He saw that the Lord will come to judgment, destroy wickedness, and enthrone the righteous Saints to live and reign with him for a thousand years.

He saw the people and said that they "draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men;

"Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:13-14.)

And did he tell us when this shall be? He did! That is now! His prophecies are for today!

Moroni saw this also and wrote to us as he neared his own death: "Search the prophecies of Isaiah." (Morm. 8:23.)

Jesus gave us this commandment as he visited the Nephites: "Behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah." (3 Ne. 23:1.)

This prophet, Isaiah, spoke in clear and frightening terms to the people of his day and warned them against the destruction that threatened them. But they disregarded him.

He spoke just as vigorously both of us and to us of today. He saw that we too live in a time of apostasy, even as did the people of his time. He saw the tribulations of the last days.

Looking toward them he said, "The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." (Isa. 24:4-5.)

And then he followed with this frightful prediction: "Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left." (Isa. 24:6.) He saw the Lord come to judgment!

Isaiah said even further as he looked to the day in which we live: "And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. The land shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken his word." (Isa. 24:2-3.)

"Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof." (Isa. 24:1.) So fearful will be his judgment.

In that day also, "the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again. . . . Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed" as a sign preliminary to his coming. (Isa. 24:20, 23.)

Great destruction is projected for the wicked in these last days, but for the righteous there will be a joyful reward. In their midst the Lord of hosts "shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem" (both in America and Palestine), and his reign shall be glorious. Isa. 24:23.)
