Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

BACKWARD OR FORWARD?

Only the Latter-day Saints truly understand Isaiah. The Book of Mormon indicates that one must know "concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews" to comprehend his teachings.

We read: "Now I, Nephi, do speak somewhat concerning the words which I have written, which have been spoken by the mouth of Isaiah. For behold, Isaiah spake many things which were hard for many of my people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews." (2 Ne. 25:1.)

The reason Nephi's brothers did not understand the meaning of Isaiah's words is that Nephi had "not taught them many things concerning the manner of the Jews." He explained that he did not so instruct his brothers because of their own "doings of abominations" and "works of darkness." (2 Ne. 25:2.)

But Nephi understood Isaiah, quoted generously from him in his writings on the plates that later were included in the Book of Mormon, and thus provided for us an understanding of much of what Isaiah said.

The teachings of Book of Mormon prophets, and especially the instruction of the Savior as he ministered among the Nephites, open to Latter-day Saints a comprehension of Isaiah that is far beyond the scope of any part of the sectarian world. It greatly exceeds the understanding of the Jews themselves, because like the Christians, they are blind to the work of the Lord in these latter days whereby the gospel was restored. They are utterly unaware of the mission of Christ, both in the meridian of time and in the latter days.

Much of Isaiah's work points to the Savior, Jesus of Nazareth, who died on the cross. It has to do with his second coming also, and the preparation being provided by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for that glorious event.

To understand Isaiah, people need to understand the Latter-day Saint point of view. They cannot and never will understand him otherwise. Both Jews and Christians alike grope in darkness concerning this matter until they are willing to accept the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

A large part of Isaiah's writings, of course, have to do with the time in which he lived. But for us that is all past. That is history. We of today need to study those portions of Isaiah which relate to the twentieth century, even looking forward to the twenty-first century, now not far away.

When the Savior commands us to read Isaiah, we should respond. But to understand it, we must read the Book of Mormon along with it, for that volume opens our eyes to the genuine meaning in his words. And further, we must look to the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who also provides valuable background for those ancient prophecies.

It is sad indeed to read the efforts of both Jewish and Gentile scholars as they try to interpret some of Isaiah's words. Note this concerning one of the passages most dear to us: "Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isa. 7:14.)

Following is a typical example of secular understanding: "This very year . . . a young woman will have a son and call his name Immanuel. . . . Before the boy shall be two or three years old, the allied kings will have departed from Judah. Then evil days will come upon Judah, such as she has not seen since the secession of Ephraim. Egypt and Assyria will lay the land waste." (Margolis and Marx, A History of the Jewish People, Jewish Publication Society of America, 1927, p. 97.) There is no mention of the true Immanuel, the Messiah.

The passage in Isa. 2:1-5 we interpret as relating to the coming of the Saints to Salt Lake Valley and the building of their modern Zion there, together with a temple. It is interpreted by the Jews, of course, to relate only to their Jerusalem. They translate the scripture in this way, however, although they associate it with Palestine:

"In the days to come the Mount of the Lord's House shall stand firm above the mountains, and tower above the hills; and all the nations shall gaze on it with joy.

"And the many peoples shall go and shall say: `Come, Let us go to the mount of The Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, That he may direct us according to his ways, And that we may walk in his paths,' For direction shall be forthcoming from Zion, And words of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"Thus he will judge among the nations and arbitrate for the many peoples, And they shall beat their swords into plowtips and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not take up Sword against nation; They shall never again know war." (Encyclopedia Judaica, New York: Macmillan, 9:51.)

Their translated version of this scripture is most interesting and further sustains the Latter-day Saint point of view. But the true meaning is entirely lost on both Jews and Christians. Which of any of the sectarian groups recognizes the facts in the case?

Similarly, the predictions of Isaiah with respect to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon (Isaiah 29) have no true meaning at all to either Jew or Gentile. How could they know? They do not have the key to prophecy, and they are blinded by the teachings of men.

Only because of the Prophet Joseph Smith do we understand chapter 29 of Isaiah.

And who of the Jews or Gentiles understands the first verse in Isaiah 61? It is quoted by the Savior himself in Luke 4:18-19, but who understood it even in the Lord's day?

Was salvation for the dead—was the Savior's preaching to the departed spirits—ever in the minds of any Christian denomination? Did the Jews believe in such vicarious work? Did it not take the restoration of the gospel to make this passage clear?

And consider chapter 53 of Isaiah. Which Jew, orthodox or not, relates this to Jesus of Nazareth, plain as the scripture is? Most Christians accept it, but even now many of them are beginning to reject Christ as the Son of God; they no longer believe in his atonement, which is what chapter 53 is all about.

A true knowledge of that scripture comes only in the light of modern revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith and through the Book of Mormon.

Isaiah is definitely for today. His dealings with the ancient kings of Judah and his confrontations with them over the attacks of the Assyrians and the Babylonians are all in the past. Reference to them is strictly historical and has little relevance for us.

But his writings concerning Christ, the restoration of the gospel, the gathering of the Twelve Tribes, and the second coming of the Lord are all relevant—very much so. In them he writes both about us and to us who live right now. He not only tells much about the restoration of the gospel that has already taken place, such as the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, but he also foretells the signs of the coming of Christ. The signs of the times are now all about us. Shall we not give heed to them?
