Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WHO WAS ISAIAH?

Both Jewish and Christian scholars debate the question: Who was Isaiah?

They have a variety of answers, including the theory that there may have been two or three authors of various sections of that work. But despite their differences on this point, all agree that this book is one of the greatest in the Bible.

One Jewish writer declares Isaiah to be "the greatest of the Hebrew prophets of whom literary monuments remain." (The Jewish Encyclopedia, New York and London: Funk and Wagnalls, 1904, 6:635.)

Isaiah was a seer, a prophet, and a revelator. He was privileged to see God, "sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up." (Isa. 6:1.) At this glorious sight the prophet was greatly humbled, and wrote: "Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts." (Isa. 6:5.)

Isaiah was a keen political observer of his times, and he constantly counseled his country's rulers, even when they resented it. He lived to be eighty years old and then died a martyr at the hands of a cruel and jealous king.

His own book says that he was the son of Amoz and that he lived in Jerusalem. According to the Babylonian Talmud, Amoz was a brother of Amaziah, king of Judah. Isaiah was contemporary with the prophet Micah and lived slightly after Hosea and Amos. He labored in Judah, which had been divided from the northern kingdom, or Ephraim. Hosea and Amos ministered in the north. Isaiah labored primarily within the city of Jerusalem, while the record indicates that Micah served mostly in the rural areas. The kings under whom Isaiah lived were Uzziah, who died in the year that Isaiah "saw the Lord"; Jothan; Ahaz; Hezekiah; and Manesseh, by whom he was martyred.

Isaiah is mentioned outside of his own book in 2 Kgs. 19 and 20 and in 2 Chr. 26 and 32.

Isa. 8 indicates that he was married, as were all good Jewish men, and that he had children, mentioned in both chapters seven and eight. His wife is spoken of as a "prophetess." The Jewish Encyclopedia (6:636) says further: "By her solidarity [speaking of his wife] with her husband she is detached from the unholy people among whom she dwells, and made, as it were, sacrosanct. His children, too, are `signs and omens' of divine appointment, and one may conjecture that if Isaiah ever pictured the worst disaster coming to Jerusalem, he saw himself and his family, like Lot of old, departing in safety (for some work reserved for them by God) from the doomed city."

We read further that "according to the Rabbis, Isaiah was a descendant of Judah and Tamar," and that his father, Amoz, was himself a prophet and a brother of King Amaziah. In measuring the stature of Isaiah, this authority continues: "In the order of greatness Isaiah is placed immediately after Moses by the Rabbis; in some respects Isaiah surpasses even Moses."

Although he was friendly with some of the Jewish kings, and greatly assisted them through his inspired advice, Isaiah also suffered the enmity of Manasseh, who brought about his death.

The prophet in his old age is said to have been "sawn asunder" by Manasseh. Various versions of his death appear, including that which is found in the Babylonian Talmud, which quotes a genealogical record in Jerusalem to the effect that the prophet was "swallowed by a cedar tree." When King Manasseh learned of it, he ordered the tree sawed in half with Isaiah inside it.

Another version says that Isaiah fled from the king's wrath and found refuge in a hollow tree. When his pursuers searched for him, they discovered a portion of his garment hanging outside the tree. This they reported to the king, who ordered them to saw the tree in half as it stood there. In the process, Isaiah suffered the same fate as the tree.

Some commentators think that the apostle Paul referred to this event when he wrote: "And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented." Of those who thus were afflicted for the Lord's sake, Paul further says: "(Of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth," all of this indicating how severely the faithful were persecuted. (Heb. 11:36-38.)

Still another version of the prophet's death is related in the Jewish Talmud. Of it Funk and Wagnalls says:

It is related in the Talmud that Rabbi Simeon ben 'Azzai found in Jerusalem an account wherein it was written that Manasseh killed Isaiah.

Manasseh said to Isaiah, "Moses, thy master, said, `There shall no man see God and live' (Ex. xxxiii. 20, Hebr.); but thou hast said, `I saw the Lord seated upon his throne' " (Isa. vi. 1, Hebr.); and went on to point out other contradictions—as between Deut. iv. 7 and Isa. 1v. 6; between Ex. xxxiii. 26 and II Kings xx. 6.

Isaiah thought: "I know that he will not accept my explanations; why should I increase his guilt?" He then uttered the Unpronounceable Name, a cedar-tree opened, and Isaiah disappeared within it.

Then Manasseh ordered the cedar to be sawn asunder, and when the saw reached his mouth Isaiah died; thus was he punished for having said, "I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips" (Yeb. 49b).

A somewhat different version of this legend is given in the Yerushalmi (Sanhedrin x.). According to that version Isaiah, fearing Manasseh, hid himself in a cedar-tree, but his presence was betrayed by the fringes of his garment, and Manasseh caused the tree to be sawn in half.

A passage of the Targum to Isaiah quoted by Jolowicz ("Die Himmelfahrt und Vision des Prophets Jesajas," p. 8) states that when Isaiah fled from his pursuers and took refuge in the tree, and the tree was sawn in half, the prophet's blood spurted forth.

From Talmudical circles the legend of Isaiah's martyrdom was transmitted to the Arabs ("Ta' rikh," ed. De Goeje, i. 644). (Jewish Encyclopedia 6:636.)
