Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

JERUSALEM'S DEFENSE

Isaiah was probably the greatest patriot in the nation of Judah in his time. He was mighty both in inspired advice to the kings and in actual prophecy as he sought to preserve his nation from repeated invasions by its enemies.

At first it was Syria and the northern kingdom of Israel that threatened Judah. Later Assyria turned from being a friend and defender to a plundering enemy.

As the threat of invasion by Syria and Israel became imminent, Isaiah went to the wicked King Ahaz and pleaded earnestly with him to turn to God for his defense. But being without any faith in Jehovah, Ahaz disregarded him completely. He depended more on an alliance with Assyria than he did on any divine aid, either from Jehovah or from his pagan deities.

From the time of Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, the Kingdom of Judah had lapsed deeply into idolatry, influenced and encouraged by Athaliah, the daughter of the apostate King Ahab and his devilish wife Jezebel. Ahaz reached such depths in his idolatry that he even sacrificed his own son on the heathen altar.

When the kings of Syria and Ephraim, or Israel, as the northern nation was called, conspired against Judah, Isaiah again warned Ahaz to turn to God for his protection. Ahaz, however, appealed to Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, for assistance, and as an inducement he turned over to that monarch the treasures of both the temple and the palace.

The Assyrians went against Syria and Ephraim, or Israel, as Ahaz had asked, and in the battles that followed, both Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel, were killed.

At this point Ahaz went to Damascus, which was taken in the war, and there saw a huge pagan altar, which he promptly duplicated in the city of Jerusalem. Against this idolatrous act, Isaiah raised his powerful voice. But still the king paid no heed, and paganism spread even further among the Jews. By the time Ahaz died, the kingdom had reached a new low in apostasy.

Isaiah again prophesied the destruction of the kingdom and the enslavement of the whole nation if they failed to repent.

Following the death of Ahaz, his son Hezekiah became king. He came to the throne when he was twenty-five years of age and reigned for twenty-nine years.

A righteous man, Hezekiah accepted the worship of Jehovah and moved at once to eradicate idolatry from the land. After repairing the temple, he restored temple worship and reorganized the work of the priests and Levites. He thoroughly cleansed the temple of every vestige of pagan worship and again resumed the sacred sacrifices prescribed by Moses. He also cleansed the land of the "high places" where the pagan gods had been worshipped under Ahaz, and sent messengers to all Israel, in both north and south kingdoms, to join in his reinstituted celebration of the Passover.

The northern kingdom scorned the invitation and abused the messengers. But Hezekiah proceeded regardless, and the scripture indicates that through this observance there was greater joy in Judah than at any time since the days of Solomon. Hezekiah successfully defended Judah against the Philistines and retook all of the cities which his father had lost.

In all his righteous efforts, including his military undertakings to restore and preserve the kingdom, Hezekiah had as his constant ally and adviser the prophet Isaiah.

Since his father, Ahaz, had become indebted to Assyria, that nation continued to demand a heavy tribute from Judah in payment of their part in the war with Syria and Ephraim. This was painful for the people of Judah to bear, and Hezekiah sought means to escape this burden.

The king's political advisers urged him to seek an alliance with Egypt and then begin a revolt against Assyria. Isaiah regarded such a proposal as a sign of defection from God. As he had told Ahaz previously, now he urged Hezekiah to depend on the Lord, who would protect them if they would but serve Him.

Hezekiah did rebel against Assyria. In the fourth year of his reign, Shalmaneser invaded nearby Samaria but did not come into Judah. However, in the fourteenth year of his reign, Jerusalem was attacked by Sennacherib, son of Sargon, who ascended his father's throne after Sargon was slain in 705 B.C. This monarch not only invaded Judah's capital city, but, according to the historical records, his armies also captured forty-six other towns and carried away two hundred thousand captives. (See 2 Kgs. 18;2 1 Chr. 28-30.)

The Assyrians were fierce and heartless invaders. When they had formerly seized Babylon, they had virtually massacred the populace there. It was they who took Nineveh, where they built a tremendous palace, now the envy of archaeologists. It was fifteen hundred feet long and seven hundred feet wide. They also brought water into the city by means of a system of canals, evidence of which still remains.

Funk and Wagnall's Jewish Encyclopedia (6:380) has this interesting thing to say about the invasion of Judah:

There is . . . an essential difference between II Kings, on the one hand, and Isaiah and II Chron., on the other, as to the invasion of Sennacherib. According to the former, Sennacherib first invaded Judah in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, and took all the fortified cities (the annals of Sennacherib report forty-six cities and 200,000 prisoners).

Hezekiah acknowledged this fault and parleyed with Sennacherib about a treaty. Sennacherib imposed upon Hezekiah a tribute of three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold; and in order to pay it Hezekiah was obliged to take all the silver in the Temple and in his own treasuries, and even to "cut off the gold from the doors of the Temple" (II Kings xviii. 13-16). Sennacherib, however, acted treacherously. After receiving the gold and the silver he sent a large army under three of his officers to beseige Jerusalem, while he himself with the remainder of his troops remained at Lachish (ib. xviii. 17).

The contrary is related in II Chronicles. After Sennacherib had invaded Judah and marched toward Jerusalem, Hezekiah decided to defend his capital. He accordingly stopped up the wells; diverted the watercourse of Gihon, conducting it to the city by a subterranean canal (II Chron. xxxii. 30; Ecclus. [Sirach] xlviii. 17); strengthened the walls; and employed all possible means to make the city impregnable (II Chron. xxxii. 1-8).

Still the people of Jerusalem were terror-stricken, and many of Hezekiah's ministers looked toward Egypt for help. Isaiah violently denounced the proceedings of the people, and derided their activity in fortifying the city (Isa. xxii. 1-14).

The account from the arrival of Sennacherib's army before Jerusalem under Rabshakeh till its destruction is identical in II Kings, Isaiah, and II Chronicles. Rabshakeh summoned Hezekiah to surrender, derided his hope of help from Egypt, and endeavored to inspire the people with distrust of Hezekiah's reliance on providential aid. But Sennacherib, having heard that Tirhakah, King of Ethiopia, had marched against him, withdrew his army from Jerusalem. He sent messages to Hezekiah informing him that his departure was only temporary and that he was sure of ultimately conquering Jerusalem. Hezekiah spread open the letters before God and prayed for the delivery of Jerusalem.

Isaiah prophesied that Sennacherib would not again attack Jerusalem; and it came to pass that the whole army of the Assyrians was destroyed in one night by "the angel of the Lord" (II Kings xviii. 17-xix.; Isa. xxxvi.-xxxvii.; II Chron. xxxii. 9-22).
