Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

HEZEKIAH'S ILLNESS

A severe illness came to Hezekiah, and he was "sick unto death." Then it was that Isaiah came to him and said, "Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live." (Isa. 38:1.)

But Hezekiah did not want to die. He turned his face toward the wall as he lay in bed and prayed, saying:

"Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

"Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying, Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city. And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken." (Isa. 38:3-7.)

At this time Isaiah predicted the Babylonian captivity. Following Hezekiah's recovery, the king of Babylon sent letters and messengers with gifts to him, "for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered. And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

"Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.

"Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

"Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts; Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon." (Isa. 39:1-7.)

Isaiah also predicted the eventual doom of Babylon. He said:

"Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children.

"And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

"But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged." (Isa. 13:17-22.)

This literally happened. Babylon was never rebuilt; today it is but a desolation.

Hezekiah lived for the additional fifteen years. On his death he was given the highest of honors by his people. The Talmudists write that he had been such a righteous man that many thought he was the long-looked-for Messiah. They also say that the reason he pleaded so earnestly to live longer was that he had no male heir to inherit the throne.

However, after his recovery, according to the Jewish writers, the king married one of the daughters of the prophet Isaiah who bore to him a male child, Manasseh. It was this Manasseh who restored idolatry and who later killed Isaiah by "sawing him asunder."

Manasseh was only twelve years old when he ascended the throne, but as he grew older he brought back all the idolatrous practices of his predecessor Ahaz, and Judah again apostatized from the Lord.

Isaiah continued his ministry, constantly warning Manasseh against his grievous sins. This led to enmity between the prophet and the king who ultimately ordered his execution.
