Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

HE TESTIFIED OF CHRIST

Without doubt, one of the most moving portions of all the writings of Isaiah is chapter 53, wherein he describes the labors and sufferings of the Savior.

Isaiah understood the atonement of Christ. It was no mystery to him. And he wrote of it with the deepest of feeling. "Who hath believed our report," he begins, "and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" (Verse 1.)

Indeed, it may seem difficult to believe Isaiah's prediction—or his report—that the Savior would suffer so for mankind, or even that he, the Creator, would be without comeliness. "When we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him." (Verse 2.)

Jesus was both Jehovah and Creator. Could such a mighty Personage be without comeliness? Apparently he was during his mortality. It was when the Savior was transfigured that "the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistening." Thus he became glorious in his appearance. But only Peter, James, and John were allowed to see him so. (Luke 9:29.)

In his mortal life he looked so much like other men that his crucifiers could not identify him from among the disciples, and so they hired Judas for thirty pieces of silver to point him out to them.

How true were Isaiah's words: "He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not." (Isa. 53:3.)

How he was jeered, ridiculed, and spat upon!

How many times was he accused of being a devil, or of being possessed of a devil! His critics called him names, even Beelzebub, whom the Jews believed to be the prince of evil spirits. The Pharisees cried out: "This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils." What was Jesus' response? "If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?" (Matt. 12:24, 26.)

The Lord comforted his persecuted disciples by saying, "If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?" (Matt. 10:25.)

Isaiah spoke of the atonement itself: "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." (Isa. 53:4.)

Some of his closest disciples doubted him at first, but more so when he was arrested and later crucified. They fled when he was seized by the mob led by Judas. And on the third day, which should have been important to them, they would not believe the women who reported his resurrection. Even as they themselves looked at him after his resurrection, some still doubted until he said: "Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.)

"But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isa. 53:5.)

Was a more descriptive statement of the atonement ever given? Christ was the Savior! He died for us! He paid the price of our transgressions, "and with his stripes we are healed."

But there are those who give it little heed. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way." How true this is of so many. And yet he is the Redeemer, "and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all." (Verse 6.)

Can we ever forget the scriptural account of his suffering in Gethsemane, or his sweating drops of blood? Can we ignore his agony on the cross? Can we set aside his own words as he told of his suffering?

"For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." (D&C 19:16-18.)

It was the iniquity of us all that caused him this suffering. Yet, as Savior and Redeemer, he humbly said, "The cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" (John 18:11.)

In modern revelation he added: "Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (D&C 19:19.)

Evidently foreseeing the attitude of Jesus before the high priests who demanded his crucifixion, and those who condemned him, Isaiah said: "He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." (Isa. 53:7.)

The Savior said little to Pilate, and less to the high priests. But he did declare his divine Sonship!

"He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken." (Verse 8.)

It is of more than ordinary moment that Isaiah wrote this: "And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth." (Verse 9.)

He died with thieves; he was buried in a rich man's tomb, and the soldiers divided his raiment between them.

"Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

"He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

"Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." (Verses 10-12.)

What a description of the Savior in his atonement! What a revelation! What a testimony!
