Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

PREDICTIONS OF CHRIST

No biblical prophet foretold the coming of the Savior more clearly than did Isaiah. In great detail he described his mission. He saw that the Lord would be born of a virgin, and he detailed the manner of His death and burial. "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isa. 7:14.)

Matthew records the fulfillment in these words:

"Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

"Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.

"But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.

"And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins.

"Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,

"Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." (Matt. 1:18-23.)

Isn't it significant that "his name shall be called Immanuel"? Who was the Babe of Bethlehem? He was the Creator of all the heavens and the earth. He was Jehovah of the Old Testament and Christ of the New Testament. He was the Son of Almighty God!

Did he change his identity when he was born into mortality? No! None of us do. We all retain our identity from the premortal existence through this mortal life and on into immorality hereafter. Could it be otherwise?

Neither did Jesus change into a different being. He was the divine Jehovah before his birth. He was the divine Jehovah after his mortal birth. He was the Beloved Son of God before coming into mortality. He was so in mortality. Did not the Father identify him thus, both at his baptism and on the Mount of Transfiguration?

"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" was the declaration as Jesus came up from the waters of baptism. (Matt. 3:17.) And, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him" was the acknowledgment of the Father on the mount. (Matt. 17:5.)

It was the self-same Well-Beloved Son who had brought about the creations of the heavens. The Almighty said to Moses, even when Moses was still in mortality, and long before the birth of Christ: "And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

"And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

"And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:31-33.)

Jesus in truth was the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, and the Father himself indentified him as such both before and after his birth—while he was yet in the premortal life, and also while he was in mortality. And he did so after the resurrection in addressing the Nephites. (3 Ne. 11:7.) He is yet to come as the returning Christ in his glorious second coming, and he will still be the very same mighty Personage.

Wasn't he the same Being who appeared to the Nephites after his resurrection in Palestine? Did he not say to them, "Behold I am Jesus Christ," and did he not allow them to examine the marks of the crucifixion? (3 Ne. 11:6-17.)

Jesus never changed his identity. He came into this world as the child of Mary and the Son of God. He was divine before coming into mortality, and in mortality he was called "Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." (Matt. 1:23.)

The ancient prophet wrote of the mercy and kindness of the Lord: "He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young." (Isa. 40:11.)

Isaiah described the mighty works of the Savior before he ever came to earth, and asked:

"Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?

"Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counseller hath taught him?

"With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?

"Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing." (Isa. 40:12-15.)

When Isaiah wrote what is the eleventh chapter of his book, he referred to "a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots." (Verse 1.)

By revelation the Prophet Joseph Smith identified this passage as a further declaration of the forthcoming mortal birth of the Christ. He inquired of the Lord for the meaning of that scripture and the Lord replied:

"Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah?

"Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ.

"What is the rod spoken of in the first verse of the 11th chapter of Isaiah, that should come of the Stem of Jesse?

"Behold, thus saith the Lord: It is a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim, or of the house of Joseph, on whom there is laid much power.

"What is the root of Jesse spoken of in the 10th verse of the 11th chapter?

"Behold, thus saith the Lord, it is a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days.

"Questions by Elias Higbee: What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion—and what people had Isaiah reference to?

"He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost.

"What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck; 2d verse?

"We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles." (D&C 113.)

Isaiah describes him further and says:

"And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

"And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

"But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

"And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

"The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

"And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

"And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

"They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:2-9.)

Speaking of the latter days when these peaceful conditions will prevail, Isaiah tells of the gathering of Israel:

"And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

"And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

"And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. . . .

"And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt." (Isa. 11:10-12, 16.)

Further speaking of the Christ, Isaiah then provides us with one of his great poetic compositions:

And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: Though thou wast angry with me, Thine anger is turned away, And thou comfortedst me. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: For the Lord Jehovah is my strength And my song; he also is become my Salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw Water out of the wells of salvation. And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, Declare his doings among the people, Make mention that his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; For he hath done excellent things: This is known in all the earth. Cry out and shout, Thou inhabitants of Zion: For great is the Holy One of Israel In the midst of thee. (Isa. 12.)

This poem reminds us of the psalms of David, it is so expressive, so beautifully written, so devout and worshipful. Many of Isaiah's chapters are regarded as true poetry, just as are the psalms.

Some of the newer versions of the Bible, and especially the rendering in the Masoretic text, set his words as poetry in chapter after chapter. In chapter 12 he certainly is at his best.
