Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ISAIAH AND ABINADI

One of the most courageous of the prophets was Abinadi of the Book of Mormon. He was a faithful student of Isaiah and quoted him generously.

As Abinadi faced death before King Noah, he resorted to Isaiah for his greatest declaration: that the Christ will come. He quoted the 53rd chapter of Isaiah to the wicked king and his priests and challenged them to accept the Christ and turn from their evil ways. "Yea," he began, "even doth not Isaiah say. . . ." (Mosiah 14:1.) And then he quoted Isa. 53 essentially as it appears in the King James Translation of the Bible.

Was not Abinadi testifying of Christ? Did he not use Isaiah as a witness for Christ? Every word testifies of Jesus. Did not Isaiah speak the truth? Was he not inspired, even as was Abinadi? Would Abinadi have quoted him if Isaiah was not inspired?

But Abinadi went further in testifying of Christ and in giving full validity to the testimony of Isaiah. This Book of Mormon prophet declared that God did give the "Son power to make intercession for the children of men" (Mosiah 15:8), and he declared that the resurrection would be brought about by this Savior of whom Isaiah testified.

Abinadi announced the very name of Christ, saying, "for so shall he be called." (Mosiah 15:21.) Speaking of the resurrection he said:

"They are raised to dwell with God who has redeemed them; thus they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands of death.

"And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord.

"And little children also have eternal life." (Mosiah 15:23-25.)

So Isaiah was instrumental in sustaining the doctrine of Christ even in ancient America through this and other Book of Morman quotations.

Isaiah firmly declared the Christ as the Savior of the world. Among other things he said: "Thus saith the Lord . . . I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour." (Isa. 43:1, 11.)

It will be recalled that Peter used similar language as he addressed the high priests in Jerusalem:

"Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.

"This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.

"Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:10-12.)

Peter went further in his own defense as he faced the wicked rulers of Jerusalem who had demanded that he no longer speak the name of Christ.

"Then Peter and the other apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him." (Acts 5:29-32.)

Again the words of the Lord to Isaiah identified the Christ: "Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me." (Isa. 45:21.)

Speaking of the divine Redeemer, who alone is Jesus Christ, Isaiah said this: "For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called. . . . In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer." (Isa. 54:5, 8.) Note his frequent use of the titles "Redeemer" and "Savior," which are applicable only to Jesus of Nazareth.

Can anyone mistake such scriptures? Did not Isaiah abundantly testify of Christ?

Is it any wonder that the Savior commanded us to read Isaiah, "For great are the words of Isaiah"?

When it is realized that salvation comes alone through Jesus, and Isaiah was so vocal in declaring this fact, it becomes essential that all people understand and believe him.

As Isaiah spoke of the Lord and his atonement, he taught clearly that mankind, through Him, may receive forgiveness of sins. He appealed to the people of his day in such terms and said:

"Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

"If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 1:18-20.)

He said further: "Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel." (Isa. 41:14.)

He revealed that the atonement paid the price of sin: "I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isa. 43:25.)

He spoke of the resurrection, which alone comes through Jesus, and said: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead." (Isa. 26:19.)

He spoke repeatedly of the second coming of the Lord, of which the following is an example: "Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him." (Isa. 40:10.)

And he added: "For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many." (Isa. 66:15-16.)

But always he assured the righteous of peace, protection, and rich rewards.
