Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WONDERFUL, COUNSELLER

One of the most pointed predictions of the coming of Christ appearing anywhere in the Old Testament is Isaiah's declaration, which reads: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.)

This immediately establishes the divine nature of the Savior. He is the Mighty God.

To affirm the divinity of Jesus is basic to our faith. It is the faithless who question that he is Deity. It is the faithless who raise doubts, just as they did in the day when he lived.

"Is not this the carpenter's son?" they asked. "Is not his Mother called Mary? And his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? When then hath this man all these things?" (Matt. 13:55-56.)

Even within the immediate family of Jesus there was unbelief. Mary knew his identity, for the angel had declared it unto her. And Joseph, her husband, had been similarly informed. But Mary evidently did not broadcast her knowledge; she "kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart." (Luke 2:19.)

Her other sons, born to her by Joseph, did not believe, at least not at first. They had grown up with Jesus. He was their older brother. They had become so accustomed to him as they all grew up together that they saw nothing unusual about him, certainly nothing divine. Jesus was so much like other men that not even his own blood brothers recognized his true status.

This was revealed in the scripture telling of their visit to Jerusalem for the Passover. The brothers planned to attend and wondered if Jesus would go also. It is not indicated whether they invited him to accompany them to Jerusalem. They knew of his reported miracles, but seemed to doubt them. They knew he had been persecuted and hence had shunned the crowds in Jerusalem.

They said to him, "Depart hence, and go into Judea that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly."

Then they daringly added, "If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world." Note that "if." How much did they really doubt him? It seems that they even taunted him, "For neither did his brethren believe in him."

Jesus did not hesitate to reply, saying, "My time is not yet come: but your time is alway ready. The world cannot hate you." (John 7:4-7.)

Was that because they did not believe in him, and thus they were "of" the world and the world "would love his own"? (John 15:19.)

"The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil." (John 7:7.)

And yet Isaiah said that he was the Mighty God, and called him Immanuel, "God with us." When was he the Mighty God? He never departed from that status!

He was the mighty God in the creation, as the babe in Bethlehem, at his baptism, and as he walked the plains of Palestine.

He was the Savior when he talked to the woman of Samaria who referred to the coming Messiah. It was then that he said, "I that speak unto thee am he." (John 4:26.)

He was the Redeemer when he administered the sacrament of the Lord's Supper to his disciples and told them to partake subsequently in remembrance of him.

He was the Creator and the Savior as he debated with the lawyers and scribes, as he was also when he was betrayed by Judas.

He was the divine Son of God as he stood before the high priests and the Roman governor. And so he was during his trial when the high priest asked him, "Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" And the Lord replied, "I am." (Mark 14:61-62.)

He was divine while on the cross, atoning for the sins of all mankind. His sacrifice was beyond human comprehension, not to mention any human ability to endure.

He was divine as he came forth from the tomb, breaking the bands of death, bringing to pass the resurrection, not only for himself but for all mankind. Truly, "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

He was still the great Immanuel as he showed himself to his disciples after the resurrection, and later as he allowed twenty-five hundred Nephites to feel the marks of the crucifixion, and as he ascended to heaven.

And he is God today. He it was who came with our Eternal Father to the youthful Joseph Smith. He it was who was introduced by the Father to Joseph, saying, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith—History 1:17.)

He it is who has established his church in these last days, and whose servants carry his word to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, as the prophets foretold.

Yes, Jesus of Nazareth truly is the Mighty God, the Savior and Redeemer, Immanuel, Wonderful, the Prince of Peace, the Only Begotten Son of our Father in heaven.
