Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

HOPE FOR THE DEAD

As Isaiah testified of Christ, he opened to his readers still another view of the divine Son of God. He declared that Jesus would pierce the doors of the prison house and provide salvation for the dead as well as for the living. He was the first of the biblical prophets to speak of this subject.

It will be remembered that Jesus, during his travels, came to Nazareth, his childhood city. As was his custom, he went to the synagogue on the Sabbath and read to the congregation from the scripture.

"And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,

"The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

"And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:17-21.)

But as he preached to them, "all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them went his way." (Luke 4:28-30.)

He quoted from Isaiah. When he said "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears," he identified himself as that Being referred to by Isaiah.

But the people in the synagogue would not accept him, and again asked, "Is not this Joseph's son?" In response to their rejection he said, "No prophet is accepted in his own country." (Luke 4:22-24.)

Jesus would not only teach the living, bind up the brokenhearted, and preach good tidings to the meek; he would also "proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." (Isa. 61:1.)

Isaiah had said something similar in an early chapter:

"I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

"I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images." (Isa. 42:6-8.)

And how did the Savior bring deliverance to those in the prison house? Who were the prisoners?

The apostle Peter gives us the answer. Said he:

"For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:18-20.)

Other Bible translations are very clear on this point. The spirits of those who were rebellious in the days of Noah and who died in the flood, in truth were held in a spirit prison in the hereafter. And Jesus did preach to the departed dead.

The Schoenfeld Authentic New Testament, for example, says: "Christ himself died for sins once and for all, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but revived in the spirit, in which also Enoch went and preached to the spirits in prison."

The New English Bible says, "And in the spirit he went and made his proclamation to the imprisoned spirits."

The Roman Catholic (Douay) Bible of 1947, giving essentially the same translation, adds in a footnote that Christ, after his death, "descended into the realm of the dead and brought them the Good Tidings; i.e. preached or proclaimed to them the Gospel."

So it is a scriptural fact that while his body lay in the tomb "until the third day," Christ, as an immortal spirit, went to the realm of departed spirits and there brought the gospel to the dead. And why?

Peter gives the answer: "For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.)

The Jerusalem Bible (Catholic) has this passage read: "And because he is their judge too, the dead had to be told the Good News as well, so that though, in their life on earth they had been through the judgement that comes to all humanity, they might come to God's life in the spirit."

The New English Bible reads: "Why was the Gospel preached to those who are dead? In order that, although in the body they received the sentence common to men, they might in the spirit be alive with the life of God."

The true understanding of it all was given in a vision to President Joseph F. Smith. On one occasion as he studied the scripture from Peter telling of the Lord's ministry among the dead, a vision burst upon him. First he saw the righteous dead, who knew the Savior was to visit them:

"I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand. They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death.

"Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joy.

"While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful; and there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance.

"But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised; neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.

"Where these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace; and the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death and the chains of hell. Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord rested upon them, and they sang praises unto his holy name.

"I marveled, for I understood that the Savior spent about three years in his ministry among the Jews and those of the house of Israel, endeavoring to teach them the everlasting gospel and call them unto repentance; and yet, notwithstanding his mighty works, and miracles, and proclamation of the truth, in great power and authority, there were but few who hearkened to his voice, and rejoiced in his presence, and received salvation at his hands.

"But his ministry among those who were dead was limited to the brief time intervening between the crucifixion and his resurrection; and I wondered at the words of Peter wherein he said that the Son of God preached unto the spirits in prison, who sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah—and how it was possible for him to preach to those spirits and perform the necessary labor among them in so short a time.

"And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; but behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead.

"And the chosen messengers went forth to declare the acceptable day of the Lord and proclaim liberty to the captives who were bound, even unto all who would repent of their sins and receive the gospel.

"Thus was the gospel preached to those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets.

"These were taught faith in God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and all other principles of the gospel that were necessary for them to know in order to qualify themselves that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

"And so it was made known among the dead, both small and great, the unrighteous as well as the faithful, that redemption had been wrought through the sacrifice of the Son of God upon the cross.

"Thus was it made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his sojourn in the world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of the prophets who had testified of him in the flesh; that they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead, unto whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression, that they through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words." (D&C 138:15-37. See also Gospel Doctrine, pp. 473-74.)

The Savior gave us this additional scripture in regard to the salvation of the dead:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.

"For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

"Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:25-29.)

With regard to the resurrection Isaiah declared: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." (Isa. 26:19.)
