Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ISAIAH'S SECOND CHAPTER

Let us now turn to Isaiah as he speaks of our day.

For Latter-day Saints, one of the most significant parts of the entire book of Isaiah is the second chapter. There Isaiah foretells the journey of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains and unfolds their ultimate destiny.

Micah gives the same prophecy, but in his own words. The modern Bible translations include both prophecies and in all cases confirm the meaning in the older versions. There can be no doubt that these prophecies refer strictly and specifically to the Latter-day Saints.

Isaiah speaks directly concerning the last days and uses that very expression. He said, "The mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains." (Isa. 2:2.) Scholars indicate that to the Jews, the expression "mountain of the Lord's house" simply meant the temple of God.

Before there were temples built on earth, the Lord sanctified places in the mountains and there instructed his prophets. Such places were regarded as being holy, and contributed to such expressions as the "temple of the mountain of the Lord" and "the mountain of the Lord's house." These were natural temples, in the open air, made sacred by the presence of God as he communed with his servants.

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

"Of necessity the first sanctified temples were the mountain tops and secluded places in the wilderness. If we are correctly informed, Adam built his altar on a hill above the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. At that place the Lord revealed to him the purpose of the fall and the mission of the Savior.

"Enoch stood in the place Mahujah. . . . Upon this mount Enoch beheld the heavens open, he was clothed upon by the glory of the Lord, he saw the Lord and spoke to him face to face. On this mount the Lord revealed to him the fulness of the plan of salvation. . . .

"It was upon the great mountain Shelem, which was sanctified and made holy, that the brother of Jared was commissioned and received one of the greatest revelations ever given unto man. . . .

"Jacob named the place where the Lord appeared to him, Beth-el, which interpreted means the House of God. . . .

"It was at the holy sanctuary on Horeb, called the mountain of the Lord, that Moses received his commission to deliver Israel. . . .

". . . These places became consecrated because there was no temple on the earth at that time. Joseph Smith prayed in the grove near his father's house, and that spot was made holy by the vision of the Father and the Son. . . .

"Shortly after the organization of the Church and when the membership was small, the Lord commanded the Saints to build a temple in which he could reveal the keys of authority and where the apostles could be endowed and prepared to prune his vineyard for the last time. . . .

"Had there been such a house when John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John came, they would have delivered their authority in it. Necessity made it expedient for them to come in the wilderness." (Doctrines of Salvation, Bookcraft, 1955, 2:232-34.)

And so it was that temple building began in these days. The fact that God required such structures is further seen in the glorious appearance that took place in the Kirtland Temple, when the Savior came, and various other personages, to restore keys of the kingdom of God.

It is also seen that at first mountain tops and the wilderness were used instead of temples until such structures could be built. Hence temples became associated with high mountains.

A temple will be built on Mount Zion in old Jerusalem in the latter days. And, according to Isaiah, there will be a temple also on the Mount Zion in the western world. That holy house, he said, will be "exalted above the hills" (Isa. 2:2), that is, at some considerable altitude.

The structure that Isaiah saw, we are told by President Wilford Woodruff, is the Salt Lake Temple. In the valley of the Great Salt Lake it stands at 4,300 feet above sea level, with mountains ranging from 10,000 to nearly 12,000 feet in elevation surrounding the valley in which the building stands.

When the Douay Bible (Roman Catholic) spoke of the erection of that edifice, its translators used the expression "the house of the Lord shall be prepared" in the top of the mountains.

"All nations shall flow unto it," that is, to the house of the Lord thus built in the high mountain area. People from "all nations" now do come to it, generally in three categories.

One group is made up of tourists. An average of nearly two million a year visit Temple Square in Salt Lake City. That ten-acre parcel of land is one of the greatest tourist attractions in the Mountain West. The tourists sign registration slips at the visitors centers showing that they represent countries from around the world, including both sides of the Iron Curtain and both sides of the "Bamboo" curtain. These tourists travel not only to see Salt Lake City, but also to see the temple and the Tabernacle and to hear the Tabernacle Choir and the great organ.

Another group is composed of converts to the Church from many lands who visit Church headquarters, the General Authorities, and Temple Square. Many are from areas where presently no temples exist, and hence they enter the Salt Lake Temple to receive their blessings, which are given in various languages.

A third group is made up of those attending general conferences of the Church each spring and autumn. And who are they? They too are from "all nations." Many are lay members of the Church, but particularly some three thousand official delegates or representatives from Church units in about seventy nations are present to receive instructions. They include area administrators from the four quarters of the world, some two hundred regional representatives, also from many parts of the earth; stake presidents, high councilors, bishoprics, patriarchs, and auxiliary leaders. They are local officers living in many lands.

They, of course, speak various languages. Translations of all sermons are given in about thirty different tongues. A large room in the Tabernacle houses the translators, each one working in his own language, having his or her own desk with the necessary privacy to allow for full concentration on the message being given.

It is an inspiration to see these translators and how they work. They do so prayerfully, constantly seeking the inspiration of the Lord to guide them in transmitting the messages of the General Authorities to their own people in their own languages. Simultaneous translations are provided for the visiting officials from overseas who are in the congregation. But beyond that, the translations are sent abroad to local members in other nations by telephone, cable, and satellite. Video tapes are also made in various languages, and are sent to still other nations for subsequent release in local chapels.

The prophecies of Isaiah and Micah are literally fulfilled in these activities. Officials from other lands who come to the conference in Salt Lake City are delegates or representatives of congregations in their homelands, thus "flowing" from these nations. When they return to their homes, they make reports on the conference to their people.

With present technical advancements, conference proceedings by cable, satellite, and video tape are now made available to most free nations on earth. Members who cannot travel to Utah listen with great attention to the reports thus provided, and in this way, such congregations also "flow unto it" in spirit if not in the flesh.

That both Isaiah and Micah meant these Church members who come to hear and obey the words of the Lord is evident from these words: "Many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain [temple] of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." (Isa. 2:3. Italics added.)

That is exactly what happens at each general conference. The Saints do assemble from the many nations, they do gather to learn, they are taught, and they do obey, literally walking "in his paths."

It is all a great miracle. It is a remarkable fulfillment of prophecy.

Isaiah indicates, as further evidence of this being in the latter days, that afterward God "shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Isa. 2:4.)

This obviously refers to the opening of the millennial reign of the Savior. The coming of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains was definitely preliminary to that blessed period.

"O house of Jacob," comes Isaiah's invitation, "come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord." (Verse 5.) One of the most important parts of that prophecy, however, we should now mention: "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Verse 3.)

All of America is Zion, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith, but there will be two central places in America from which the law of the Lord will go.

The first is Salt Lake City, the headquarters of the Church until such time as the New Jerusalem is built. We speak of Salt Lake City as Zion in this sense. It is the Zion high in the Rocky Mountains.

Certainly from there the law of the Lord is going abroad to the nations right now. It is in Utah that most of the missionaries are trained before going abroad. From there instructions go to stakes and missions the world around. It is to Temple Square that the congregations assemble at each general conference to be taught the law and the word of the Lord.

But the great Zion of the Lord—the New Jerusalam—from which the Lord will reign through the millennium will be built in Jackson County, Missouri, the center for the Lord's greatest modern temple. As the Savior reigns for a thousand years, accompanied by his Saints, he most assuredly will issue his laws and directions to all the world from that great center.

But what of the other Jerusalem from which the word of the Lord will issue also? It will be the Old Jerusalem in Palestine, restored. A great temple is to be built there also. The Tribes of Israel will gather there, fulfilling the mighty prophecies concerning their eventual happiness.

America is the land of Joseph, and the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, sons of Joseph, will inherit this land, with the great New Jerusalem as their capital city. Palestine will be headquarters for the other tribes, centering in the restored Old Jerusalem.

Of the American Zion, the Lord says this:

"And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; and the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

"And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

"And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand.

"And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy." (D&C 45:66-71.)
