Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WHAT ISAIAH SAW

The Salt Lake Temple is the edifice that Isaiah saw, high in the mountains, the holy place to which all nations should flow, where "he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." (Isa. 2:3.)

This is the firm declaration of President Wilford Woodruff. He also said that the Salt Lake Tabernacle was a part of the fulfillment of Isaiah's words. Following is an excerpt from a sermon that he gave:

Today I stand in a tabernacle filled with some twelve thousand of the Latter-day Saints who have followed the pioneers into these valleys of the mountains.

When we cast our eyes over these valleys, then a desert, today they are teeming with the industry of one hundred and fifty thousand of the sons and daughters of Zion, who have been gathered by the commandments of God and the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.

We, as pioneers and as the people of God, are fulfilling prophecy and making history. This tabernacle in which we are today, is the very tabernacle that Isaiah saw in vision twenty-six hundred years ago, that should be as a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and a covert from the storm and from the rain.

We are also building the temple of our God, on this block, which the prophet saw was to be built in the last days upon the mountain of the Lord's house, and be established on the tops of the mountains for all men to flow unto.

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways and we will walk in His paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."

Our whole life, history and travels have been pointed out by the ancient prophets. As the pioneers came into this barren desert and the Saints have followed them to fulfill the prophecies, to make the desert blossom as the rose, to sow our grain beside all small streams and still waters, and use the fir, the pine and the box, to beautify the place of God's sanctuary and to make the place of His feet glorious, and as there is but a remnant of us left as pioneers, or Battalion, or Zion's Camp, let us magnify our calling and build up the Zion and Kingdom of God until it is perfected before the heavens and the earth, and not disappoint those who sent us, nor those who have seen us by vision and revelation, but let us finish and fulfill our destiny to the satisfaction of our heavenly Father, His angels and all good men. (Elders' Journal 4:130.)

In his prayer dedicating the Salt Lake Temple, President Woodruff used these words further indicating that he regarded the Salt Lake Temple as the one foretold by Isaiah:

O Lord, we regard with intense and indescribable feelings the completion of this sacred house. Deign to accept this the fourth temple which thy covenant children have been assisted by thee in erecting in these mountains.

In past ages thou didst inspire with thy Holy Spirit thy servants, the Prophets, to speak of a time in the latter days when the mountain of the Lord's house should be established in the top of the mountains, and should be exalted above the hills.

We thank thee that we have had the glorious opportunity of contributing to the fulfillment of these visions of thine ancient seers, and that thou hast condescended to permit us to take part in the great work.

And as this portion of thy servant's words has thus so marvelously been brought to pass, we pray thee, with increased faith and renewed hope, that all their words with regard to thy great work in gathering thine Israel and building up thy kingdom on earth in the last days may be as amply fulfilled, and that, O Lord, speedily.

We come before thee with joy and thanksgiving, with spirits jubilant and hearts filled with praise, that thou hast permitted us to see this day for which, during these forty years, we have hoped, and toiled, and prayed, when we can dedicate unto thee this house which we have built to thy most glorious name.

One year ago we set the capstone with shouts of Hosanna to God and the Lamb. And to-day we dedicate the whole unto thee, with all that pertains unto it, that it may be holy in thy sight; that it may be a house of prayer, a house of praise and of worship; that thy glory may rest upon it; that thy holy presence may be continually in it; that it may be the abode of thy Well-Beloved Son, our Savior; that the angels who stand before thy face may be the hallowed messengers who shall visit it, bearing to us thy wishes and thy will, that it may be sanctified and consecrated in all its parts holy unto thee, the God of Israel, the Almighty Ruler of mankind. (Millennial Star55:334-35.)

President Brigham Young was shown the Salt Lake Temple in vision and the pattern by which it was to be built. Said he:

I scarcely ever say much about revelations, or visions, but suffice it to say, five years ago last July I was here, and saw in the spirit the temple not ten feet from where we have laid the chief cornerstone. I have not inquired what kind of a temple we should build. Why? Because it was represented before me. I have never looked upon that ground, but the vision of it was there. I see it as plainly as if it was in reality before me. Wait until it is done. I will say, however, that it will have six towers, to begin with, instead of one. (Discourses of Brigham Young, Deseret Book, 1977, p.410.)

At another time President Young said: "I want this temple that we are now building to the name of our God, to stand for all time to come as a monument of the industry, faithfulness, faith, and integrity of the Latter-day saints who were driven into the mountains." (Ibid., p. 411.)

President Young indicated that the Lord gave the pattern of the Kirtland Temple to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "The Church, through our beloved Prophet Joseph, was commanded to build a temple to the Most High, in Kirtland, Ohio. Joseph not only received revelation and commandment to build a temple, but he received a pattern also, as did Moses for the tabernacle, and Solomon for his temple; for without a pattern, he could not know what was wanted, having never seen one, and not having experienced its use." (Ibid., p. 415.)

President Young indicated that the Prophet Joseph received the pattern for the Nauvoo Temple by revelation. Such divine direction was needed, of course, because this temple was different from that in Kirtland. It had specific uses unknown to Joseph Smith until new revelation came.

All of the temples built by the pioneer Latter-day Saints were constructed at great sacrifice because of the poverty of the people. The Saints knew the importance of obtaining the ordinances of salvation, and therefore gave temple building as great emphasis as they did missionary work.

In speaking of the completion of the Salt Lake Temple, the Elders' Journal editorialized: "The edifice completed stands on this block [Temple Square]. It speaks for itself. It is located in the top of the mountains. It is exalted above the hills and people from all nations have come unto it. Thus the specifications laid down by the prophet of old are satisfied, his prophecy fulfilled." (Elders' Journal24:148.)

When the temple was completed and dedicated by President Woodruff in 1893, of course, all nations had not yet begun to "flow unto it." But today Temple Square is one of the chief tourist attractions of the Mountain West.

Year after year it exceeds or equals the patronage of most of the national and state parks of the area. Visitors at Temple Square each year rival even the number who go to Yellowstone Park.

They come as tourists; they come to conventions; they come for business; and they come to learn about genealogy. Two successful World Conferences on Records have been held in Salt Lake City, in 1969 and in 1980, in which several hundred researchers and archivists from various lands conducted classes and gave instruction to the thousands who attended.

Response to the 1980 World Conference on Records was outstanding. For example, Lord Teviot from London summed up his feelings—and the feelings of others—concerning the conference when he responded to queries from the press: "Absolutely marvelous! There isn't another genealogical or personal family conference in the world that can compare with the World Conference on Records."

Approximately 11,500 admission badges were issued. Participants from thirty nations attended the conference, including individuals from India, Thailand, Indonesia, mainland China, Taiwan, Japan, Tunisia, Kenya, Israel, Yugoslavia, and South Africa. Approximately 2,000 registrants were not members of the Church; 6,600 registrants were from Utah, and 500 were from outside the United States.

Hundreds of thousands of tourists and other visitors come to our temples and visitors centers situated in the "tops of the mountains." These visitors literally come from "all nations." It is to be remembered that they not only come to the tops of the mountains as tourists, they come to see the temples! These many as visitors are truly a living fulfillment of Isaiah's mighty prophecy.

One of the most remarkable things about Isaiah's prophecies as they relate to America was explained by the Savior himself as he ministered among the Nephites.

The Lord was discussing the role of the Gentiles in America in the latter days and said: "If the Gentiles will repent and return unto me, saith and the Father, behold they shall be numbered among my people, O house of Israel."

Then he added these significant words, as we keep in mind that the land of which he spoke was America:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, thus hath the Father commanded me—that I should give unto this people this land for their inheritance.

"And then the words of the prophet Isaiah shall be fulfilled, which say: Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

"Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God." (3 Ne. 16:13, 16-20. See also Isa. 52:8-10.)

Isaiah truly spoke of America. Is it any wonder, then, that the latter-day temple that he saw in the tops of the mountains was truly an American temple, built in the Rockies, the highest mountains on this continent?
