Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

TEMPLE HILL

Isaiah and Micah were contemporaries, and both dealt with the constant problems in the nation of Judah. Both made similar predictions, and did so especially and specifically with respect to the mountain of the Lord's house in latter days.

The Knox Translation (Roman Catholic) of Micah's words is of particular interest. They appear in the 1955 version of their Bible, published in Great Britain under the imprimatur of Archbishop Griffin of Westminster. The translation of this passage reads:

"The Temple hill! One day it shall stand there, highest of all the mountain-heights, overtopping the peaks of them, and the nations will flock there together.

"A multitude of peoples will make their way to it, crying, Come, let us climb up to the Lord's mountain-peak, to the house where the God of Jacob dwells; he shall teach us the right way, we will walk in the paths he has chosen.

"The Lord's command shall go out of Sion, his word from Jerusalem; over thronging peoples he shall sit in judgment, give award to great nations far away. Sword they will fashion into ploughshare and spear into pruning hook, no room there shall be for nation to levy war against nation and train itself in arms." (Michaeas 4:1-3.)

Another Catholic Bible, the Jerusalem Bible, has the passage from Isaiah read like this:"In the days to come the mountain of the Temple of Yahweh [Jehovah] shall tower above the mountains and be lifted higher than the hills. All the nations will stream to it, peoples without number will come to it; and they will say: `Come, let us go up to the mountain of Yahweh, to the Temple of the God of Jacob that he may teach us his ways so that we may walk in his paths." (Isa. 2:3.)

The version of Micah given in this same Bible reads: "In the days to come the mountain of the Temple of Yahweh will be put on top of the mountains and be lifted higher than the hills. The peoples will stream to it, nations without number will come to it; and they will say, `Come, let us go up to the mountain of Yahweh, to the Temple of the God of Jacob so that he may teach us his ways and we may walk in his paths."

In the New World Translation these words are used: "The mountain of the house of Jehovah will become firmly established above the top of the mountains." (Micah 4:1.)

The King James Version of Isaiah reads on this point:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

"And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

"O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord." (Isa. 2:2-5.)

Micah's prediction was discussed by the late Elder Orson Pratt of the Council of the Twelve. He began by asking this question:

Why is Zion commanded to "get up into the high mountains?" Why did He exclaim so emphatically, "O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountains!"

Surely He must have seen some cause of an important nature, why Zion should go into a high mountain, or He never would have uttered a commandment to take effect nearly three thousand years in the future.

One of the principal causes why Zion should be required to "get up into a high mountain" is, that they might build a house of God there, in fulfillment of prophecy.

Micah, (chap. 4), says: "But in the last days it shall come to pass that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the tops of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.

"And many nations shall say, come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths, for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." . . . All this was to take place in the "last days."

We can see the propriety then of Isaiah's calling upon the people of the latter-day Zion to "get up into the high mountain." For it is there that the "house of the God of Jacob" is to be built. It is from the mountains that Zion shall send forth her perfect law to teach the kings of the earth wisdom, and the nations afar off a perfect order of government.

It is in the house of God which shall be in the mountains, that "many nations" shall be taught in the ways of the Lord, and be instructed to "walk in his paths."

There must be something connected with the House of God in the mountains which is very peculiar, or it would never excite the attention of many nations.

There are many thousands of houses built up at the present day, professing to be the houses of God. Scores of them are to be seen in almost every city of America and Europe; yet there does not appear anything very striking in any of them.

There is not one house among the whole of them that has excited the attention of even one nation. There is a very good reason for this; for all nations have been entirely destitute of a "house of God" for more than seventeen hundred years. Indeed, the house of God was not to be built again until the last days; and, when it was built, it should be built in the mountains, and not in several hundred places among the nations.

The "house of God" could not be built without new revelation to give the pattern of its various apartments. Without new revelation Zion would not know the precise time to "get up into the high mountains," they would not know the precise mountain where God would have His house to be built.

The "house of God" never was in any past age, and never can be in any future age, built without express commandments or new revelations being given to the people who built it.

When the house of God shall be built in the right time, and in the right place, and according to the right pattern, and by the right people, then it will be acknowledged by the God of Jacob—then His glory shall rest upon it, and His presence shall come into it. . . .

Then "many nations" shall say, come, let us go up to Zion, for God is there; His house is there; His people are there; His law is there; His glory and power are there; the "perfection of beauty" is there; whatsoever is great, and good, and noble are there.

Come, then, let us go up, "for he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths," and we will no more lift up our swords against nations, but convert them into the peaceful implements of husbandry, and henceforth dwell with the people of God.

It is to accomplish this great, this marvellous, this wonderful work, that Zion in the last days is commanded to "get up into the high mountain."

Thousands of her noble enterprising sons have already traversed the widely extended plains of North America, and have ascended the great central range of mountains that form as it were, the backbone of that continent, and among its deep, retired, and lonely recesses they have "sought out" a resting place for the children of Zion. . . .

In the latter part of July we arrived in the valley, called by us the "valley of the Great Salt Lake," here we located a site for a city, called by us "Great Salt Lake City."

In this city we reserved a block for the building of a house unto the God of Jacob; this we called "Temple Block." . . .

Well might the ancient prophets speak of Zion going up into the high mountains, and of the house of the God of Jacob being built in the mountains, when it is ascertained that the "Temple Block" is 4300 feet above the level of the ocean.

It cannot, for a moment, be supposed that Zion would go up to the top of some mountain peak, and undertake to build a city and a temple upon its snowy summit.

But the word mountain in those passages doubtless means some high elevated portion of the earth, and yet not so high as to be rendered sterile by eternal frosts and snows, for this would unfit it for the habitation of man. . . .

The latter-day Zion was not to be built where Zion anciently stood, that is, in Jerusalem, the place of which has been well known for ages; but in the "high mountain," in a place unknown, that should be "sought out;" and there they should be called, "the holy people"—"the redeemed of the Lord"—"a city not forsaken."

This was something, too, that was to take place in connection with the great preparatory work for the coming of the Lord: for it will be seen in the above passage that the "end of the world" was about this time to hear a proclamation concerning His coming, "His reward being with him, and His work before Him."

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those who are publishing "good tidings," that are saying unto Zion, "behold, thy God reigneth."

Let the servants of the Lord cry aloud to the children of Zion scattered abroad, saying: Go ye "up into the high mountain" and build yourselves a city, and the God of Jacob a house; for "He will suddenly come to His temple," and reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His ancients gloriously. (Contributor 12:307-10.)
