Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WHY BUILD TEMPLES?

The Latter-day Saints are unique in the world in many ways, and one of them is in the construction of temples. There are many structures in many lands that mankind regard as temples. But the temples of the Latter-day Saints are different. They are built after a revealed pattern, and in them are given saving ordinances of the gospel for the living and the dead.

The Latter-day Saints have been commanded to build temples just as Solomon was commanded to build a temple, and Moses was commanded to carry a portable "temple" or tabernacle in the wilderness as the tribes wandered for forty years. In temples, and only in them, are sacred ordinances provided that are restricted by the Lord to such sacred places.

In our day, there are two general categories of ordinances in the gospel: those that may be administered outside a temple and those that are given only in a temple.

Those permitted outside the temple include baptism of new members, confirmation, the bestowal of the gift of the Holy Ghost, and ordination to the priesthood.

But what are those ordinances that are so sacred that they may be given only inside a temple? They are called endowments and sealings, and they have special significance. They are given to the living, but vicariously for the dead also. Work for the dead is one of the greatest uses of the temples.

The late Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve explained these ordinances and the symbolism attached to them. He wrote as follows:

In God's kingdom are many gradations, which lead to exaltation. . . . Those who hunger and thirst for righteousness and labor for the fulfillment of the promise involved in the gift of the Holy Ghost will advance farther than those who placidly sit by with no driving desire within them. Temple worship is an avenue to exaltation in God's kingdom.

God's definition of a temple is given over and over again in . . . the Doctrine and Covenants. A temple is a place in which those whom he has chosen are endowed with power from on high.

And what is power? Knowledge made alive and useful—that is intelligence; and intelligence in action—that is power.

Our temples give us power—a power based on enlarged knowledge and intelligence—a power from on high, of a quality with God's own power. . . .

Sealings, for time and eternity, have the purpose of tying together father and son, mother and daughter, the living and the dead, from age to age. In addition it emphasizes the authority of the priesthood. . . .

When man contemplates the full meaning of the sealing ordinance. . . he is overwhelmed with the boundless power that it implies and the weight of authority that it represents. . . .

In the wonderful D&C 124, of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord has described the work to be done in the temples, including the holy endowment:

"For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my Saints, may be baptized for those who are dead. . . .

"For therein are the keys of the Holy Priesthood, ordained that you may receive honor and glory. . . .

"And again, verily I say unto you, How shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

"For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was;

"Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places, wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name."

At first reading the full meaning may not be clear, yet in these few verses lie the germs of practically everything that belongs to or is done in the house of the Lord.

Dr. James E. Talmage, under authority of the Church, has also discussed the meaning of the endowment, in the book called "The House of the Lord." I quote a part of it.

"The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements.

"As will be shown, the temples erected by the Latter-day Saints provide for the giving of these instructions in separate rooms, each devoted to a particular part of the course; and by this provision it is possible to have several classes under instruction at one time.

"The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King,—the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation of a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions.

"No jot, iota, or tittle of the temple rites is otherwise than uplifting and sanctifying. In every detail the endowment ceremony contributes to covenants of morality of life, consecration of person to high ideals, devotion to truth, patriotism to nation and allegiance to God. The blessings of the House of the Lord are restricted to no privileged class; every member of the Church may have admission to the temple with the right to participate in the ordinances thereof, if he comes duly accredited as of worthy life and conduct." [The House of the Lord, pp. 83-84.]

In no part of the temple service is the spirit or the purpose of the temple worship so completely shown as in the endowment. . . .

The holy endowment is deeply symbolic. "Going through the temple" is not a very good phrase; for temple worship implies a great effort of mind and concentration if we are to understand the mighty symbols that pass in review before us.

Everything must be arranged to attune our hearts, our minds, and our souls to the work. Everything about us must contribute to the peace of mind that enables us to study and to understand the mysteries, if you choose, that are unfolded before us. . . .

Some have gone through the temple looking at the outward form and not the inner meaning of things. The form of the endowment is of earthly nature, but it symbolizes great spiritual truths.

All that we do on this earth is earthly, but all is symbolic of great spiritual truths. To build this temple, earth had to be dug; wood had to be cut; stone was quarried and brought down the canyon.

In was dusty and dirty work, and made us sweat—it was of this earth—yet it was the necessary preparation for the mighty spiritual ordinances that are carried on daily in this magnificent temple.

The endowment itself is symbolic; it is a series of symbols of vast realities, too vast for full understanding. . . .

This brings me to a few words concerning symbolism. We live in a world of symbols. We know nothing, except by symbols. We make a few marks on a sheet of paper, and we say that they form a word which stands for love, or hate, or charity, or God or eternity. The marks may not be very beautiful to the eye. No one finds fault with the symbols on the pages of a book because they are not as mighty in their own beauty as the things which they represent. We do not quarrel with the symbol "G-o-d" because it is not very beautiful, yet represents the majesty of God.

We are glad to have symbols, if only the meaning of the symbols is brought home to us. . . .

We live in a world of symbols. No man or woman can come out of the temple endowed as he should be, unless he has seen, beyond the symbol, the mighty realities for which the symbols stand. ("Temple Worship," in Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 12:50-64.)
