Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

THE MARVELOUS WORK

The Book of Mormon is our finest key to an understanding of Isaiah. Not even Jewish scholarship can approach it in revealing what the prophet's words really mean. To understand his work requires an acceptance of the restoration of the gospel, for that is the subject of much of his writing.

It is admitted that many parts of Isaiah are difficult to comprehend, but a great deal is made clear by extensive passages in the Book of Mormon, which include explanations by ancient American prophets who loved Isaiah, studied his writings, preached from them, and interpreted them.

One of the outstanding examples of this phenomenon relates to chapter 29 of Isaiah, where the prophet foretells the publication of the Book of Mormon and speaks of the Prophet Joseph Smith as an unlearned man, which he was at the time referred to, but through whom the Lord accomplished a marvelous work and a wonder.

Isaiah's writing on this subject is one of the great testimonies for Latter-day Saints concerning the restoration of the gospel. It is verily true that Isaiah saw our day and described much of our work in considerable detail.

Let us examine Isa. 29 and then turn to chapters 27 and 28 in Second Nephi wherein is laid before us in beautiful clarity an understanding of this matter.

Isaiah begins his passages by mentioning a city known as Ariel. He identifies it as the "city where David dwelt," which, of course, is Jerusalem. He mentions the woes of Ariel, since the people of that ancient city had become apostate, turning as they did to idolatry.

Then he speaks of a nation that he says shall be "as Ariel" in that it also would be in deep trouble because of apostasy. Hence it would fall to the dust and be destroyed suddenly.

We know from Book of Mormon writings that this other nation was indeed "as Ariel" in many respects. It was the Nephite nation. It belonged to the House of Israel, as did the Jews. It had inspired prophets, as did the Jews. It had the same scriptures as were possessed by the Jews, the entire Bible from Moses to Jeremiah.

The Lord blessed the Nephites when they were obedient, just as he did the Jews, but he left them to suffer when they disobeyed him, also as he did the Jews.

This branch of the House of Israel, which was "as Ariel," had been led from Palestine to the Western Hemisphere by the Lord. From them sprang the Nephites, who eventually apostatized to the extent that the Lord allowed them to be destroyed in a dreadful war with the Lamanites in which but one man was left to tell the tale.

Isaiah's description of the Nephites in no way reflects the lives or activities of the Jews. The Jews were not destroyed. They survived captivity and are still with us. It is estimated that they now number 16 million in the world altogether. There are about 3 million in Palestine and some 6 million in the United States. So obviously they were not destroyed suddenly or otherwise. Neither was the city of Jerusalem ever destroyed. It suffered repeated invasions and plunderings, but it still stands today, a bone of contention between Jews and Arabs.

Isaiah's words describe the New World branch of the House of Israel to perfection.

The Jews did not bury their scriptures in the ground to come forth in the latter days. They carefully preserved them and still read them in the synagogues. But the ancient Nephites buried many of their records in the ground for safekeeping, just as did other early peoples. Numerous such instances have been brought to light in various lands by archaeologists.

The Nephite branch of the House of Israel prepared records with great care, engraving some of them in stone and others in metal. Those in metal were buried in the ground in box-like stone containers.

Isaiah saw that an ancient record would come out of the ground, literally, whereby the nation described "as Ariel" would deliver an important message to the modern world.

Isaiah said these people would "speak out of the ground, and [their] speech shall be low out of the dust, and [their] voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and [their] speech shall whisper out of the dust." (Isa. 29:4.)

In this one passage Isaiah tells us four times that the message should come out of the ground and out of the dust. Did he not earnestly try to make this clear? Did he not understand the importance of repetition in teaching this great fact? So four times he declared that this record would come out of the ground, out of the dust. That was a major part of the identification of that record and needed emphasis. Could Isaiah have been more explicit?

At no time did Ariel, or Jerusalem, ever speak "out of the dust" in this manner. Never was a Jewish record buried and brought forth in such a way that the speech of an entire people came out of the ground.

Some might point to the Dead Sea Scrolls as evidence that certain Jewish records did come out of the ground. It is acknowledged that these scrolls came from caves, but they did not represent the Jewish nation as such. They came only from a small detached apostate cult that had separated itself from the main body of Jews and were known as separatists. Let it be noted that there was nothing new about the writings on those scrolls. The Jews already had the books thus found, and in a much better state of preservation than anything that came out of Qumran. So the Dead Sea Scrolls could in no way be related to the prophecy of Isaiah.

The whole nation that was likened "as Ariel" literally was destroyed suddenly, leaving only one man to survive. It was he who buried their final record in the ground, to be brought forth in these last days, as Isaiah saw.

That record has a vital message for Jews and Gentiles, for Chicanos, for Native Americans, Polynesians, and anyone else who will read it. It testifies of Christ! It is a second witness of the Redeemer! It is on a footing equal to the Bible! It is the Book of Mormon!

Isaiah makes it clear that this "speech out of the ground" would be in the form of a book. This is another factor that disqualifies the Dead Sea Scrolls from consideration with this prophecy.

Particular and very peculiar circumstances were to surround the coming forth of this book, says Isaiah. It would be given for publication to an unlearned man, a most unusual thing. What a specific and extraordinary stipulation the prophet makes! But it is vital to the proper identification of the record.

Isaiah also declares that some of the words of the book—but not the book itself—would be given to a learned man who would reject those words, since they came from a "sealed" book that he had never seen. That the book itself would be given to an unlearned man is quite an unusual circumstance. It is also a highly significant part of the identification of the ancient record.

None of these factors can possibly relate to the Qumran scrolls, but they definitely do narrow the identification of the book of which Isaiah spoke, and to a very fine point indeed.

The prophet Isaiah further said that pursuant to the publication of the book, the Lord would perform a "marvelous work and a wonder" that would baffle the wise and prudent men of the earth. The Qumran scrolls were not involved in any such occurrence.

One of the striking things about Isaiah's prediction is that the time of its fulfillment is specified. It was destined to happen just "a little while" before Palestine would again become fruitful, just before the restoration of the Holy Land in these modern times.

Now let us read Isaiah's words:

"And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:

"And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

"Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

"Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. . . .

"Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?

"And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

"The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel." (Isa. 29:11-14, 17-19.)

Who can understand these puzzling words? Only the Latter-day Saints, and then only through the use of the Book of Mormon. To the worldly wise, these words form one of the deep mysteries of the Holy Scriptures. But they are plain to those whom God chooses to bring about his "strange" task (Isa. 28:21), his "marvellous work and a wonder."
