Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

NEPHI'S EXPLANATION

Nephi is the author of the description of these important events as they are recorded in the Book of Mormon. He did more than merely outline or repeat what Isaiah said in his brief account. He provided a rich abundance of additional information, including the fact that part of the book was sealed and was not to be opened at this time. It is obvious that this fact could not be related to the Qumran scrolls either.

The sealed portion, Nephi said, contained an account of events foreseen in prophecy from the beginning to the end of the world.

The "unlearned man" was forbidden to touch the sealed portion, but was instructed to translate and publish that part which was not sealed. Nephi said:

"For behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep. For behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have rejected the prophets; and your rulers, and the seers hath he covered because of your iniquity.

"And it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words of a book, and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered.

"And behold the book shall be sealed; and in the book shall be a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof.

"Wherefore, because of the things which are sealed up, the things which are sealed shall not be delivered in the day of the wickedness and abominations of the people. Wherefore the book shall be kept from them.

"But the book shall be delivered unto a man, and he shall deliver the words of the book, which are the words of those who have slumbered in the dust, and he shall deliver these words unto another;

"But the words which are sealed he shall not deliver, neither shall he deliver the book. For the book shall be sealed by the power of God, and the revelation which was sealed shall be kept in the book until the own due time of the Lord, that they may come forth; for behold, they reveal all things from the foundation of the world unto the end thereof.

"And the day cometh that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the house tops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ; and all things shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children of men, and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth.

"Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.

"And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

"Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word; and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!

"But behold, it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall say unto him to whom he shall deliver the book: Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee. And the learned shall say; Bring hither the book, and I will read them." (2 Ne. 27:5-15.)

Nephi explained, as is noted, that three witnesses would be chosen of the Lord to view this ancient record and as many others "as seemeth me good." Note now these additional words:

"And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this, and not for the glory of God.

"And the man shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is sealed.

"Then shall the learned say: I cannot read it.

"Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book and the words thereof to him that is not learned; and the man that is not learned shall say: I am not learned.

"Then shall the Lord God say unto him: The learned shall not read them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee.

"Touch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them forth in mine own due time; for I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own work." (2 Ne. 27:16-21.)

How easily understood are these words. Do they not remove all mystery from Isaiah's expressions? Are they not in plain language and in great detail? Of course the Book of Mormon is required to give clarity to Isaiah, and it does so amazingly well!

Now Nephi continues:

"Wherefore, when thou hast read the words which I have commanded thee, and obtained the witnesses which I have promised unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the book again, and hide it up unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast not read, until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things unto the children of men.

"For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith.

"And again it shall come to pass that the Lord shall say unto him that shall read the words that shall be delivered him:

"Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men—

"Therefore, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, yea, a marvelous work and wonder, for the wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid." (2 Ne. 27:22-26.)

Both Isaiah and Nephi point out that this sacred record which would come "out of the ground," and which would permit a nation once destroyed to speak suddenly in a modern voice, will actually appear shortly before Lebanon shall become a fruitful field. It is thus dated in prophecy.

Palestine "blossomed as the rose" only after the Jews began colonization there. That followed World War I and was brought about through the Balfour treaty between the United States and Great Britain in the 1920s. However, the Book of Mormon was printed in 1830, nearly a century before Palestine was freed from the Turks. In the Lord's language, that is but a "little while," as the prophet says.

It is interesting also that both Isaiah and Nephi explain that the deaf shall "hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness." (2 Ne. 27:29; Isa. 29:18.)

The blind, with Braille, now read the Book of Mormon, and modern hearing devices, including the signlanguage, allow the deaf to learn the message of the book. Of course, in the parabolic sense in which the scriptures so often speak, the passage may also mean that those who formerly were blind to the truth and those who formerly were deaf to the gospel, in that they refused to see or listen to it, would now see and hear and be convinced, this by the blessing of God.

And as both prophets so plainly taught, "the meek also shall increase . . . their joy . . . in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel." (2 Ne. 27:30; Isa. 29:19.) This would be an important part of the "marvellous work and a wonder."

How were all these prophetic words fulfilled?

The account of the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon provides the evidence that the Book of Mormon was that ancient record. The Prophet Joseph Smith gives the details plainly in his History of the Church. Each facet set forth by Israel and Nephi is verified in the actual events that developed during the publication of the Book of Mormon.

Joseph Smith was the unlearned man.

Professor Charles Anthon of Columbia College was the learned man.

Martin Harris took only some of the words of the book to Professor Anthon.

Three witnesses were chosen to view the record, to which they gave their solemn testimony. As was indicated, there would also be other witnesses. Eight were chosen, and they handled and carefully scrutinized the ancient record and testified of its existence.

This is all a mighty fulfillment of prophecy in the words of both Isaiah and Nephi. The Bible thus bears testimony to the Book of Mormon. In this regard, Ezekiel joins Isaiah in describing this additional volume of scripture. (See Ezek. 37:16-28.)

The Book of Mormon is also bears testimony to the accuracy of the Bible. And both volumes fully sustain the account of the restoration of the gospel.

The Book of Mormon is verily true, brought forth literally by the power of God. All the details of its identification provided by Isaiah were fully met. That book did come out of the ground. It does speak for a people suddenly destroyed. It has a mighty message to all mankind.

That message is and forever shall be: Jesus Christ of Nazareth is the Son of God! He is our Savior, the Redeemer of all flesh!
