Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

THE UNLEARNED MAN

By the time Joseph Smith closed his career in martyrdom, he was brilliant and he was learned. He had been taught by heavenly angels and by the Holy Spirit as well.

When the Saints settled in Kirtland, Ohio, one of their first efforts was to provide for education, and a school of the prophets was begun. Later, when they established the city of Nauvoo, Illinois, they organized the University of Nauvoo. The Prophet Joseph was a firm supporter of education and took every opportunity to study ancient languages and other subjects.

But when, as a youth, he was selected as the one through whom the Lord would usher into the world "a marvelous work and a wonder," he most certainly was unschooled and unlearned. Isaiah could not have described him more accurately.

To suppose that he had the capacity to write the Book of Mormon, or any book for that matter, was simply beyond reason, especially when it is remembered what archaeologists subsequently found in Book of Mormon lands, and when we discover that the book is filled with Hebrew idioms of which the young farm boy had not the slightest inkling. His formal classroom education would not exceed even the sixth grade as we know it.

The translation was nothing short of a miracle, and of course that is what the Lord called it. He did that work by the gift and power of God, and not of any man or set of men. (See D&C 3:11-14; 5:4; 6:25; 10:1)

Joseph Smith was raised in a poor family, all members of which were obliged to work to bring home the required daily sustenance. Not only did he work on his father's farm, but he also hired out as a laborer to his neighbors.

The schools that were available at that time were usually of the one-room variety, and even these Joseph was not able to attend regularly.

During most of his childhood he lived in areas that were, in fact, frontier regions of the struggling young United States of America, where schools were scarce and far between. Few of the young people in those areas at that time attended school with any degree of regularity. Their conditions were not too different from those of Abraham Lincoln.

It was to such a young man that the Lord entrusted the publication of this ancient record that was destined to come out of the ground and out of the dust, baffling even the wise and prudent men of the world.

People who knew the Prophet Joseph Smith in his childhood confirmed that he was not privileged to have much schooling, and his own family, of course, knew very well his childhood educational limitations, for his brothers and sisters suffered the same handicap.

And when notoriety was given to his connection with the "golden Bible," much was published in the newspapers about his being unlearned. Shortly after the appearance of the Book of Mormon, several other books were published also that claimed to "expose" the fallacy of Joseph's story.

These books and newspapers spared no effort to "reveal" that Joseph was an unlettered and unlearned farm laborer, and that his claims to supernatural events were false. The authors apparently took delight in trying to prove the young man's complete inadequacy to produce any book.

Whereas this resulted in persecution to Joseph and his family, it nevertheless serves as evidence of the truth of what Isaiah said. Of course Joseph was an unlearned man, and now these newspapers and books proved it.

One of the books that allegedly exposed the Prophet was The Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism by Pomeroy Tucker, published in Palmyra, New York.

Gleanings by the Way, written by the Reverend John A. Clark, a resident of Palmyra, freely quoted neighbors in the area concerning the character and economic burdens of the entire Smith family.

And what do such books prove? That Joseph was unlearned when he produced the Book of Mormon, just as Isaiah said. But they also prove that Joseph did indeed have a manuscript to be published as a book, although at first few people would take him seriously.

Ellen E. Dickinson wrote a book entitled New Light on Mormonism in which she quoted Thurlow Weed, famous New York politician and publisher, as follows: "In 1825 [later corrected to 1829] when I was publishing the Rochester Telegraph a man introduced himself to me as Joseph Smith, of Palmyra, N.Y., whose object, he said, was to get a book published. He then stated he had been guided by a vision to a spot he described, where, in a cavern, he found what he called a golden Bible." (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1885, p. 260.) Mr. Weed examined the manuscript and refused to publish it.

In 1834 a book entitled Mormonism Unvailed was written by Eber D. Howe, a printer of Painesville, Ohio, only nine miles from Kirtland, where the Saints were then living. He quoted in his book affidavits from Palmyra citizens attacking the character of Joseph Smith and asserting that he was "an ignorant person, a fraud and a deceiver." (See Francis W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America, 3rd ed., 1951, 1:130.)

Emphasizing that Joseph was unlearned, Tucker in his book went so far as to say: "Smith could not write in a legible hand, and hence an amanuensis or scribe was necessary. Cowdery had been a schoolmaster, and was the only man in the band who could make a copy for the printer." (Kirkham, 1:114.)

Defamatory articles were published in the Rochester Advertiser and Telegraph on August 31, 1829; in the Palmyra Freeman; and in the Rochester Gem on September 5, 1829. And what do they prove?

Although they attack the young prophet, the publications are solid evidence that he had a manuscript, that he regarded it as miraculous, and that he himself was not an educated man, but rather a humble farmer without any previous publication experience.

Joseph's mother says in her own life story of the Prophet that he was not learned, and Joseph's wife agreed. She assisted at times with the translation when no other scribe was available.

Dr. Francis W. Kirkham, in his book A New Witness for Christ in America, quotes members of the family as well as close associates of the Prophet, setting forth facts concerning the translation of the Book of Mormon and the manner in which the work was accomplished. In all cases it is made clear that Joseph had not the capacity to produce the book on his own, but that it was done by the power of God. Dr. Kirkham writes as follows:

Regarding this fact Professor N. L. Nelson writes:

"Joseph Smith dictated the Book of Mormon without apparent hesitation, as fast as a scribe could write it in long hand. There is no chance of error on this point. The entire Whitmer family, besides Olivery Cowdery, Martin Harris, and Joseph's wife, sat and listened, or had free access to listen, to the record as it grew day by day during the entire month of June, 1829." (N. L. Nelson, Mormon Point of View, p. 124.)

A direct statement confirming this fact has been left us by Emma Smith Bidamon, the wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The questions to her were by her son, Joseph Smith, and were asked in the presence of Bishop Rogers, W. W. Blair, and H. A. Stebbins. A part of the interview follows:

"Q. Could not Father have dictated the Book of Mormon to you, Oliver Cowdery, and others who wrote for him after having first written it, or having first read it out of some book?

"A. Joseph Smith could neither write nor dictate a coherent and well worded letter, let alone dictating a book like the Book of Mormon, and though I was an active participant in the scenes that transpired, and was present during the translating of the plates, and had cognizance of things as they transpired, it is marvelous to me, "a marvel and a wonder," as much so as to anyone else. (A private journal written by Joseph Smith in his own hand writing is evidence of the above statement. This journal is preserved in the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.)

"Q. Mother, what is your belief about the authenticity, or origin of the Book of Mormon?

"A. My belief is that the Book of Mormon is of divine authenticity—I have not the slightest doubt of it. I am satisfied that no man could have dictated the writing of the manuscript unless he was inspired: for, when [I was acting] as his scribe, your father would dictate to me hour after hour; and when returning after meals, or after interruptions, he would at once begin where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him. It would have been improbable that a learned man could do this; and, for one so . . . unlearned as he was, it was simply impossible.

"These questions and answers she had given to them, were read to my mother by me, the day before my leaving Nauvoo for home and were affirmed by her. Major Bidamon stated that he had frequently conversed with her on the subject of the translation of the Book of Mormon, and her present answers were substantially what she had always stated in regard to it.

Signed, JOSEPH SMITH, Who is the Son of the Prophet Joseph Smith. (The Saints Advocate, Oct., 1879)"

(Kirkham, op. cit., pp. 194-96.)
