Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ONE THAT IS LEARNED

Martin Harris was greatly impressed by the Prophet Joseph Smith and the existence of the gold plates of the Book of Mormon. He assisted Joseph for a time as a scribe, and became especially curious as to the authenticity of the work.

He obtained from the Prophet the first 116 pages of the translated manuscript and showed them to his wife. The pages were lost, bringing the condemnation of the Lord upon both Martin and the young Prophet. As Martin was repentant, the Lord forgave him but did not permit him to serve further as scribe.

Martin felt that he should assist in financing the publication of the book, and he was willing to mortgage his farm to do so. But he wanted to have some further assurance that the work was all that Joseph claimed for it. He obtained from the Prophet a transcription of some of the characters as they appeared on the plates. These he intended to take to New York City, to submit to scholars, and thus satisfy himself as to their value. This he set out to do.

He obtained from the Prophet a transcript of some of the characters on the plates and took them to New York, where he showed them to two experts in ancient writings: Dr. Charles Anthon of Columbia College, now Columbia University, and Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell.

On his return, Martin made the following report:

I went to the city of New York and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyrian and Arabic; and he stated they were true characters.

He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold places in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

He then said to me, "Let me see that certificate." I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him, he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, "I cannot read a sealed book."

I left him and went to Mr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said, respecting both the characters and the translation. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, Deseret Book, 1974, p. 54.)

Evidently the Saints quoted Martin Harris concerning his New York visit, and eventually word reached Professor Anthon to this effect. He resented it and denied what Martin had said, although he did admit a recollection of the visit. Years later he wrote a letter setting forth his denial and providing other details concerning the episode.

One of the very interesting things he wrote in his letter is that the characters copied by Joseph Smith and delivered to Martin Harris were in vertical columns, not horizontal. This is of vital importance in view of the recent discovery, in an old Bible, of what is regarded as the original paper that Harris took to Anthon. This paper shows the characters to be in vertical columns also. Although this statement has been in Anthon's letter, resting in the Church archives for decades, no interest was shown in the fact that the characters were in vertical columns until the original was found in an old Bible by Mark William Hofmann, who had bought it as a curiosity, not knowing that it contained the document.

The letter was written to Anthon's friend the Reverend Dr. Coit, rector of Trinity Church, New Rochelle, New York. This letter was first published by the Reverend J. A. Clark in his book Gleanings by the Way, and has been reprinted in Francis W. Kirkham's A New Witness for Christ in America (1:417-21). Dated New York, April 3, 1841, it reads as follows:

Rev. and Dear Sir:

I have often heard that the Mormons claimed me for an auxiliary, but, as no one, until the present time, has ever requested from me a statement in writing, I have not deemed it worth while to say anything publicly on the subject. What I do know of the sect relates to some of their early movements; and as the facts may amuse you, while they will furnish a satisfactory answer to the charge of my being a Mormon proselyte, I proceed to lay them before you in detail.

Many years ago, the precise date I do not now recollect, a plain looking countryman called upon me with a letter from Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell requesting me to examine, and give my opinion upon, a certain paper, marked with various characters which the Doctor confessed he could not decipher, and which the bearer of the note was very anxious to have explained. A very brief examination of the paper convinced me that it was a mere hoax, and a very clumsy one too.

The characters were arranged in columns, like the Chinese mode of writing, and presented the most singular medley that I ever beheld. Greek, Hebrew, and all sorts of letters, more or less distorted, either through unskilfulness, or from actual design, were intermingled with sundry delineations of half moons, stars, and other natural objects, and the whole ended in a rude representation of the Mexican zodiac.

The conclusion was irresistible, that some cunning fellow had prepared the paper in question, for the purpose of imposing upon the countryman who brought it, and I told the man so without any hesitation. He then proceeded to give me a history of the whole affair, which convinced me that he had fallen into the hands of some sharper, while it left me in great astonishment at his own simplicity.

The countryman told me that a gold book had been recently dug up in the western or northern part (I forget which), of our state, and he described this book as consisting of many gold plates, like leaves, secured by a gold wire passing through the edge of each, just as the leaves of a book are sewed together, and presented in this way the appearance of a volume. Each plate, according to him, was inscribed with unknown characters, and the paper which he handed me, a transcript of one of these pages.

On my asking him by whom the copy was made, he gravely stated, that along with the golden book there had been dug up a very large pair of spectacles! so large in fact that if a man were to hold them in front of his face, his two eyes would merely look through one of the glasses, and the remaining part of the spectacles would project a considerable distance sideways! These spectacles possessed, it seems a very valuable property, of enabling any one who looked through them, (or rather through one of the lenses), not only to decipher the characters on the plates, but also to comprehend their exact meaning, and be able to translate them!

My informant assured me that this curious property of the spectacles had been actually tested, and found to be true. A young man, it seems, had been placed in the garret of a farm house, with a curtain before him, and having fastened the spectacles to his head, had read several pages in the golden book, and communicated their contents in writing to certain persons stationed on the outside of the curtain.

He had also copied off one page of the book in the original character, which he had in like manner handed over to those who were separated from him by the curtain, and this copy was the paper which the countryman had brought with him. As the golden book was said to contain very great truths, and most important revelations of a religious nature, a strong desire had been expressed by several persons in the countryman's neighborhood, to have the whole work translated and published. A proposition had accordingly been made to my informant, to sell his farm, and apply the proceeds to the printing of the golden book, and the golden plates were to be left with him as security until he should be reimbursed by the sale of the work.

To convince him more clearly that there was no risk whatever in the matter, and that the work was actually what it claimed to be, he was told to take the paper, which purported to be a copy of the pages of the book, to the city of New York, and submit it to the learned in that quarter, who would soon dispel all his doubts, and satisfy him as to the perfect safety of the investment.

As Dr. Mitchell was our "Magnus Apollo" in those days, the man called first upon him; but the Doctor, evidently suspecting some trick, declined giving any opinion about the matter, and sent the countryman down to the college, to see, in all probability, what the "learned pundits" in that place would make of the affair.

On my telling the bearer of the paper that an attempt had been made to impose on him, and defraud him of his property, he requested me to give him my opinion in writing about the paper which he had shown to me. I did so without any hesitation, partly for the man's sake, and partly to let the individual "behind the curtain," see that his trick was discovered.

The import of what I wrote was, as far as I can now recollect, simply this, that the marks in the paper appeared to be merely an imitation of various alphabetical characters, and had, in my opinion, no meaning at all connected with them. The countryman then took his leave, with many thanks, and with the express declaration that he would in no shape part with his farm or embark in the speculation of printing the golden book.

The matter rested here for a considerable time, until one day, when I had ceased entirely to think of the countryman and his paper, this same individual, to my great surprise, paid me a second visit. He now brought with him a duodecimo volume, which he said was a translation into English of the "Golden Bible." He also stated, that notwithstanding his original determination not to sell his farm, he had been induced eventually to do so, and apply the money to the publication of the book, and had received the golden plates as a security for repayment.

He begged my acceptance of the volume, assuring me that it would be found extremely interesting, and that it was already "making a great noise" in the upper part of the state. Suspecting now that some serious trick was on foot, and that my plain-looking visitor might be in fact a very cunning fellow I declined his present and merely contented myself with a slight examination of the volume while he stood by.

The more I declined receiving it however, the more urgent the man became in offering the book, until at last I told him plainly, that if he left the volume, as he said he intended to do, I should most assuredly throw it after him as he departed. I then asked him how he could be so foolish as to sell his farm and engage in this affair; and requested him to tell me if the plates were really gold.

In answer to this latter inquiry, he said that he had never seen the plates themselves, which were carefully locked up in a trunk, but that he had the trunk in his possession. I advised him by all means to open the trunk and examine the contents, and if the plates proved to be of gold, which I did not believe at all, to sell them immediately.

His reply was, that if he opened the trunk the "curse of heaven would descend upon him and his children." "However," added he, "I will agree to open it, provided you will take the `curse of heaven' upon yourself for having advised me to the step." I told him I was perfectly willing to do so, and begged he would hasten home and examine the trunk, for he would find he had been cheated. He promised to do as I recommended, and left me, taking his book with him. I have never seen him since.

Such is a plain statement of all that I know respecting the Mormons. My impression now is, that the plain looking countryman was none other than the prophet Smith himself, who assumed an appearance of great simplicity in order to entrap me, if possible, into some recommendation of his book. That the prophet aided me by his inspiration, in interpreting the volume, is only one of the many amusing falsehoods which the Mormonites utter relative to my participation in their doctrines. Of these doctrines I know nothing whatever, nor have I ever heard a single discourse from any one of their preachers, although I have often felt a strong curiosity to become an auditor, since my friends tell me that they frequently name me in their sermons, and even go so far as to say that I am alluded to in the prophecies of Scripture!

If what I have here written shall prove of any service in opening the eyes of some of their deluded followers to the real designs of those who profess to be the apostles of Mormonism, it will afford me a satisfaction, equalled, I have no doubt only by that which you yourself will feel on this subject.

I remain very respectfully and truly, your friend,

Chas. Anthon.

It is obvious that the letter is full of errors and false claims, evidently to save face for Professor Anthon. But the fact is clearly affirmed that Martin Harris did visit him and did show him the transcripts, that the "gold book" came out of the ground, and that the transcriptions were in vertical columns, a point of great interest.

When Professor Anthon said he could not read a sealed book, Isaiah was vindicated and so was the Book of Mormon in the light of the biblical prophecy. The story of the "learned man," as well as that of the "unlearned man," is vital to a proper identification of the Book of Mormon, testifying that the volume is all that is claimed for it.

It was King David of old who said, "Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven." (Ps. 85:11.)
