Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ONLY BY DIVINE POWER

The Lord himself affirms that it was only by the power of God that Joseph Smith was able to translate the ancient record.

The volume was written in a tongue unknown to modern men, in what those ancients themselves called Reformed Egyptian, and was not known to any other people. Not even the scholars of Joseph's day could decipher the inscriptions that had been copied off by him and shown to others by Martin Harris. Only by the power of God could they be translated.

This is made clear by the Lord. In D&C 1:29, we read: "And after having received the record of the Nephites, yea, even my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., might have power to translate through the mercy of God, by the power of God, the Book of Mormon."

In D&C 9 we have the following, referring to Oliver Cowdery:

"But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

"But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me.

"Now, if you had known this you could have translated; nevertheless, it is not expedient that you should translate now. Behold, it was expedient when you commenced; but you feared, and the time is past, and it is not expedient now; for, do you not behold that I have given unto my servant Joseph sufficient strength, whereby it is made up? And neither of you have I condemned." (Verses 8-12.)

Although these words are addressed to Oliver Cowdery, they reinforce the principle that translation of sacred things cannot be accomplished except "it be given you from me."

When Martin Harris's wife lost the first 116 pages of translated manuscript, the Lord upbraided Joseph severely. First he made it clear that Joseph's ability to translate was strictly a gift of God: "Now, behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them." (D&C 10:1.)

Then the Lord took that gift from the Prophet so that he became powerless to translate further until commanded to do so: "And you also lost your gift at the same time, and your mind became darkened. Nevertheless, it is now restored unto you again; therefore see that you are faithful and continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation as you have begun. Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided to enable you to translate; but be diligent unto the end." (D&C 10:2-4. See also D&C 3:11-14, 5:4, 6:25.) It was indeed a gift.

The Lord gave detailed instructions on how to proceed:

"Behold, I say unto you, that you shall not translate again those words which have gone forth out of your hands;. . .

"Therefore, you shall translate the engravings which are on the plates of Nephi, down even till you come to the reign of king Benjamin, or until you come to that which you have translated, which you have retained; and behold, you shall publish it as the record of Nephi; and thus I will confound those who have altered my words. . . .

"Behold, there are many things engraven upon the plates of Nephi which do throw greater views upon my gospel; therefore, it is wisdom in me that you should translate this first part of the engravings of Nephi, and send forth in this work." (D&C 10:30, 41-42, 45.)

The fact that the power to translate was strictly a gift to Joseph Smith is further stated by the Lord in these words:

"Behold, thou art Joseph, and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall.

"But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work; except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift.

"And when thou deliveredst up that which God had given thee sight and power to translate, thou deliveredst up that which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man." (D&C 3:9-12.)

This, of course, was said in regard to the loss of the 116 pages of manuscript. But it illustrates the fact that Joseph translated only by the gift of God through the Urim and Thummim.

At other times the Lord spoke about the fact that it was he, God, who had brought forth the Book of Mormon. As he spoke to the witnesses of the Book of Mormon he said:

"And ye shall testify that you have seen them, even as my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., has seen them; for it is by my power that he has seen them, and it is because he had faith.

"And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as you Lord and your God liveth it is true.

"Wherefore, you have received the same power, and the same faith, and the same gift like unto him;

"And if you do these last commandments of mine, which I have given you, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; for my grace is sufficient for you, and you shall be lifted up at the last day.

"And I, Jesus Christ, you Lord and your God, have spoken it unto you, that I might bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men. Amen." (D&C 17:5-9.)

Again, when the Lord gave commandments to Martin Harris concerning the financing of the printing of the Book of Mormon, he spoke as follows, again declaring that the book contains his word, which, of course, was brought about only by his power:

"And again, I commanded thee that thou shalt not covet thine own property, but impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains the truth and the word of God—

"Which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come." (D&C 19:26-27.)

To say that the young Joseph Smith produced the Book of Mormon through his own efforts is to completely ignore the facts. It was an act of God, a "marvelous work and a wonder."
