Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

EZEKIEL'S STICKS

One of the greatest of God's purposes in the latter days is to gather the twelve tribes of Israel.

Many are the prophecies throughout the scriptures declaring that the Lord will bring about this mighty movement. The tribes are to gather to Palestine. Joseph will remain in America. Old Jerusalem will become a world capital in the Millennium. So also will the New Jerusalem, which is to be built at Jackson County, Missouri. The Savior is to govern from both.

Universal peace is predicted. The Savior, the Lord of all, will reign over a united Israel. There will be unity, with one fold and one Shepherd, and Jesus is that Shepherd.

As he gathers his people together in the last days, so their writings also are to be consolidated, bringing together the scriptures of the Jews, the Nephites, and the Lost Tribes. Each nation may read the writings of the other, with a common understanding. When this combining of all the scriptures is to be accomplished has not been revealed. (2 Ne. 29:13.)

One great first step in this direction was destined to precede the gathering of Israel and assist in bringing it about. Through it would come the testimony of the Savior, one nation to another, helping to establish Zion in the latter days in preparation for the second coming of Christ and the gathering of Israel.

This great first step is described by Isaiah and Ezekiel, and it relates to a volume of scripture known as the record of Joseph. The 29th chapter of Isaiah told the manner of its coming forth. Ezekiel identifies it and indicates that the volume will be an integral part of and preceding the final gathering.

As Ezekiel spoke of the gathering of the tribes, he wrote particularly of the Jews and the descendants of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh. Before the tribes come together, their records will be joined, eventually to become one in the hand of the Lord's servants. So Ezekiel spoke as follows:

"The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

"And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?

"Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand." (Ezek. 37:15-19.)

"Stick" seems to refer to both the people and their records.

Two kinds of "sticks" were associated with ancient writings among the house of Israel. One was that they actually wrote upon a piece of wood. Such "writing tablets" were in common use even in Babylon during the ministry of Ezekiel. The stick of Judah, then, would identify Judah as such, and yet it was itself a record.

The other was the type of stick about which parchment records were wound, as a scroll. This, too, was in common use among the house of Israel. It is believed that such a record or scroll was used by the Savior when he read from the prophets as he taught in the Jewish synagogues. (Luke 4:18.)

What is the record of the stick of Judah?

Nephi saw it in vision and was well acquainted with it. In the vision in First Nephi he wrote:

"I beheld a book, and it was carried forth among them.

"And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the book?

"And I said unto him: I know not.

"And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the plainness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God.

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

"And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the foundation of a great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

"And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

"Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God.

"And after these plain and precious things were taken away it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest—because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceeding great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them." (1 Ne. 13:20-29.)

And what is the book? It is the Holy Bible, the record of the people or stick of Judah.

But what is the record of the stick, or people, of Joseph? It is the Book of Mormon! The Lord so designates it. It is the record of the "stick" or nation of Joseph, and may be spoken of as a stick itself.

"Behold, this is wisdom in me; wherefore, marvel not, for the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim." (D&C 27:5.)

Part of the gathering of Israel in the last days will be the uniting of these two volumes of scripture, so that they will be as one in the hands of the Lord's people.

Joseph who was sold into Egypt became a great prophet. He spoke of the reuniting of the tribes of Israel, but he also told of the coming together of their writings. Lehi read the words of Joseph as they were inscribed on the brass plates. The Lord spoke to Joseph and said:

"Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord." (2 Ne. 3:12.)

Again we have a prophecy of the two volumes of scripture coming together. And again we see that it was to be a part of the gathering of Israel.

As the sticks are joined into one, the Lord tells of the blessings he will give to the gathered tribes:

"And they shall cry from the dust; yea, even repentance unto their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them. And it shall come to pass that their cry shall go, even according to the simpleness of their words.

"Because of their faith their words shall proceed forth out of my mouth unto their brethren who are the fruit of thy loins; and the weakness of their words will I make strong in their faith, unto the remembering of my covenant which I made unto thy fathers.

"And now, behold, my son Joseph, after this manner did my father of old prophesy.

"Wherefore, because of this covenant thou art blessed; for thy seed shall not be destroyed, for they shall hearken unto the words of the book.

"And there shall rise up one mighty among them, who shall do much good, both in word and in deed, being an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders, and do that thing which is great in the sight of God, unto the bringing to pass much restoration unto the house of Israel, and unto the seed of thy brethren.

"And now, blessed art thou, Joseph. Behold, thou art little; wherefore hearken unto the words of thy brother, Nephi, and it shall be done unto thee even according to the words which I have spoken. Remember the words of thy dying father. Amen." (2 Ne. 3:20-25.)

As we read Ezekiel, it becomes evident that the joining of the two volumes of scripture is literally to be part and parcel of the final gathering. That drama is well underway. Three million Jews are now in Palestine establishing their homeland. To that homeland millions more will go eventually, including the ten lost tribes who will first come to Ephraim to receive their priesthood blessings, after which they will move on to Palestine, which is given to them as an inheritance. (D&C 133:26-34.)

Ephraim is being gathered from the four quarters of the earth. Salt Lake City is the present headquarters for this movement. Eventually the Lord will reign from the Zion to be built in Jackson County, but he will speak also from the Old Jerusalem when that city is restored. Then will come the fulfillment of the testimony of Isaiah:

"Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.)
