Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

JESUS AND ISAIAH

The Savior and the New Testament writers quoted more from Isaiah than from any other prophet except Moses. This is significant.

It was the Lord who said, "Great are the words of Isaiah," and he showed his evaluation by his use of those words, both in the Bible and in the Book of Mormon.

Esaias, or Isaiah, is quoted thirteen times in the four Gospels, and eight additional times elsewhere in the New Testament.

Matthew refers to the prophecy of Esaias concerning John the Baptist: "For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." (Matt. 3:3. See also Isa. 40:3.)

This is mentioned also in Luke: "As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." (Luke 3:4.)

The Gospel of John quotes John the Baptist as identifying himself, from the words of Isaiah, as the voice of one crying in the wilderness. This passage reads:

"And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?

"And he Confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ.

"And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No.

"Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?

"He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias." (John 1:19-23.)

Again in reference to John the Baptist, it is seen that Isaiah also predicted the coming of the Messiah whose forerunner John would be.

On one occasion Jesus went to Capernaum on the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim, and Matthew points out that it was a fulfillment of another of Isaiah's prophecies: "That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles; the people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up." (Matt. 4:14-16. See also Isa. 9:1-2.)

The light, of course, was the gospel that Christ himself had brought to the people. Here again Isaiah predicted details concerning the ministry of the Savior.

Matthew referred once more to Isaiah when he wrote: "When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were sick: That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." (Matt. 8:16-17. See also Isa. 53:4.)

Again, it is evident that Isaiah gave advance details on the Savior's ministry.

When the Pharisees sought to destroy the Lord, Matthew writes, Jesus "withdrew himself from thence: and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all; and charged them that they should not make him known: That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles." (Matt. 12:14-18. See also Isa. 42:1-3.)

In explaining his parables to his disciples, the Savior said:

"Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath. Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

"And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them." (Matt. 13:10-15. See also Isa. 6:9-10.)

In one of his most piercing statements about unbelievers who follow false creeds, the Savior again quoted Isaiah. He had been assailed by the Pharisees concerning some of their traditions, and said:

"Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? . . . Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (Matt. 15:3, 7-9. See also Isa. 8:20; 29:13.)

This episode is referred to in the Gospel of Mark: "Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (Mark 7:5-7.)

It was from the book of Isaiah that the Savior read while in the synagogue in Nazareth, raising resentment in the hearts of his listeners:

"And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.

"And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,

"The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

"And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.

"And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:16-21. See also Isa. 61:1-2.)

John quoted Isaiah concerning the Savior's ministry:

"But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?

"Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

"These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him." (John 12:37-41. See also Isa. 6:1-10; 53:1.)

The last sentence in the above quotation is significant. Could this be the same vision Isaiah saw in the year that King Uzziah died, or was this another glorious event? The scripture does not make it clear. But it is certain that Isaiah did see the Deity and that he evidently was well aware of Christ.

It was from Isaiah that the eunuch was reading when he was met by Philip, who converted him. (Acts 8:27-39.)

The fact that Isaiah possessed the gift of the Holy Ghost is taught by the apostle Paul: "And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers." (Acts 28:25.)

This recalls also the words of Isaiah concerning the Savior: "Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last. Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together. . . .

"Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me. Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go." (Isa. 48:12-13, 16-17.)

Not only is this another affirmation of the Savior on the part of the Isaiah, but it also indicates the influence of the Holy Spirit which "hath sent me."

That the ancient prophets were moved by the power of the Holy Ghost is firmly declared by the apostle Peter: "Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:20-21.)

Jesus was the Jehovah of the Old Testament, just as he was Christ of the New. Since he was the Creator, his ministry encompassed the entire time period of this earth.

Those who say that there was no evidence of the Trinity in the Godhead in Old Testament times simply do not have all of the facts. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have labored with and for this earth from its beginning and will do so until the end. Through the ages they used prophets whom they had appointed on earth, and Isaiah was one of the greatest of them.
