Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

TEACHINGS OF JESUS

When the Savior ministered among the Nephites, he taught them many things concerning the latter days and the gathering of Israel, in addition to other principles of the gospel. He quoted Isaiah in doing so.

He gave them the Sermon on the Mount. He explained that he himself was the God of the Old Testament, and that his gospel now superseded the law of Moses. And he informed the Nephites that it was he who gave the law to Moses.

"I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel," he told them. "I have come to fulfill the law; therefore it hath an end." The gospel in its fulness was to take its place. "Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled." (3 Ne. 15:5-6.)

He had chosen his Twelve by this time, and said to them, "Ye are my disciples and ye are a light unto this people, who are a remnant of the house of Joseph." (3 Ne. 15:12.)

He gave the land of America to the house of Joseph for their special inheritance. "Behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you," he told the Nephites. (3 Ne. 15:13.)

It is noteworthy to see how closely the Father was associated with his Beloved Son in the work. It was the Father who gave America to Joseph, the Lord said, taking no credit to himself. The Savior told the Nephites also that they were the "other sheep" mentioned in the tenth chapter of John. Again he said that it was the Father who had instructed that he should tell the Nephites of this fact.

"And now, because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them.

"But, verily, I say unto you that the Father hath commanded me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their iniquity that they know not of you.

"And verily, I say unto you again that the other tribes hath the Father separated from them; and it is because of their iniquity that they know not of them.

"And verily, I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

"And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching.

"And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

"But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me." (3 Ne. 15:18-24.)

Note the honor the Savior pays to his Father. Note the fact that it is the Father giving directions for mankind, but doing so through the agency of Jesus. This fits into the pattern as expressed elsewhere too. The apostle Paul said that all creation was made by Jesus as the agent of the Father:

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1:1-3.)

Paul taught the same doctrine to the Colossians when he wrote:

"Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light: Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell." (Col. 1:12-19.)

In the Pearl of Great Price we again learn that the Father created all things through the agency of his Son: "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:32-33.)

The close relationship of the Father and the Son should never be forgotten. Many incidents in the life of the Savior illustrate this fact. For example, recall the raising of Lazarus. Before doing so, the Savior "lifted up his eyes and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me." (John 11:41.) He did not attempt to raise Lazarus on his own responsibility. He recognized the Father.

So did not the Father and the Son cooperate in the closest kind of relationship? This we must recognize. It helps us to understand the Savior better. It helps us to know why it is that Jesus instructed us to pray not to himself, although he is the Redeemer, but to the Father, in the name of Jesus. Always the Father comes first. We are to become like the Father (see Matt. 5:48), but through Jesus the Savior.

This great principle the Lord taught to the Nephites.

He then turned to the events of latter days. He spoke of the gospel going to the Gentiles and said that if they will repent "and return unto me, saith the Father, behold they shall be numbered among my people, O house of Israel." (3 Ne. 16:13.)

It was at this point that the Lord quoted Isaiah concerning these last days:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, thus hath the Father commanded me—that I should give unto this people this land for their inheritance.

"And then the words of the prophet Isaiah shall be fulfilled, which say: Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

"Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God." (3 Ne. 16:16-20. See also Isa. 52:8-10.)

He also told them:

"Ye remember that I spake unto you, and said that when the words of Isaiah should be fulfilled—behold they are written, ye have them before you, therefore search them—And verily, verily, I say unto you, that when they shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel.

"And then shall the remnants, which shall be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, be gathered in from the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them." (3 Ne. 20:11-13.)

Following this the Lord quoted an entire chapter from Isaiah, further expressing his love for Israel and promising millennial peace. We quote only a part: "For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. . . . For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my people be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee." (3 Ne. 22:7-8, 10. See also Isa. 54:7-8, 10.)

The fact that the Savior would quote Isaiah in this manner has much significance. He had given the same information to that prophet seven hundred years before, even as he now gave it to the Nephites.

Here is an amazing fact. The Third Nephi statement given by the Savior in direct instruction to the Nephites is almost identical to the King James version of this scripture. The Savior thus once more emphasized that "great are the words of Isaiah." By using them, he verified their accuracy and that of the King James Version as well.

Some scholars attempt to cheapen the Savior's sermon by saying that Joseph Smith wrote it himself, borrowing language from the King James Version of the Bible and inserting it into the Lord's address to the Nephites. The Book of Mormon is a complete translation of the ancient record, and in no sense is it a composition of Joseph Smith.

The Savior's sermon, with its inclusion of the words of Isaiah, is of such superior quality that it is beyond the ability of mortal man. Joseph provides this classic utterance of the Savior strictly as a translation of the Lord's own words. It was possible only because Joseph translated by the power of God, and not by any of the very limited powers he possessed.

Jesus acknowledged Isaiah's greatness by incorporating into his own sermon the words found in Isa. 54.

As for Isaiah, he was merely the spokesman of the Lord in his day. The words were those of Jehovah. Does Isaiah not give credit to the Lord for them, as he declares "saith the Lord" at several points in the chapter?

To Isaiah it was revelation, just as the sections in the Doctrine and Covenants were revealed to Joseph Smith, who took no credit for them himself. On this point he and Isaiah followed the same pattern.
