Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WHO WROTE ISAIAH?

For years controversy has raged among Bible scholars as to whether or not the Book of Isaiah had more than one author. Some say there were at least two, separated by as much as two hundred years. Others think there were three.

An alleged difference in writing styles is one of the reasons for their suppositions. However, some claim that the treatment of historical facts precludes the entire book from having been written by one person in the time period of about 720 B.C.

Certain events are mentioned in some of the chapters as having already taken place, whereas they happened two centuries after it is known that Isaiah lived. On this point the Encyclopaedia Judaica (9:46) says: "The virtually unanimous opinion in modern times is that Isaiah is to be considered the work of two distinct authors: First Isaiah (chs. 1-39) whose prophetic career in Jerusalem covers the years c. 740—700 B.C.E., and that of an unknown prophet (Deutero-Isaiah, chs. 40-66) whose prophecies reflect the experience and events of the Babylonian Exile (c. 540 B.C.E.)."

The same authority, however, says that Jewish scholars do not agree with this claim. They hold to a single authorship. Says the Judaica (9:44): "It was generally axiomatic among the rabbis that the Book of Isaiah was the work of one prophet, and they answered the apparent time discrepancy by attributing the latter chapters to the outcome of prophetic powers." Abinadi did the same thing in the Book of Mormon. (See Mosiah 15, for example.)

In modern revelation no suggestion of more than one author appears. The writings of Isaiah are identified with but one expression— "the words of Isaiah"— regardless of whether the early or the later chapters are used.

For example, the Savior quoted Isa. 52, one of the later chapters, as he addressed the Nephites (3 Ne. 20:36-46) without raising the question of authorship.

The same thing is true of the Lord's sermon as recorded in Third 1 Ne. 22, quoting Isa. 54. As part of that sermon the Lord said: "A commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah." (3 Ne. 23:1.) Thus he refers to chapter 54, one of the later ones in the book, and which Jesus identified as Isaiah's work.

He did not teach us to search the words of the first Isaiah or the second Isaiah or the third Isaiah. He quoted Isaiah as we have it in the King James Version, and commanded us "to search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah." He clearly identified "these things" as the work of Isaiah. Is there a better authority?

When Moroni wrote "Search the prophecies of Isaiah" (Morm. 8:23), he did not quibble over authorship. It was Isaiah of whom he spoke, and there is only one known Isaiah, despite speculation to the contrary.

The first Nephi in the Book of Mormon quoted generously from Isaiah and specifically identified his quotations as coming from that prophet. There was no question in his mind as to whether there was more than one author. He spoke of Isaiah the prophet, and there is only one prophet known by that name.

When the Lord gave us D&C 113 of the Doctrine and Covenants, answering questions about Isaiah, nothing was said challenging the authorship that appeared under that name. Isaiah was the prophet. No question was raised as to authorship—not by the Lord.

When the Lord gave us D&C 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, he included this passage in explanation of the glory of the telestial world:

"And the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is one; for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so differs one from another in glory in the telestial world;

"For these are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas.

"These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch." (D&C 76:98-100.)

Again no question is raised in modern revelation about the identity of Isaiah.

Latter-day Saints need not worry about the authorship of the book of Isaiah. If there had been question about either it or the veracity of its contents, would not the Lord have told us?

He did not hesitate to discuss the Apochrypha, and he cautioned us against that book. (D&C 91.) If there was anything apochryphal about Isaiah, we surely would have been told in the same way. But on the contrary, the Book of Mormon prophets and the Savior himself freely quoted from Isaiah without reservation, thus recommending and endorsing what was written under that name.

When the Lord said "great are the words of Isaiah," he spoke of only one man, and his references include scriptures from both the early and the latter part of Isaiah's book, which is particularly pertinent to this point.
