Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

ISAIAH AS A POET

The quality of Isaiah's writing exceeds most of the literature now in print, either modern or ancient. No uninspired writers even approach him. Most of his work is poetic, although much of it is in direct prose. The prose is forceful, the style dynamic, the language superb.

Who can read such masterpieces as chapter 53 of Isaiah and not realize that the Holy Spirit guided him, that he was poetic in very deed, but that he was a prophet above all else?

The sheer beauty of his language is impressive, made infinitely more so by the message. Says the prophet concerning Jesus:

He is despised and rejected of men; A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: And we hid as it were our faces from him; He was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, And carried our sorrows: Yet we did esteem him stricken, Smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: The chastisement of our peace was upon him; And with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; We have turned every one to his own way; And the Lord hath laid on him The iniquity of us all. —Isaiah 53:3-6

And no poetry can exceed these words:

How beautiful upon the mountains Are the feet of him That bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; That bringeth good tidings of good, That publisheth salvation; That saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! Break forth into joy, sing together, Ye waste places of Jerusalem; For the Lord hath comforted his people, He hath redeemed Jerusalem. —Isaiah 52:7, 9

An example of his straightforward rebukes appears in his third chapter. There he speaks of the judgment that will befall the unrepentant. He speaks to the daughters of Zion in particular and says:

"Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:

"Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts.

"In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers, the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings, the rings, and nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.

"And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty.

"Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.

"And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground." (Isa. 3:16-26.)

His use of contrasts and comparisons is found in many parts of his book. One notable example is seen in chapter 28:

"Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

"Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground?

"When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place?

"For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him.

"For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

"Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen.

"This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working." (Isa. 28:23-29.)

His prayers are also eloquent:

"O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

"At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered. And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon them.

"The Lord is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stablity of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the Lord is his treasure.

"Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.

"The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man." (Isa. 33:2-8.)

In another appeal to the women of Israel he cries out:

"Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech.

"Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.

"Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.

"Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

"Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest." (Isa. 32:9-15.)

Isaiah, like David and Solomon, wrote under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Their day-to-day education, as it was, could in no way equip them to write so beautifully.

The same thing may be said of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is true that he was not educated in the colleges of the world, but he was taught by the Holy Spirit.

On this point do we recall what was said of the Savior? "Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" (John 7:14-15.)

With all the great prophets, and especially those who wrote so beautifully, credit indeed must be given to the Lord for their majestic expressions. Sheer inspiration is the word for it.

Consider this from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

"For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

"And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

"And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

"And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them." (D&C 1:1-5.)

Could an unlettered man have written that without divine help? Or could he have written this:

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

"Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out.

"His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

"From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail.

"For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

"And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

"Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

"And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

"For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man." (D&C 76:1-10.)

Or this:

"How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.

"Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

"Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

"That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

"That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.

"Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God.

"We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

"Hence many are called, but few are chosen." (D&C 121:33-40.)

The Psalms of David were prophetic, and hence inspired of the Holy Spirit. The Proverbs of Solomon were likewise scriptural. Such things come only from the Lord. Such inspiration is what makes men prophetic.

Isaiah was truly inspired of the Lord, and the beauty of his works testifies of it.
