Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

WHAT ISAIAH TAUGHT

Righteousness and full acceptance of the Holy One of Israel were the predominant teachings of the prophet Isaiah.

These principles were all embracing; they included acceptance of the Lord before his birth as well as during his mortality, and are reflected in his great latter-day work.

The modern phase of the Lord's ministry would, of course, include the restoration of the gospel, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the journey of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains. It will yet include the gathering of all the tribes of Israel and the establishment of Zion in America and the restored Jerusalem in Palestine.

But especially Isaiah emphasized the coming of the Holy One of Israel to judgment in the last days, after which a millennial reign will begin, when the lion and the lamb will lie down together and a sacred peace will descend upon the earth.

Included in his over-all message were many other teachings that deserve special mention. One of them was his charge to honor the Sabbath day. In his first chapter he demanded sincerity of the people and denounced them for hypocrisy, which must have included a mock observance of the Sabbath. Said he:

"Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.

"Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

"To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

"When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

"Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

"Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

"And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.

"Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." (Isa. 1:9-17.)

It was at this point that he taught one of his great lessons on repentance and the willingness of the Lord to accept honesty in worship: "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 1:18-20.)

He again mentioned the Sabbath as he called upon Israel at a later date to repent of all waywardness: "Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil. . . . Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord,

to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant." (Isa. 56:2, 6.)

With this great appeal he also said:

"Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:6-9.)

One of his most forceful expressions with regard to the Sabbath day is given in these words:

"If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

"Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 58:13-14.)

And he continued with this: "Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear." (Isa. 59:1-2.)

He made many promises as rewards for obedience to the Lord. One of his choice expressions is this:

"Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

"He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength.

"Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isa. 40:28-31.)

Another of his promises was this: "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." (Isa. 54:17.)

As a warning against going into forbidden paths for light and guidance he said: "Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother. And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm." (Isa. 9:19-20.)
