Mark E. Petersen, Isaiah for Today ( 1981)

HIS VOICE TO US

Isaiah's voice is one of testimony, and if heeded, it will bring a rich harvest to the faithful.

First and foremost he is a great witness for Christ, telling seven hundred years in advance about Jesus' birth, his ministry in Palestine, and his death.

He identified Jesus as the Holy One of Israel, the Savior, Redeemer, and Messiah, and said that he would be born of a virgin and would be named Immanuel. Jesus was "God with us." But he was also "Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) Isaiah announced him so.

The humble carpenter of Nazareth was seen by Isaiah as "a man of sorrows, acquainted with grief." His own people disowned him. They hid their faces from him, despised him, and esteemed him not.

All they like sheep had gone astray. As the Holy One of Israel came among them, feeding them by the thousands and healing many of their sick—even raising some of their dead—they nevertheless oppressed him, afflicted him, and brought him as a lamb to the slaughter. As a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.

Yet he bore their iniquities. For their transgressions he was wounded, for their sins he was stricken, but with his stripes they were healed.

He gave his soul as an offering for sin. He made intercession for the transgressors. He died that man might live. All this Isaiah taught.

Jesus was indeed with the wicked in his death, a thief on each side of him. He made his grave with the rich—but in a borrowed tomb, obtained through the sympathy of Joseph of Arimathea, "an honorable counseller, which also waited for the kingdom of God." (Mark 15:43.) This Joseph was a member of the Jewish Sanhedrin as was Nicodemus, and was regarded as a rich man.

Isaiah foresaw it all.

Jesus brought about the resurrection, and Isaiah declared that all men will be blessed by it. "Thy dead men shall live," he said, "together with my dead body shall they arise." (Isa. 26:19.) There was no doubt in his mind.

Isaiah gave the first biblical glimpse of salvation for the dead, forecasting the Savior's visit to the realm of the departed, there to pierce the prison doors.

He also would open the eyes of the blind and give hearing to the deaf; and because of his ministry, the meek would increase their joy in the Lord and the poor would rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

Isaiah's testimony of Christ included enlightening reference to the Lord's latter-day mission: the restoration of the gospel, the rise of Joseph Smith, the publication of the Book of Mormon, the establishment of the Saints in the tops of the mountains, the building of temples, the ultimate gathering of Israel, the second coming of Christ, and the opening of His millennial reign.

What other prophet compares with Isaiah? Was he not great like Moses? Was he not an effective voice crying in the wilderness like John? Is not his message one with tremendous modern significance?

Isaiah! He was a prophet for ancient Judah, it is true, but his message for latter days is magnificent for us.

Isaiah is for today! Great are the words of Isaiah!
