“And in the same region there

were shepherds out in the fields

keeping watch over their flocks

by night” (Lk 2:8). Not likely if

it was wintertime! The fields

of Bethlehem were far too

valuable as grain-producing

areas to be used to graze sheep

and goats during the wintertime

growing season. And,

wintertime rains and wind drive

all sane people indoors at night

anyway. This flock of sheep,

with one curious and precocious

goat (so they are!), grazes

among fig trees in the high hill

country in late summer. Soon

they will head east, leaving the

growing areas behind for the

farmer to sow his crop of winter

wheat. Christmas will just have

to wait for summertime.

Glory to God in the highest,

of the spring scorches the ground and forces them

and on earth peace among men

back up into the hills. Once in the vicinity of Beth-

with whom He is well pleased. (Lk 2:14) lehem, the sheep and goats could forage and fertilize

This was the climax of special visits paid by God’s the fields all summer, after the crops had been har-messengers to expectant mothers and wonder-vested. Luke continues that the shepherds were in ing fathers since the time of Abraham the fields “at night” (Lk 2:8), a pleasant time for shep-Judg 13:2–23; 2 Kgs 4:8–17; Lk 1:5–38; Heb 13:2) (Gen 18:1–15; herds to watch their flocks out-of-doors following

of “the hopes and fears of all the years” was just . The climax the heat of a long summer day, but a miserably cold

and wet experience in the winter. If Mary had given

beginning. Luke provides some geographical details about birth in December and the family’s flocks were near-

For many, the Jesus of the the birth of Jesus that suggest that this first Christ-by, the stable in any case would have been crowded modern church is the Jesus of mas took place sometime in the summer or early with animals seeking shelter and warmth, leaving stained glass, with images to fall, not winter as is celebrated today (the date no room for the expectant couple. Rabbinic sources turn the hearts of the faithful December 25 was apparently adopted by Western (Mishnah, Shekalim 7.4) suggest that certain fields in the to the heavens but seldom Christians in the fourth century vicinity of Bethlehem were reserved year round for representing “how it actually sion to the pagan mid-winter festivals of Saturna-a.d. as a conces-lambs being raised for Temple (Passover) sacrifice, was.” The Jesus of the Gospels lia and Brumalia, celebrated across the Roman and it is theologically tempting to suggest that it is a Jesus of history and of Empire on December 17–24 and 25 respectively). was these shepherds who paid the first visit to “the faith, and the Christmas story When Jesus was born, shepherds from the vicinity Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world” more than any other allows of Bethlehem were “out in the fields keeping watch (cf. Jn 1:29). Perhaps—but even they would have been Christians to continue to over their flocks” (Lk 2:8). In the growing season of in the fields at night only in the summertime! meaningful ways. combine the two in fresh and the hill country of Judea, the farmers of Bethlehem Mary wrapped her baby in swaddling cloths and

sow their fields with wheat and barley in gently placed him in the manger—and for Jesus, this . With reversed November in anticipation of a spring and cozy crib was a fine first home (Lk 2:7) early summer harvest (Pesach/Passover and imagery describing unfaithful Israel, the prophet Shavuot/Weeks are spring harvest festivals). Ezekiel fills us in on the details of being a midwife: By late December their fields start to sprout As for your birth, on the day you were born your with grain. Flocks of sheep and goats would navel cord was not cut, nor were you washed with love to feast of the soft green shoots, but water for cleansing. You were not rubbed with salt only at the risk of incurring the wrath of the or even wrapped in cloths. No eye looked with pity hard-working farmer! Rather, in the winter- on you to do any of these things for you, to have time Bethlehem shepherds have historically compassion on you. Instead, you were thrown out driven their flocks eastward to graze off the into the open field, for you were abhorred on the day scant growth afforded by the winter rains you were born. (Ezek 16:4–5) in the Judean wilderness, before the heat Mary’s baby wasn’t Joseph’s. Everyone back home

176 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your assumed “illegitimate.” Joseph had every right to

Journeys to Judea. Mary

cast it aside to die in the ditch, then get Mary preg-

made the journey south fairly

nant the way it was supposed to happen. But like

often for a young village

woman: first to visit her

God did with His people, Joseph redeemed his first-

kinswoman Elizabeth who was

born son:

also expecting a child, then to

When I passed by you and saw you squirming in

Bethlehem where she gave birth

your blood, I said to you, “Live!” I said to you while

to Jesus, then back down to

you were in your blood, “Live!” (Ezek 16:6)

Jerusalem with her family to

celebrate Passover when Jesus

The proud, redemptive parents were careful

was twelve. The likely route

to keep Torah and so circumcised their baby on

bypassed Samaria by dropping

the eighth day of his new life (Lk 2:21; cf. Lev 12:1–3;

through the Rift Valley, then

Gen 17:12; Josh 5:2–9). With a yelp of pain and a smear

climbed back up to Jerusalem

of blood he entered into the Covenant of God’s peo-

via Jericho. This added a day

ple, receiving the name Jesus (“the LORD is salva-

or two to the trip but avoided

a land and its people whom the

tion” or “the LORD saves”). It was the right of the

Temple authorities considered

father to name his own son. Joseph deferred to the

unclean.

angel (cf. Mt 1:21; Lk 1:59); this was God’s son, alive in

flesh and blood (cf. Rom 8:3; Gal 4:4; Phil 2:7–8; Heb 2:17).

He would shed much more of it later.

According to provisions in the Torah (Lev 12:1–5),

Mary was considered to be ritually unclean from

During the Great Revolt against

the time of the flow of blood during her delivery

Rome of a.d. 66–70, Jews

to the thirty-third day following the circumcision

minted their own coins and

of her son. When Jesus was forty days old, Mary, coes of the Temple courtyard, now and again climb-adorned them with symbols with Joseph and her baby, went up from Bethlehem ing the grand staircase leading to the Nicanor Gate of Jewish life in order to give to the Temple in Jerusalem for her to be purified. and mingling here and there among the faithful pil-practical expression to their Like most who visited the Temple, they likely en-grims, were two old and venerable figures, part mys-longing to be free from Rome. tered the holy precinct through the Hulda Gates tic, part prophet, faithfully and tirelessly waiting for This coin shows two baskets in the compound’s southern wall, where they had God to bring the Messiah to His people. Simeon was overflowing with dates on easy access to the public miqveh pools for cleansing “looking for the consolation of Israel,” Anna “for either side of a date palm, a their bodies from ritual impurities. After the requi-the redemption of Jerusalem” (Lk 2:25, 2:38). Each had tree symbolizing righteousness site immersion, the young parents, with Jesus, pro-a reputation, certainly, in Jerusalem, a city that has and victory. The inscription,

in ancient (Old Testament

ceeded to the Nicanor Gate on the Temple Mount always—and still—seems to attract devout, elderly era) Hebrew script, reads platform, at the entrance of the Women’s Court folk, pious and sure that before their lifetimes ex-“for the redemption of Zion.” (Mishnah, Tamid 5.6). It was there that Mary offered pire, they will see God act for His people as He has It is not possible to separate a sacrifice of two turtledoves—the offering of the never done before. “Just a little longer; I can hang the religious feelings of Jews poor—as atonement for her post-delivery ritual on”—and in this case, they were right. Both Simeon who were struggling against uncleanness (Lk 2:22–24; cf. Lev 12:6–8). At the same and Anna recognized the baby Jesus as the one for Roman occupation from their time Mary and Joseph formally presented Jesus to whom their patient longings represented the antici-longing for an independent the LORD, fulfilling the Torah-command that all pation of all Israel (Lk 2:26–38). Jesus was blessed. His Jewish political state: in their firstborn sons were to be given to God as a kind of parents were amazed. It was a holy moment. minds “the redemption of Zion” first-fruit offering (Lk 2:22–23; Num 18:15–16; cf. Ex 13:1–2; Sometime later—how much later is unknown, was a package deal. Seeing Num 3:44–47; 1 Cor 15:23). Then, according to the provi-but certainly not the night of Jesus’ birth or else the infant Jesus in the Temple, sions of the law, they “redeemed” him back to them-Mary could have afforded to give a lamb as the of-the prophetess Anna “spoke

of him to all those who were

selves (the verb is quite intentional) for the price of fering for her purification—“Magi from the east” looking for the redemption five sanctuary (i.e., Tyrian) shekels, the equivalent of made their way to Bethlehem to offer due homage of Jerusalem” (Lk 2:38). Her about twenty days’ wages paid in a priceless transac-to Jesus (Mt 2:1–12). Herodotus, always content to Messiah had come. tion (Num 18:16). This was not an insignificant sum for codify a fantastic rumor, thought the Magi were a the newlywed couple. (Jesus would be “purchased” class of Persian priests who flaunted awesome pow-for six times that amount later; Mt 26:14–16, 27:3–6.) ers of magic and astrology; others consider them

The wonder of the moment was surely over-to have been Nabateans based on imagery found

whelming—redeeming one’s firstborn son is always in Isaiah 60:1–7 and the type of gifts they brought a highlight of the life cycle of a Jewish family, and to Jesus. More reasonably these Magi were urban doing so within the confines of the Temple precinct, scholars from Babylonia (in their day, Parthia), at though not a required venue, made the act doubly home among the academies and libraries of Baby-special for this poor couple from Galilee. And there, lon, who fastidiously studied the remnants of a rich constantly walking among the colonnaded porti-and hoary 4,000-year-old Mesopotamian civiliza-

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 177

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

It was perhaps somewhere along this Nabatean

spice route that they secured gifts of frankincense

and myrrh (aromatic gum resins) and gold. Turn-

ing westward at the northern end of the Dead Sea,

the Magi would have crossed into Judea at Jericho,

passing in the shadow of the large and sumptuous

winter palace of Herod the Great. The king was suf-

fering through the last and very paranoid years of

his reign. Arriving in Jerusalem, the Magi inquired,

perhaps naïvely, for the one “born king of the Jews”

(Mt 2:1–2). Herod saw only Parthians, bent on grabbing

control of his realm and reestablishing a legitimate

(though puppet) Jewish ruling line, as they had tried

to do at the beginning of his reign thirty-five years

before. Although it is unattested in sources outside

of the Gospel of Matthew, Herod’s response to kill

all of the potential candidates who might usurp his

throne is true to his character (Mt 2:3–8, 2:16–18).

The Magi presented their lavish gifts to Mary,

Joseph and Jesus. Echoes of royal visits such as

that of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon abound

(e.g., 1 Kgs 10:1–10), as do prophecies that anticipate

kings and nations flowing to a rising light in Judea:

Arise, shine, for your light has come,

and the glory of the LORD has risen upon you…

Nations will come to your light,

and kings to the brightness of your rising…

A multitude of camels will cover you,

the young camels of Midian and Ephah;

All those from Sheba will come.

They will bring gold and frankincense,

The Journey of the Magi. tion. By the end of the first century b.C. the use of and will bear good news of the praises Routes for the journey of cuneiform as a literary medium had very nearly ex- of the LORD.… (Isa 60:1–6) the Magi follow the path of pired, but these learned and wise men of Babylon Warned in a dream not to retrace their steps geographical logic—from the still probed the mysteries of the universe through al-through Jerusalem, the Magi returned to their east-Transjordanian spice route to ready ancient cuneiform texts that recorded means ern homes “by another way” (Mt 2:12). Possibly they Jerusalem by way of Jericho, of reckoning time and tracking the starry host. In left Bethlehem by following the narrow, twisted bot-then back east via a more addition, Babylon was home to a large and influ-tom of the Nahal Kidron, winding their way through southern route. Any way they ential Jewish population that had found it more the wilderness and past Herod’s fortress at Hyrcania went the Magi had to skirt economically expedient to remain “by the waters of to the upper end of the Dead Sea, then around its one or more of Herod’s palace Babylon” (Ps 137:1) than return from exile to Judea, top to the Transjordanian highway and home. This fortresses. It was a journey of and from them these Magi certainly knew the sto-became the “monk and pilgrim” route connecting great personal risk, one that

took the Magi, like Abraham, ries and prophecies of the Old Testament as well Jerusalem and Bethlehem with the Judean Wil-far from their comfort zone (cf. Num 24:17; Isa 60:3).

derness monasteries during the Byzantine period.

into a land known only to God. So the Magi—traditions say three in number and Or, they followed the ridge heading southeast out Overcoming every obstacle, even provide their names: either Bithisarea, Mel-of Bethlehem past the Herodium to En-gedi, then the travelers persisted—and chior and Gathaspa (Latin) or Balthasar, Melkon crossed the Dead Sea at the Lisan Peninsula. Either rejoiced when at last they gazed and Gaspar (Armenian)—set off on a most remark-way would have minimized contacts with Herod at the divine child face-to-face. able journey, to find a baby who was beginning an and his henchmen.

even more remarkable journey of his own. They For Joseph and Mary, the practical outcome of the certainly traced one of the great caravan routes Magi’s visit was that they now had adequate funds of antiquity, north, west and then south along the to live on their own in exile. Mary and Joseph may bend of the Fertile Crescent toward Judea, follow-have been refugees at this point in their lives, but at ing roughly the same path that Abraham had trod least they were not destitute. Correctly sensing that two millennia before. Geographical logic suggests Herod wouldn’t rest until all threats to his throne that once the Magi reached Damascus they prob-were removed, the holy family set off for Egypt (Mt ably would have continued to follow the caravan 2:13–15), far from Herod’s influence and realm. There route due south, toward the Arabian Peninsula. was a large Jewish community in Alexandria, and it

178 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your is perhaps to that city that they headed. For Coptic

Christians, the visit by Mary, Joseph and the infant

Jesus to Egypt was a great moment in the Gospel

story, fulfilling the prophecy of Isaiah “Blessed is

Egypt my people” (Isa 19:24–25) and allowing them

to become the first Christians. The fourth-century

Coptic apocryphal gospel The History of Joseph the

Carpenter, a purported account by Jesus reminisc-

ing about the faithful deeds of his righteous parents,

preserves a memory of many details of the life of the

holy family that are not recorded in Scripture, and

is a witness to the richness of the Coptic tradition.

In one long episode, events swirling around the

baby Jesus flowed from Mesopotamia to Egypt, cov-

ering the geographical sweep of the story of Israel

from Abraham to Moses to the Exile and Return.

It was a momentous swing for a simple, still shamed

and nameless couple who hailed from a tiny village

lost in the land between.

And now for their Exodus from Egypt. After

the death of Herod the Great in 4 b.C., Mary, Jo-

seph and Jesus returned to the land of their birth

(Mt 2:19–21; cf. Hos 11:1) . There was no pressing rea-

son for them to go all the way back to Nazareth; if

home is where the heart is, Bethlehem likely won

out as their destination. But Herod’s son Archelaus

was on the throne in Judea with a reputation even

nastier than his father’s (Ant. xvii.10.1–10, xvii.13.2). At

(above) Faded paint in a badly damaged semi-dome in

the apse of the church at St. Simeon Monastery, Aswan,

Egypt, does little to attract the eye or provide visual details

of the rich heritage of the saints of the Coptic Church.

But it does carry the echoes of a proud memory of Jesus’

sojourn in the land of the Nile. This church building and

its paintings date to the 10th or 11th century a.d.; Coptic

tradition reaches back nearly another millennium beyond,

to the very roots of early Christianity.

(right) Jesus in Egypt According to Coptic

Tradition. Since at least the 4th century a.d., many

oral traditions have arisen within the native Egyptian

Coptic church to flesh out the visit by the Holy Family to

Egypt. Most claim their origin in a divine dream, vision or

revelation.

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 179

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

The Sojourn in Egypt. Fearing the wrath of Herod,

Joseph took Mary and Jesus to Egypt. They would

have walked the well-traveled road skirting the Sinai

that follows the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, an

international route of historic importance, perhaps all

the way to the thriving Jewish community in Alexandria.

Alexander the Great had marched this way, as did the

Assyrian kings Esarhaddon and Ashurbanipal. Coming

out of Egypt, this was the military highway for Thutmose

III, Amenhotep I, Seti I, Rameses II and Merneptah, the

“Pharaohs Triumphant” of Egypt’s New Kingdom. But

Matthew chose to relate Jesus’ exodus from Egypt to the

work of Moses: “Out of Egypt I called My Son” (Mt 2:15; cf.

Hos 11:1).

a worker in wood (Mt 13:55; Mk 6:3). This understand-

ing has grown in large part from statements by vari-

ous Church Fathers as early as the second century

(Justin Martyr argues that Joseph made plows and

yokes) and from the cumulative weight of a host of

literary and artistic representations over the last two

this point prudence played the better part of valor; millennia. The word tekton, however, is better ren-with the choice of facing either the wrath of Arche-dered “artisan in local building materials,” in this laus or the disparaging looks of people from Naza-case mostly stone, but with some wood and metal. reth, Joseph, counseled in a dream, chose the latter Joseph was, in all likelihood, a master craftsman of (Mt 2:22–23).

buildings and furnishings, certainly not a common

So it was back to Galilee. With the exception of day laborer but someone with special skills in con-

annual Passover trips to Jerusalem (Lk 2:41), these are struction who could demand a decent wage. Again, silent years during which Jesus “continued to grow drawing on recent ethnographic comparisons, every and become strong, increasing in wisdom; and the village (or couple of neighboring villages) in Otto-grace of God was upon him” (Lk 2:39–40). Surely Jo-man Palestine was home to someone who was espe-seph and Mary kept a religiously observant home, cially skilled in the more tricky parts of building a were honest and law-abiding citizens and sought to home—choosing the best materials, deciding how contribute to the welfare of their family and com-and where to lay the foundation, fashioning and munity. The stigma of the “illegitimate” birth lurked hanging the door, making a lock and key, and the in the background, but the urgency of the moment like. The tekton would also be involved in other pro-eventually took priority and people surely got on jects—building or fashioning wine presses, tombs, with their lives.

ossuaries, mikveh installations and so forth. The one

All four Gospel writers speak of Jesus having sib-who did this kind of work well had to be organized,

lings (Mt 12:46–47; Mk 3:31; Lk 8:20; Jn 2:12). Matthew and creative and physically strong, possess intuitive on-Mark identify the boys as James, Joseph/Joses, Judas the-job problem-solving skills, demonstrate com-

The Hebrew word for and Simon, all bearing names common in the world petency in applied mathematics and engineering, “carpenter” is naggar; Joseph of first-century a.d. Judaism; of the girls, the Gos-and have enough initiative and vision to make it and Jesus would have used the pels are silent (Mt 13:55–56; Mk 6:3). Although a strong all work. The Rabbis recognized the value of this related word nagar to refer to interpretative tradition holds that these children unique mix of skills and considered the “carpen-the pins projecting from the top must either have been Jesus’ half-siblings from an ter” (Heb. naggar) a specialist who could be con-and bottom of the door which, earlier marriage of Joseph or his cousins (so the Pro-sulted on legal matters related to pruning fruit trees when placed into sockets in toevangelium of James, Jerome, Augustine and a host (Abodah Zarah 50b). But not only did someone who was the lintel above and threshold of other witnesses throughout the ages), the most a master craftsman in local building materials com-below, would allow the door to natural sense of the language of the Gospels indi-mand a package of highly demanded skills, during open and close properly. This cates that they were Jesus’ real brothers and sisters the normal course of his work he likely would enter door and doorway, leading to and that Mary’s virginity lasted only through the all of the homes in the area and become familiar a storage room off the open birth of Jesus (cf. Mt 1:25). Altogether there were at with the family life and personal needs of everyone courtyard of a home in the least seven children in the family, with Jesus the old-around (not unlike a doctor who makes house-Jordanian village of Shawbek, est, an elder brother to be looked up to and admired. calls). And, if work was a little slow at home—as it was rather crudely constructed, It was a large family to raise, and Joseph was able would be in a small village like Nazareth, where the but it works. Joseph certainly

hung many doors in his day, to provide for them through his trade as a tekton. natural building materials were of a rather inferior

and certainly built walls and Until quite recently this Greek word has almost quality anyway—he would travel in larger circles in

doorways as well. universally been translated “carpenter,” indicating search of adequate work.

180 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

It was in this way that Joseph—if this reconstruc-

tion is correct, an independent businessman from

a conservative and relatively secure small town—

likely found work in Sepphoris, a short four-mile

walk down ridge to the north. According to Jose-

phus (Life, 123), Sepphoris was one of the three chief

cities of Galilee in the first century a.d. (the other

two were Tiberias—which wasn’t founded until a.d.

17—and Garaba), and was the center of political

and economic life of the region. The population of

the city was decidedly mixed—Jews and Gentiles—

with a cosmopolitan flair that no doubt irked people

in the poorer villages round about. Sepphoris was

destroyed in 4 b.C. as part of the general unrest fol-

lowing the death of Herod the Great, then rebuilt

by his son Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee. It was

to be a long, drawn-out process and resulted in a the time they got to Jericho (about a day’s journey The city of Sepphoris is on the city that looked and felt Roman. Much work was out) and realized he was actually gone they retraced must-see list of archaeological available in Sepphoris for specialists who worked in their steps to Jerusalem to find him. Three days of sites in Israel today. Visitors are wood and stone, and so it is reasonable to suppose searching produced understandable anxiety (there especially awed by the ancient that Joseph—often with Jesus in tow—went there, could have been an accident)—then it was Jesus’ city’s colorful, intricately-to the only job site anywhere in the vicinity of Naza-turn to be astonished: designed mosaic floors. These

reth that offered long-term job security. Perhaps Jo- Why were you looking [all over the city] for me? remains and many others, seph walked down on Sundays, the first day of the Didn’t you know that I had to be about my Father’s while striking and imaginative, work-week, and returned home each Sabbath. In business? all post-date the time of the Sepphoris, both he and Jesus would be exposed to a Celebrating Passover with his family took second (Lk 2:49) Gospels. In the early first wide variety of people and ideas that were not part seat to affairs of the Temple and God’s call on Jesus’ century a.d. Sepphoris was a

the theater, shown here early

Nazareth basin. of the normal ebb and flow of life high up in the life. For all Joseph’s paternal care, he wasn’t Jesus’ place just being (re)built. Even

Joseph and Mary, with their children, made the real father, nor was carpentry Jesus’ real calling, or on in its excavation, was only

lem habit of attending the Passover festival in Jerusa-Nazareth his real home. Joseph and Mary simply possibly built during the reign . b c .– a . d. (Lk 2:41; cf. Ex 23:14–15, 23:17; Deut 16:1–8) didn’t understand—nor should we necessarily ex-of Herod Antipas (3

city was typically crowded with pilgrims during the . The holy pect them to, yet (Lk 2:50; cf. Lk 2:19) 39). This makes it unlikely that eight-day spring freedom festival, among them “rel-made his point on his bewildered parents. He re-. But Jesus had Joseph or Jesus ever sat in its atives and acquaintances” of Jesus’ family turned with them to Nazareth, still subject to their seats, although it is reasonable

The year that Jesus was twelve (just old enough to (Lk 2:44) . authority and continuing “to increase in wisdom and to assume that they participated

(Lk 2:51–52). crusader citadel, now the site’s

be considered an adult), he spent his Passover in stature, and in favor of God and man” in initial work in the city. A

museum, sits above.

Jerusalem absorbed in detailed and protracted con-

versations with rabbis in the Temple on Scripture

and matters of religious law (Lk 2:42–47). Clearly Jo-

seph had seen to it that Jesus was well taught in the

Nazareth synagogue, so much so that David Flusser

has termed Jesus “a precocious scholar, one might

almost say a young talmudist” (Flusser, Jesus, p. 29). Je-

sus’ divine connection to God, combined with the

“anything’s possible” exuberance of youth, fueled

his arguments and surely gained him a reputation

The “precocious scholar and

young Talmudist” at work,

among the more staid—and now astonished—Tem-

holding learned rabbis in the

ple authorities. To their amazement, it was indeed

Temple spellbound. This image

possible to get a good rabbinic education in a village

in stained glass, adorning

in Galilee (cf. Mt 22:15–46; Jn 7:46).

a window in the chapel

Jesus was so absorbed by his conversations and

of Bethlehem University,

the wonder of the moment that he missed his fam-

Bethlehem, captures the

ily’s return trip home. At first Mary and Joseph

centrality of Jesus in the story.

weren’t too worried about their son’s safety (even

Underneath the haloed aura

in the Middle East today nobody messes with kids,

of the Divine was a sharp and

and Jesus was, after all, already about the age that

very well-trained mind, clever,

Mary had been when she was betrothed), but by

witty and practical.

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 181

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

his ministry began, Jesus showed a tender heart for

the fatherless, widows and children, and from this

we can safely conclude that his years of preparation

were shaped around tangible human needs, includ-

ing some that his own heart, as a fatherless youth,

must have felt (cf. Mt 19:13–15; Lk 7:11–17, 18:1–8, 21:1–4).

Quite early in his public ministry—after he had

attracted some disciples but before he was widely

known—Jesus went to a wedding. The celebration

was in Cana of Galilee, on a Tuesday (“the third

day,” Heb. yom shlishi, still a day for weddings in Is-

rael). While the weight of Early Church tradition

locates Cana at Kafr Kana, a large Christian Arab

town just down-slope from Nazareth, the more like-

ly location of the site is Khirbet Qana, a prominent,

bare rise with scattered first-century remains five

miles due north, just across the Beth Netofa Val-

ley (the practical travel needs of pilgrims during the

early Byzantine period apparently pulled the loca-

tion of Cana much closer to Nazareth). Mary was

The Wedding at Cana. Jesus’ With the line “I must be about my Father’s busi-invited—certainly she reminisced about her own first miracle was at Cana of ness,” Joseph disappears from the Gospel story. Is hurried wedding—and Jesus and his disciples came Galilee, an important Jewish this a literary device, or does it reflect, as many have along as well (Jn 2:1–2). Did Mary ever pause to won-village on the northern end of concluded, that Joseph died sometime shortly after der about her oldest son’s marital status? the Beth Netofa Valley. Like Jesus’ twelfth year? Joseph surely had apprenticed It is impossible to know who was getting married the people of Sepphoris, those his first-born son in the skills of a tekton (cf. Mk 6:3), in Cana, but surely it was either a relative or close who lived in Cana enjoyed and likely expected him to inherit the family busi-acquaintance of Mary and Jesus (a cousin perhaps, the richness of the valley’s soil ness. This prompts the question—mostly a theolog-or maybe a fellow tekton Jesus met at Sepphoris). and the economic stability ical speculation that cannot be answered: To what But the who is not as important as the what: this that it brought. Certainly the extent did Mary and Joseph know where Jesus’ call-was clearly a kosher family of some means, who residents of Cana were better ing would take him?

off economically, on the whole,

could afford to keep in their home large, expensive

than those of Nazareth, and the But now Joseph was gone, literarily or in fact, and jars of stone “for the Jewish ritual of purification”

elegance of the wedding there Jesus was left without a father. As the oldest son (Jn 2:6). High priests from Jerusalem would be expect-

would have been a bit out of he would de facto become the head of the family. ed to have such articles in their homes, not name-

place in Jesus’ home village. The Gospel narrative picks up again when Jesus was less townsfolk from rural Galilee. Clearly this was a Archaeological excavations about thirty years old and ready to begin his public religiously observant home (today we would say it in Jerusalem have uncovered ministry (Lk 3:23). But why so old? In a land where belonged to an Orthodox Jew), who went all-out to an abundance of stone vessels life expectancy hovered around forty years someone celebrate in elegant style (there were many guests of a variety of types from who was thirty was already middle-aged. (Alexan-and a headwaiter; Jn 2:9–10) in, apparently, a rather the first century der had already conquered most of the known world large building. Everybody was enjoying themselves, plates, cups, trays, lids and, a.d.: bowls, by thirty-two.) Perhaps Jesus, raised as a dutiful as they should. It was a great moment in life. Then most impressively, large storage son, waited until his siblings had become produc-the wine ran out, and Mary (as if it were her busi-jars. These were made of a tive members of society and were in a position to ness) let Jesus know he should do something about soft limestone quarried at a provide for the daily needs of their mother. Once it (Jn 2:3, 2:5). Perhaps Mary was prompting him to

site northeast of Jerusalem

tip his Messianic Secret; more likely, she was acting

(Hizma); most were turned on

the part of a concerned guest, a bit nosy (it showed

a lathe. They were expensive

she was part of the host’s in-group), wanting to re-

vessels, and apparently

ceive the public honor that would come her way

manufactured and used in

if the man of her house could solve the problem.

response to Jewish laws of

(The need to establish and maintain honor cannot

purity that held that whereas

be separated from anyone’s actions in the Middle

pottery vessels could become

East, ancient or modern.) In other words, Mary was

ritually unclean, stone vessels

playing perfectly the role of a first-century Galile-

remained pure (Mishneh, Kelim

an matron who knew how to entertain and keep a

10.1; Parah 3:2). The wedding

proper house—even if it belonged to someone else.

at Cana was held in a home

that had both the means and

Even though Jesus was the man of her house, the

the reason to possess such stone

cultural norm prompted Mary to control his social

storage jars (Jn 2:6).

interactions until he either married or moved in to

182 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your the world of men. Mary still called the shots; Jesus,

whose ministry was only just beginning, honored his

(dead) father and his mother by obliging (Jn 2:4–8;

cf. Ex 20:12). By the time the celebration was over Je-

sus had performed his first miracle; by serving the

best wine last the homeowner had become an ex-

travagantly perfect host; by urging Jesus to act Mary

was honored—and a good time was had by all.

Following the wedding at Cana, Jesus started lay-

ing the groundwork for what it meant for someone

to be his disciple. His mother and brothers caught

up with him while he was making his way from vil-

lage to village in Galilee; something was on their

mind. Jesus, occupied with a large crowd, didn’t

notice while his family, anxious, stood outside, at

the edge. If all Mary wanted to do was relay a bit

of family news, then a single messenger would have

sufficed. But everyone came, clearly prompted by

something important, a matter that demanded a final Passover. It would be too much to suggest that Perched on top of Khirbet Qana family council. While three of the Gospel writers she knew exactly what was going to happen: even above the Beth Netofa Valley mention the incident, none records the specific rea-though Jesus repeatedly told his disciples that suf-in Lower Galilee, students of son for the visit, what Mary or the boys said, or Je-fering and death awaited, they seemed not to hear, the Gospels discuss the words sus’ answer to them (Mt 12:46–50; Mk 3:31–35; Lk 8:19–21). or to understand (cf. Mt 16:21–23, 17:22–23, 20:17–19) and actions of Jesus when he However, from Jesus’ response to the crowds upon Likely Mary was part of his growing crowd of follow-. attended a wedding in Cana being told that his family was standing nearby, it is ers, the ones tracking his wake through Perea that somewhere on the same site. likely that they had some real concerns about what last winter of his life, then across the Jordan River The hills of Lower Galilee’s he was doing, or about how he was going about do-in the vicinity of the place of his baptism and up Netofa Ridge rise to the north ing it. So Mary and the boys waited, curious to see through the twisted hills of the Judean Wilderness in the distance. Today only first-hand how Jesus behaved in public. Were the to Bethany on the Mount of Olives where, with an-intrepid hikers visit the place, stories they were hearing about his miracles and fol-other Mary and Martha and Lazarus, he celebrated approaching either through

the wadi behind or via long

lowing true? And where would it all lead? Galilee his last Shabbat Meal. Two days later it was the Tri-and fertile fields that stretch had had its share of itinerant, charismatic, crowd-umphal Entry, then days of glory and woe in and southward at its base. There collecting preachers. They usually ended up stirring around the Temple. Mary must have been there aren’t any paved roads for the crowds against the established power structures, for it all, then finally Jesus’ betrayal, trials and the miles. Jesus walked to Cana; and it never ended happily. “Jesus!” we can hear cross. By the time Jesus looked down on her hud-so did these students, retracing Mary wanting to say. “Think about what you are dled form from the heights of Golgotha, Mary must his steps across the hills and doing. Come back home to where you’re loved and have been an emotional wreck, without sleep, un-valleys of Lower Galilee. The needed. God can use you there.” able to think or feel or comprehend except to know Cana of pilgrimage and tourist

Love called, but so did a Greater Love. Home that her worst fears for her firstborn son had been buses—the modern town of

folk tend not to treat their prophets very kindly realized. The stigma of an unwed mother, a birth on Kafr Kana lying much closer (maybe they know them too well to let them be the road, the flight to Egypt, the death of her dear to Nazareth—with churches, prophetic; cf. Mt 13:53–58; Lk 4:16–30), and whether it’s husband (may his memory be for a blessing), the re-souvenir shops, restaurants,

paved roads and easy vehicle

through stoning or coaxing, the prophetic voice is jection she took on herself for her son’s denial of a access, offers a very different often silenced. Not this time.

quiet life back home—it was all nothing. Nothing! kind of experience.

My mother and my brothers are the ones who hear Compared to this.

the word of God and do it. Jesus looked down—no crowds remained. It was

Can we hear a tinge of irritation at his family for (Lk 8:21) a busy street and people hurried by, pretending not wanting to hold him back, or a voice of resolve to to notice. Rome was very efficient. Only Mary, a

couple of other women, and John stood close by. Je-

enlarge God’s family whatever the cost (cf. Lk 9:57–62, sus noticed them; his hour was close: 11:27–28, 14:26, 18:28–30; Jn 7:5) ?

So at least at the beginning of his Galilean min- Woman—your son. (Jn 19:26)

istry, Jesus pulled away from his family (“estranged” Then to John,

would be too hard a word for them, but not for the Your mother. (Jn 19:27) others of Nazareth; cf. Lk 4:16–30). But it wasn’t so The beloved disciple became family. for long. Somewhere along the way Jesus’ family by It was the duty of the family to bury one of their blood became part of his family by God. Mary was own. Jesus’ mother, distraught and without means, in Jerusalem with Jesus for the days leading up to his only watched. The body of Jesus was wrapped for

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 183

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

In the first century a.d., the burial and laid in a borrowed tomb (Lk 23:50–55). Certainly there is precedent in Judaism and the Mid-

Aegean port city of Ephesus The evening came and with it Shabbat, a day of rest dle East generally for siblings of the founders of great

was a world center of to remember and celebrate God’s creation of life movements to help continue the cause (e.g. Moses

commerce, trade and Greco- (cf. Ex 20:8–11). For Mary this was the first Shabbat of with Aaron and Miriam, and the Maccabees). As

Roman social life. The city’s death. Her cosmos had ended.

for Mary herself, some traditions remember Mary’s

deity was Artemis (Diana), Early the next morning certain women went to death (or, her final sleep) to have happened in Jeru-

who mythology holds was the the tomb to properly prepare Jesus’ body for burial. salem, on Mount Zion (the location of the Dormi-

Virgin Huntress and twin sister The Gospel writers don’t mention Jesus’ mother tion Abbey), and her burial in a cave in the Kidron

of Apollo. Artemis was the among them, but surely her heart was there if not Valley beneath Gethsemane (first reported in Tran-

goddess of nature, fertile yet her body and soul. But there was no need. The tomb situs Mariae, much of which dates to the second or

eternally chaste and attractively was empty; Jesus was alive (Mt 28:1–10; Mk 16:1–13; third century a.d.). A lesser-held tradition carries

wild. She was worshipped

across the Greco-Roman world Lk 24:1–12; Jn 20:1–18).

Mary with John the Beloved Disciple to Ephesus,

and depicted in art as the After Jesus’ ascension to heaven forty days later, the world center of worship of the Great Mother

many-breasted Great Mother. Mary and her sons could be found with Jesus’ disci-Goddess Artemis, where John became a leader of

in Ephesus All that’s left of her great temple ples in Jerusalem, “with one mind, continually devot-the most important local church in Asia Minor. Var-

massive column and scattered (cf. Acts 19:35) is a ing themselves to prayer” (Acts 1:14). She had been no ious churches in and around Ephesus mark places

stones. According to an early quicker or slower than the rest in trying to figure out where Mary is remembered to have stayed, died and

Christian tradition, the Apostle what the events of the last few weeks—or the last been buried. The Third Ecumenical Council, held at

John brought Mary to Ephesus few years—had meant. But now was a time of great Ephesus in a.d. 431, was called to discuss the nature

where she lived out her days, a transition. Jesus was alive, but in heaven. On earth of the humanity and divinity of Christ, and ended

mother of extraordinary worth he would live in the hearts of those who knew him. with the adoption of a creed stating that Jesus Christ

in the face of the Great Mother The Christian movement began at a cross and was “true God and true man” and that his mother

of Rome. It’s Mary’s legacy that a tomb and an upper room in Jerusalem, then Mary, the Holy Virgin, was Theotokos, “God-bearer.”

survives.

spread across the known world and beyond. Jesus’ Given the importance of the debate and the loca-own family, who at first had been skeptical, came tion of its resolution, it was a logical progression: around. The Book of Acts indicates that one of the Jesus was born of Mary, Mother of God. most prominent men in the Jerusalem church was She had come a long way, at least in the minds James, without specifying which one among several and hearts of the Early Christian Church. Mary and Jameses mentioned in the New Testament he was Joseph sought to live simple, quiet lives, without (Acts 12:17, 15:12–13; cf. Gal 2:9). Some of the earliest pretense or fault, according to the commands of To-church traditions (e.g. the Gospel of Thomas 12, as rah. Then the hand of God intervened, and their well as Eusebius and Epiphanius) naturally point to simple lives became quite extraordinary. But it was James the brother of Jesus, Mary’s next oldest son, in their ability to be used of God, even or perhaps as the first bishop of the Jerusalem church. They add especially when the circumstances of their lives be-that her fourth son, Judas, authored the Epistle of came confusing and unclear, that Mary and Joseph Jude (Jude 1:1) and that Simon, her youngest, also be-showed something even more extraordinary. And in came bishop of the church in Jerusalem. Perhaps so. that they became the mother and father of us all.

184 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas with Biblical © 2013 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

Backgrounds and Culture by Paul H. Wright. ISBN 9781596365346. The atlas gives you but not post on the internet or send via email. Your

Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book with

Clear Plastic Overlays + CD

Deluxe Then and Now® Bible Map Book includes

full-color Bible maps with clear-plastic overlays that

show modern cities and countries. Now you can see

where Bible places are today. This best-selling book

brings new relevance to your studies and teaching,

and compares Bible locations with modern-day sites. .

Book ................... 9781596361638 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF and eBook.

Then & Now® Bible Maps

The bestselling pamphlet Then & Now® Bible Maps!

This full-color, fold-out reference tool contains 17 Bible

maps that show ancient cities and countries in black

with modern-day boundaries marked in red. Then &

Now® Bible Maps is fantastic for comparing places in

the news with places in the Bible.

Pamphlet............9781596361300............$3.99

PowerPoint®. Also available as PDF, in Book, Wall Chart, eBook,

Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas

Then and Now® Bible Map Insert - Ultra-thin atlas

fits in the back of your Bible

The Best “Then and Now” Bible Atlas Ever — It has Features No Other

Then and Now® Bible Maps Insert includes 44 pages

Has! 120 stunning detailed Bible maps, clear plastic overlays of modern

with 8 clear plastic overlays; 22 full color maps; larger

cities and countries so you know where Bible places are today, incredible

print; every major city in the Bible; separate maps for

insights into the lives of 30 important Bible characters, and much more!.

each of Paul’s journeys; a Bible time line; and an index.

This atlas focuses on people – not regions -- and how the geography

5.5 x 8.5 inches (ultra-thin).

affected their lives and decisions.

Insert ................... 9781596362932 ...........$16.99

Book ................................................. 9781596365346 ................. $39.99

Also available as an eBook.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines, and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
