Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

FOREWORD

Archaeology and the Book of Mormon by Dr. Milton R. Hunter unfolds with all the excitement of a well-plotted detective story. Added to its fascination is the knowledge that the author authenticates everything which he includes in the book.

When the Book of Mormon was published, a storm of protest arose throughout the United States. What was this about horses in the Americas? Whoever thought of white Indians? After all, Indians were Indians. With the persistence of the scholar that he is, Dr. Hunter pursued the persistent reports that there were still white Indians in some parts of the Americas. In this book he has verified the fact that there are many white Indians in the Western Hemisphere even to this day. He has also proved that ancestors of these Indians recognized that in their time in the distant past there were white and red Indians—a fact that gained credence with the discovery of the frescoes and murals still extant in archaeological ruins of early cities.

The difficulties the author and his party of two encountered would be enough to discourage all but the most intrepid of men. That they refused to be deterred is further evidence of their courage and determination and stature as historians. Through jungles and deserts, among friendly and unfriendly natives, Dr. Hunter followed the search for unquestionable proof of the existence of the two distinct peoples living in ancient America as well as of the use of the horse in the Western Hemisphere prior to the advent of Columbus.

Success was his almost beyond his fondest aspirations. Accompanied by the only Latter-day Saint guide in Mexico, Jose Davila, and by the skilled photographer, Otto Done, Dr. Hunter survived almost incredible adventures in the successful search for corroborative evidence of the Book of Mormon.

Lest the reader think that the definitive nature of the work may make the book heavy reading—let him be assured that the approach—that of the tourist-traveler and at the same time historian—makes everything assume the freshness of the adventurer's first view of the many cities and the innumerable archaeological finds.

Eminently qualified for this assignment, Dr. Hunter has the training, the intuition, and the interest essential to assure success. Dr. Herbert E. Bolton, director of the Bancroft Library and chairman of the history department of the University of California, said, "Hunter, I won't let you throw your career away on some little Mormon seminary in Utah. You have the makings of one of America's great historians. I haven't spent these past years in order for you to expend this training fruitlessly. If you will change your mind, we will secure for you a proper place in a great university where expectations, and the training you have received, may be realized." [^1]

Since Dr. Hunter has always placed the Church above personal recognition, he returned to Utah as a member of the faculty of the LDS Institute at Logan, Utah. Contrary to what Dr. Bolton feared, Dr. Hunter has continued his alert interest in history, and has published sixteen books as well as innumerable articles in the leading historical journals.

He has been so well recognized for his work that he was sought not only once but twice to write articles for encyclopedias—articles which won the plaudits of the editors. In addition Dr. Hunter has been called upon to write the yearbook articles for an encyclopedia for the past four years.

With all of this activity, Dr. Hunter has promulgated Church doctrine since his return to Utah. His call to the First Council of the Seventy has enhanced his feeling of responsibility to use his talents for the furtherance of the work of the Church. Those who have worked closely with Dr. Hunter cannot help feeling that the way has been opened for his obtaining the needed materials for this stimulation and authoritative volume.

Archaeology and the Book of Mormon deserves wide acceptance both for its fascinating information and for its definitive approach.

December 15, 1956

Salt Lake City, Utah

MARBA C. JOSEPHSON

Associate Managing Editor

The Improvement Era

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. G. Homer Durham, "Milton R. Hunter," Improvement Era (Salt Lake City, May, 1945), p. 241.
