Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Book of Mormon has stood and will continue to stand on its own merits; however, certain people demand scientific evidences. To satisfy their demands, an attempt has been made in this book to correlate certain recent archaeological and anthropological findings with related Book of Mormon claims and present the newly discovered evidences herein.

This book expresses my personal views and findings. While I assume all and full responsibility for it and all of its parts, I am indebted to many people for their helpful suggestions and assistance rendered in its production. I take this opportunity to acknowledge my deep obligation and sincere appreciation to them.

I express sincere gratitude to the First Presidency of the Church and to President Joseph Fielding Smith for affording me the opportunity to visit Mexico and Central America on mission tours and on other occasions, thereby making it possible for me to visit and study numerous archaeological sites and collections of relics in museums.

Deep appreciation is extended to Elder N. G. Morgan, Sr., to Elder Edwin Whitney, to Dr. J. LeRoy Kimball—all of Salt Lake City—and to Elder Merland Clark of Idaho Falls, who rendered valuable assistance and encouragement in helping to make possible the collecting of numerous archaeological photographs, many of which are reproduced in this volume.

Special recognition and appreciation are extended to Jose Davila, who was hired to serve as guide on three of the archaeological trips I took to Mexico and Central America, and also to Otto Done, who was hired to accompany us on one of the tours and serve in the capacity of photographer. They were both agreeable traveling companions and did commendable work.

Elder Toby Pingree arranged for transportation for us in Guatemala and rendered various other services to make possible the completion of our work. His mission president, Gordon M. Romney, and Sister Romney were generous with their time and hospitable to us. For all these kindnesses the writer is grateful.

Deep appreciation is expressed to President and Sister Claudious Bowman of the Mexican Mission for their hospitality and kindness and for taking me to some of the archaeological sites. Also, President and Sister Edgar L. Wagner of the Central American Mission were very co-operative on my last trip to Central America.

I express sincere thanks to Robert Bruce of Sapulpa, Oklahoma, for providing me with a number of photographs of the Lacandon Indians, taken by himself and Barbara Sykes, and graciously permitting me to publish them in this volume. I also extend gratitude to Mrs. Ballard Hadman of Ketchikan, Alaska, for providing me with photographs of white, fullblood Haida Indians.

During the past two or three years, a multitude of people, in letters and in private conversations, have encouraged me to continue my research in the field of archaeology and the study of the Book of Mormon. Dozens of them have sent me clippings from newspapers and magazines, telling of archaeological findings. Some of them have informed me where valuable information could be secured which was pertinent to the general theme. Others have sent me important archaeological photographs. I am sorry that space will not permit special mention of each of them; but I am grateful to them all. Acknowledgment is made, however, to Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve and Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of the Seventy, who have extended numerous courtesies and encouragement while I have been working on this material. Appreciation is expressed to Dr. Ariel L. Crowley of Idaho City and to Elder Thomas Stuart Ferguson of Orinda, California, outstanding students in this field, and to Carl Erickson of Monte Vista, Colorado. Also gratitude is expressed to Elder J. Fred Evans of Council Bluffs, Iowa, for providing me with several important books on archaeology and an abundance of information which he had collected.

I extend deep appreciation to Elder Harold B. Lee and Elder Richard L. Evans, both of the Council of the Twelve, for reading the part of the manuscript which was published in The Improvement Era and offering numerous helpful suggestions. Also, I am grateful for the co-operation and suggestions given by members of The Improvement Era staff, especially Elder Doyle L. Green, Sister Marba C. Josephson, and Sister Elizabeth J. Moffitt. Sister Josephson read the entire manuscript and offered many valuable suggestions. She also read the proofs and wrote the foreword. I appreciate all that she did.

I acknowledge my deep obligation for the helpful suggestions of Elder Alva H. Parry, manager of the Deseret Book Company, and Elder Thomas S. Monson and Elder S. Ross Fox of the Deseret News Press, for giving unstintedly of their time and counsel in arranging for printing of the book and publishing it. Also those who worked on the production of this volume at the Deseret News Press co-operated wholeheartedly. I appreciate the work done by Miss Bonnie Joe Kesler, my secretary, who typed all the material and willingly gave her services in any way possible.

I owe a special debt of gratitude to my wife, Ferne G. Hunter, and express deep appreciation to her. The fullest credit for the completion of this book rightfully goes to her. Also, she assisted me in numerous ways throughout the entire preparation of the manuscript, offered numerous helpful suggestions, and she and Sister Marba C. Josephson did all the proofreading in preparing the material for publication. Without her help the book would not have been completed and published.

MILTON R. HUNTER

December 15, 1956

Salt Lake City, Utah
