Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 1

THE CHICHEN ITZA HORSE

VISITING CHICHEN ITZA, YUCATAN, 1954

The sun was only three or four hours above the horizon on the morning of January 27, 1954, when President and Sister Claudious Bowman of the Mexican Mission, Jose Davila (Ho-zay Dav'ee-la), our Mexican guide, Sister Hunter and I, arrived at Chichen Itza (Chee-chen Eet-za), Yucatan. As we approached this famous archaeological site, the first impressive structure to meet our gaze was the massive and beautiful pyramid sometimes referred to as the "Temple of Kukulcan" (Koo-kul-con) and at other times called El Castillo—The Castle.

Eagerly we climbed the steep stairs or steps which lead to the top of the pyramid eighty-two feet above the ground. Situated on the summit of this massive structure is an impressive temple twelve feet high. On its walls and door jambs we observed and photographed the bearded men bedecked with headdresses of long-flowing quetzal feathers, as well as the serpents which decorate the door jambs and other portions of the temple. These elaborate symbols of Quetzalcoatl were very impressive to us.

The Chichen Itza archeaological structures are divided into three different sections. One group of buildings is called the North Zone. The second group is designated as the Middle Zone; and the third, with its superb architecture of the Old Maya Empire or Classic Period, is named Old Chichen Itza. It is located in the jungles a few miles south of the other two groups of archaeological structures.

Throughout the entire day we visited one important archaeological structure after another at Chichen Itza. Among the most interesting remains in the North Zone of this famous archaeological site, in addition to the Temple of Kukulcan, are the unusual "Ball Court" with its superb acoustic qualities, the "Temple of the Tigers," the "Temple of the Eagles," the "Tomb of the Chacmool," the "Temple of the Warriors," and adjacent to it, the "Thousand Columns." In addition to these perhaps the Sacred Well or Cenote (Sa-no-tay), where the ancient inhabitants of Chichen Itza sacrificed their most beautiful maidens to the rain god Chac, arouses more curiosity in the minds of tourists than does anything else at Chichen Itza.

VISITING THE MIDDLE ZONE

We had visited all the places of interest in the North Zone by 3:00 p.m. During the remainder of the afternoon we visited the archaeological structures of the Middle Zone. We climbed to the top of the pyramid called "The Tomb of the High Priest," and looked down into the deep shaft which goes from the top straight down into the center of the pyramid. We recalled that Edward Herbert Thompson, an American who purchased the archaeological site of Chichen Itza and dredged the Sacred Well to verify the tradition of its having been used by the ancient Mayas for human sacrificial purposes, had crawled down into that hole and soon found that he had entered the home of a boa constrictor approximately fifteen feet in length.

We next visited the "House of the Three Brothers," the home in which Indian tradition claims three brothers (white men) had lived for many years and taught the people much of their culture. Members of the Church of Jesus Christ are prone to think that these men may be identified with "the three Nephites" told about in the Book of Mormon.

We next came to the Caracol or "Observatory." Here the Maya priest-astronomers during the past ages studied the heavenly bodies and attained a knowledge of them which has astounded modern scholars. The ancient Maya Observatory stands along the east side of a quadrangle, which is surrounded on three sides by archaeological structures.

The "Nunnery," an archaeological building of gigantic proportions, runs east and west along the south side of the quadrangle. This is the largest of all the archaeological ruins at Chichen Itza. It contains several rooms. Those who named it the Nunnery thought that Indian women, who could have filled a position in the religion of the Itza Mayas comparable to nuns in the Catholic Church, may have lived in it. Others have maintained that perhaps the girls who were selected to be offered as sacrifices in the Sacred Well may have lived in the Nunnery for several months' time in preparation for the holy sacrifices.

Near the corner of the Nunnery stands the Church or Cathedral. It is a very beautiful, ornate building. The photograph shows two Maya girls sitting to the east end of the Nunnery and behind the Church. Perhaps a hundred yards from the Nunnery, surrounded by jungle vegetation, we visited a building called Akabdzib or "Dark Writing." An important archaeological structure, called "The Temple of the Wall Panels or Plaques," stands adjacent to the southeast corner of the Observatory. It is one of the buildings situated along the east side of the quadrangle.

CARVING DEPICTING A HORSE

As the sun neared the western horizon, we came around the corner of the Temple of the Plaques. Jose Davila explained: "As you will observe, a section on each end of this building, called the wall panel or plaque, is covered with carvings of animals and birds which were familiar to the people who inhabited this ancient city." Then, pointing to the carvings on one of the stones, he continued: "This particular carving is a clear representation of a horse; and to the side of the horse stands a bearded man."

Since I was well acquainted with the claim made by archaeologists, historians, and others at the time of the publishing of the Book of Mormon in 1830 that there had never been horses in ancient America and since I knew that that viewpoint had been altered by archaeological discoveries during the past hundred years to the idea that horses had never existed on the Western Hemisphere during the age of white man, I immediately became unusually interested and highly excited.

HORSES AND THE BOOK OF MORMON

From the days of the publishing of the Book of Mormon, its claim of domesticated horses in ancient America has been a point of contention between those who accepted that record as being true and accurate and those who disbelieved it; and now directly in front of us on the wall of that ancient building at Chichen Itza, Yucatan, plainly visible to tourists and archaeologists, a representation of a horse was clearly depicted. There immediately before our eyes was new and valuable Book of Mormon evidence.

"By the gift and power of God," [^1] the Prophet Joseph Smith translated from the Jaredite account a statement which claims that those ancient Americans during the days of King Emer ". . . had horses . . . which were useful unto man, . . ." [^2] Several statements scattered throughout the Book of Mormon make it clear that the Nephites and Lamanites also possessed horses throughout the entire course of their history, at least to the time of the destruction of the Nephite nation. [^3] For example, we read: "And it came to pass that the Nephites did till the land, and raise . . . many horses." [^4] In regards to the Lamanites using horses and chariots, the ancient record claims that Ammon fed King Lamoni's horses and then prepared them and his chariots that the Lamanite ruler might attend a feast given in the city of Nephi by his father, the head king over all the Lamanites. [^5] We read also in the Book of Mormon that a little over a hundred years after the mention was made of horses and chariots owned by Lamoni, a Lamanite king, the Nephite historian stated that Lachoneus, the Nephite ruler, had all of his people bring their horses and chariots to one central gathering place in preparation for war. [^6]

Thus, this record of the inhabitants of ancient America contains the foregoing facts in direct opposition to the claims that frequently have been made by some historians, archaeologists, anthropologists, and other scientists that there were no horses in ancient America at the time of its discovery, nor had there been during man's sojourn here.

Our guide explained: "Some of the most outstanding Maya scholars and archaeologists, such as Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson [^7] and Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley, [^8] date the erection of most of these buildings at Chichen Itza at approximately 1,000 A.D. If their dating is correct, in all probability this representation of the horse was carved about five hundred years before Columbus discovered America. It stands to reason that if these ancient Maya people had had no horses to observe they could not have carved a likeness of one on this building."

We all agreed that the fact that a likeness of a horse was carved on the wall of one of the ancient buildings at Chichen Itza many years before the Spaniards came to this land with their horses supplies new and important evidence to sustain further the truthfulness of the claims made in the Book of Mormon relative to horses; and so this representation constitutes what might be considered by truth seekers a noteworthy evidence sustaining the claims made by the ancient Nephite historians.

It was Jose Davila, five and one-half years a branch president of the Puebla (Pueb-la) Branch, Mexico, and the only registered Latter-day Saint guide in that country—therefore the one best qualified to show our people around Mexico—who informed me as to the location of the likeness of this carved horse, and since it was he who directed me to it, I wish to acknowledge this fact.

A more complete discussion on horses in ancient America will be presented in a later volume.

PLANS FOR A TOUR

Unfortunately, my photograph of the horse was taken shortly before sundown, and upon my arrival at Salt Lake City I found that it was a very poor one. I suppose that my being overexcited at seeing what could be new Book of Mormon evidence caused me to be a little overanxious and turn too much light on my camera. During the following several months' time I tried in vain to get others visiting Yucatan to take the photograph for me. Finally in the fall of 1954, at the suggestion of a friend who is the resident manager of a travel agency, I was invited to direct a tour to Mexico during my Christmas vacation and take the picture of the horse myself. He volunteered to outline the tour. This opened a wonderful possibility. Thereupon the details of the arrangements were completed, and I invited twenty people who I thought would be interested to accompany me in touring Book of Mormon lands.

The trip would take us to Guatemala, Yucatan in Mexico, and throughout various other states of that country. The story of our tour will be told in the following chapter.

A three weeks' tour was planned. After making the itinerary, we found that there were a few places in which I have been intensely interested for years to which the regular airlines did not go; for example, Bonampak (Bo'nam-pak), discovered in 1946 in the extreme southern jungles of Mexico, where likenesses of dark and light peoples were painted on the walls of one of the buildings, had been of extreme interest to me. I wanted to see these paintings which could be interpreted as an indication of Nephites and Lamanites having once lived in ancient America. Also, I was very anxious to visit Palenque (Pa-len'-kay) where the cross of Palenque and other crosses have been found, which connote that the inhabitants of that ancient city had been worshipers of the "White Bearded God," who tradition claims had visited their ancestors. Latter-day Saints identify him as Jesus Christ. The belief in this God is often indicated by a cross to be found among the archaeological ruins. Since Dr. Alberto Ruz (Rooz) discovered the Egyptian-type burial at Palenque on June 15, 1953, my urge had been intensified to go there and study firsthand those great discoveries.

In the jungles of northern Guatemala (Gwa-ta-ma'la) such places as Flores (Flor'-ays), the home of the Itza Mayas following the conquest of Chichen Itza by the Spaniards, Uaxactun and Tikal, two of the earliest Maya archaeological sites known on the Western Hemisphere, and other early archaeological sites such as Copan and Quirigua were all considered by me as places of prime importance which I must visit to further my research in the important field of archaeology and the Book of Mormon.

Thereupon plans were made for me to remain in Mexico and Central America after the members of the touring party returned to Salt Lake City, to take Jose Davila with me, and to visit these and others of the archaeological sites. Our purposes were to take pictures of various archaeological remains and bring them back for Church use, and for me to become better informed regarding the archaeological ruins, and also to gather material to write on the subject of "Archaeology and the Book of Mormon."

Following the return of the touring party members at the close of the three weeks' tour, the decision was made to take Otto Done, an expert photographer, with Jose Davila and myself to all of the principal archaeological sites in Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and Yucatan for the purpose of taking moving pictures for the Church. These tours will be discussed in chapters five and six.

RETURNING HOME

When first making preparations for the tour, I told Sister Hunter that I was going to be gone from home for three weeks' time. After finding that we couldn't visit all the archaeological sites on the main tour, I told her that we would be gone four weeks. After arriving in Mexico and working out a more accurate and complete itinerary on the length of time it would take to go into the jungles, I wrote home and suggested that I would be gone five weeks. As our archaeological work progressed, it became apparent that it would consume even more time, and so I informed my wife that it would take six weeks. Thereupon she wrote to me and said, "Milton, there are some ruins in our back yard which I think you should come home to see"; and so after six weeks and two days' time, on February 5, 1955, I arrived home to see them—an unusual but effective way to bring a husband home.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Note: Dr. Frederick J. Turner, the originator of the frontier thesis in American history, defined the American frontier as the geographical area bordering on the land of the red men. In the westward migration of the American colonists, "the frontier was the edge of the wave—the meeting point between savagery and civilization." Turner, The Frontier in American History, pp. 3-4.
[^2] Ether 10:18-29.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price.
[^4] Frederic I. Carpenter, Ralph Waldo Emerson, pp. 79-80.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 10-11.
[^6] Ibid., p. 88.
[^7] Henry A. Wallace, in an address delivered before the New York Times National Book Fair. Reprinted in the Salt Lake Tribune (November 8, 1937), p. 13.
[^8] Marcus Bach, Faith and My Friends (New York, 1951), pp. 255-256. Italics supplied by the writer.
