Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 2

JOSEPH SMITH AND THE BOOK OF MORMON

JOSEPH SMITH AND THE BOOK OF MORMON

On March 26, 1830, a book entitled the Book of Mormon was published at Palmyra, a small, frontier town in western New York. [^1] Speaking in a general sense, it would seem that there would have been nothing unusual about the publishing of a book, since an untold number of them came from the press in America each year; but this particular book and all the circumstances connected with it were unique. As far as the writer knows, no other book in the history of the world had had so many events connected with it which could be considered as being in the realm of the supernatural as had the records from which the Book of Mormon was translated. From the time the first prophet-historian in ancient times began the recording of the history of his people on the metal plates until Joseph Smith published his translation of the contents of the ancient records, event after event occurred within the realm of what people regard as being miraculous. Back in ancient times on the Western Hemisphere, acting in accordance with direct revelations from the Lord, holy prophets had recorded on metal plates ("gold plates") the history of their people, including the revelations received from the Lord and the teachings of the religious leaders. The records were completed in 421 A.D. Under divine protection they were preserved to be brought forth in the latter days as a new witness to Jesus Christ and thereby to stand as a testimony supporting the teachings of the Holy Bible. The last prophet-historian was made the custodian of the ancient, sacred records.

During the night of September 21-22, 1823, an angel stood beside Joseph Smith's bed and told the young man that his name was Moroni. He announced that he was the last writer of the religious history of an ancient race of people called Nephites. He said that the history had been recorded on metal plates and that they were hidden in a hill not far from the Smith farm. During the past fourteen hundred years, Moroni had been in charge of those sacred records, and now he had been sent from the presence of God to tell Joseph Smith about them. He informed the Prophet that in due time he would be given the ancient records and endowed with power from on high to translate their contents into English. Then the people throughout the world could learn about God's dealings with the great civilizations which lived upon the American continents in ancient times. The heavenly messenger conversed with Joseph Smith throughout the entire night and again at the sacred depository the following day.

After Joseph had met the Angel Moroni each year for four years at the place where the records were deposited, on September 22, 1827, the angel gave the Prophet the records and instructions relative to them. Joseph Smith was also given some curious instruments known as the Urim and Thummim, instruments which had been used by prophets in ancient times. Through the use of the Urim and Thummim, the application of a sufficient amount of faith, prayers, righteousness, and hard study, and "by the gift and power of God," Joseph Smith translated the ancient American records and published his translation under the title of the Book of Mormon.

BRIEF NARRATIVE OF BOOK OF MORMON HISTORY

The Book of Mormon tells the story of a group of people who—under commandments from the Lord and the leadership of a great prophet—were brought to the Western Hemisphere from the Tower of Babel. They were called Jaredites. This people established a very superior civilization which flourished for nearly twenty-five hundred years. During certain periods of their history, the Jaredites reached heights in civilization and culture which few peoples in the world have attained. [^2] Finally the Jaredites were exterminated in a terrible war. Their history is told in the book of Ether, which appears toward the latter part of the Book of Mormon.

About B.C. 600 another group of people called Nephites, and shortly thereafter a third group, called Mulekites, were brought from Jerusalem to America by holy prophets who were directed by the Lord. About B.C. 200 they merged together and lived thereafter as one people. For approximately one thousand years—B.C. 600 to A.D. 400—these people flourished in the New World, attaining great heights in civilization. The major part of the Book of Mormon tells their story.

The Nephites and Mulekites were white and beautiful peoples of Israelitic origin. However, because of the wickedness of a portion of the first group of colonists, the Lord placed the curse of a dark skin on a part of them, which curse was retained by their descendants. Those who had dark skins and all the white people who joined with them were called Lamanites.

About A.D. 400 the Lamanites exterminated the Nephite nation in a horrible war. Many of the Lamanites, and also the Nephites who deserted their people and joined the darker-skinned race, escaped destruction and continued to inhabit the Western Hemisphere. Following the close of Nephite recorded history, Mongolians, Vikings, and perhaps small groups of wanderers from other lands, came to the Americas and intermarried—to a greater or less extent—with the descendants of Book of Mormon peoples. Their posterity constituted the numerous aboriginal tribes found in the New World by the Europeans.

When Christopher Columbus discovered America in 1492, he thought he had discovered the East Indies, and so the bronze-colored people found here were named Indians. This name has been applied to all the aborigines of America regardless of how dark or light-colored their skins may have been, even to the white descendants of the Nephites.

REACTIONS TOWARD THE BOOK OF MORMON

From the time Joseph Smith announced his First Vision—the visitation of the Eternal Father and his Only Begotten Son in the Sacred Grove when Joseph was only fourteen years of age—to the present time, there has been no neutral ground when Joseph Smith was being considered. His claims are so unusual, so vital, and so far-reaching that people either accept them in their entirety without reservations or flatly reject them.

When I was attending the University of California in 1933, the foregoing fact was drawn very vividly to my attention. I was taking a class under the direction of Dr. Frederic L. Paxson, one of America's outstanding historians. The subject for discussion that particular day was "Mormon Colonization of the Great West." Professor Paxson introduced the discussion with the following remarks: "Whether they belong to the Mormon Church or not, historians are in agreement when Brigham Young's outstanding achievements as one of the world's greatest colonizers are being considered. But the same fact doesn't hold true in regard to Joseph Smith. Many people believe implicitly all the claims he made, including the appearance of numerous heavenly personages to him and the miraculous way in which he received the gold plates from which he translated the Book of Mormon. It is no reflection on people's intelligence to believe those things; in fact, some of the most intelligent people that I have ever met were devout members of the Latter-day Saint Church and had strong convictions regarding Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon. On the other hand, there are many intelligent people who do not believe the claims made by Joseph Smith. I hope to be counted an intelligent person, and I do not believe those things. There is no middle ground upon which to stand when the claims of Joseph are being considered."

When the Book of Mormon first came from the press, many devout, intellectual, and faithful people—upon reading the book and learning of its origin—attained a positive conviction of its truthfulness. And since that time hundreds of thousands of people have received what Latter-day Saints term "a testimony of the gospel." They have possessed a firm conviction that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God and that he had received numerous heavenly manifestations and revelations from the Lord, just as did Moses, Abraham, and others of the ancient Hebrew prophets. They have accepted fully Joseph Smith's account of the origin of the Book of Mormon, and they have believed that it contained the word of God equal in authority and divinity to the teachings of Christ found in the New Testament. When they have received that strong testimony through the power of the Holy Ghost, they have become members of the Church of Jesus Christ, believing with all their hearts that they were recipients of the true gospel of the Master which had been restored to earth through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. They have accepted the assignments received through revelations to preach the restored gospel to the world, to do temple work for their departed ancestors, and to build Zion, or the kingdom of God, in preparation for the millennial reign of the Savior.

When the Book of Mormon was first published, certain other people not only disbelieved Joseph Smith's story regarding its origin, but some of them also ridiculed him and even violently persecuted him. Finally they murdered him. Book after book has come from the press since 1830 in which the authors have endeavored to prove that Joseph Smith was a liar, a fraud, and a false prophet, and that the Book of Mormon was not what it and the Prophet claimed it to be. The arguments presented by those writers in general defeated the arguments presented by one another. The result has been that all of their works have come to naught. The evil results of their efforts have vanished as the dews on earth's verdure vanish in the presence of the rising sun. Thus, the Book of Mormon stands today in higher repute than ever before in the history of the Church. None of its claims have been proved to be false.

A third group of people have been completely indifferent to Joseph Smith's claims and the Book of Mormon itself. That group must be classed with those people who have openly rejected the Prophet's declarations. Many among them are outstanding anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians, men who have a natural interest in the story of ancient America and the origin of the American Indians. The Book of Mormon contains the most complete and accurate account of those subjects of any book in the world; and yet many of the very people who one would think would be eager to read the Book of Mormon and evaluate its contents completely ignore it.

It is a fact that a vast majority of the people in the world who have had opportunities to study the Book of Mormon have turned their backs on that book without even giving it a hearing because of its miraculous origin, and yet they claimed to be Christians who readily accepted the ministration of angels in ancient times to the Hebrew prophets. The world is more densely populated with God's children today than at any other time in history, and yet these people who reject the Book of Mormon without even looking at it have done so because they have thought that it was unreasonable to believe that the same God who sent angels to visit the ancient prophets would be interested enough in his numerous children who constitute the human family today to send angels to prophets for their good. The very thought of a nineteenth century American prophet—one who proclaimed that he had received numerous heavenly manifestations, even a vision of the Eternal Father and his Only Begotten Son, one who claimed that he had been given ancient records by an angel, and furthermore one who openly declared that he had received many revelations from heaven which he published as new scriptures [^3]—was incompatible with their thinking. They maintained that such things happened in ancient Israel, but they could not happen in modern times.

In an address delivered before the senior class of the Divinity School of Harvard University on July 15, 1838, Ralph Waldo Emerson, one of America's most intellectual citizens, and one of the greatest thinkers of Joseph Smith's time, described the religious conditions in the United States and yearned for modern revelations. Part of his description could aptly apply to certain people's attitude toward the Book of Mormon. To quote Emerson:

. . . the need was never greater for new revelation than now. . . . [There has been a] universal decay and now almost death of faith in society. The soul is not preached. The Church seems to totter to its fall, almost all life extinct. . . .

Men have come to speak of revelation as somewhat long ago given and done, as if God were dead. The injury to faith throttles the preacher; and the godliest of institutions becomes an uncertain and inarticulate voice. [^4]

In moments when gleams of prophetic light flashed across Emerson's mind, he predicted what Latter-day Saints could easily believe to be fulfilled in the person of the Prophet Joseph Smith. To quote:

We are now so far from the road of truth, that religious teachers dispute and hate each other, . . .

The foregoing generations beheld God and nature face to face; we, through their eyes. . . . Why should not we have a poetry and philosophy of insight and not of tradition, and a religion by revelation to us? . . . [^5]

I look for the hour when the supreme Beauty which ravished the souls of those Eastern men, and chiefly of those Hebrews, and through their lips spoke oracles to all times, shall speak in the West also. . . . I look for the new Teacher that shall follow so far those shining laws that he shall see them come full circle; . . . and shall show that the Right, the Duty, is one thing with Science, with Beauty, and with joy. [^6]

CERTAIN NON-CHURCH MEMBERS' EVALUATION OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

There are also other people who accept the claims made by the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon as being historically true; however, they are not willing to leave father and mother, house and land, business and social position, wife and child to become affiliated with the true Church of Jesus Christ. I shall illustrate this point by describing an experience I had while attending the University of California. I was doing graduate work under Dr. Herbert E. Bolton, one of America's greatest historians and one of the best teachers that I have ever had. One day he was giving a lecture to approximately three hundred students regarding a heavenly visitation which an Indian in Mexico was reported to have had which resulted in the building of the cathedral of the Virgin of Guadalupe. Suddenly he shifted subjects in the middle of his lecture and told the story of Joseph Smith's First Vision. Then he delineated the numerous appearances of the Angel Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. He told all of those things as clearly and accurately as the Prophet had recorded them; and then he said: "Since I am a historian, I must take the word of people regarding their own personal experiences; and so I accept Joseph Smith's account of his visions and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon as being historically accurate and true. I see no other logical explanation to account for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the establishing of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." However, Dr. Bolton never joined the Church.

During the century and a quarter that have elapsed since the Book of Mormon was first published, continuously that volume has been one of America's best sellers, perhaps being exceeded only by the Bible. Also, it has been translated and published in many of the languages of the world. It has taken its place in American religious literature as one of the most broadly distributed, widely read, and most influential volumes that have been produced on this continent. Each year sees a marked increase in the number of copies published and distributed. In regard to the influence of the Book of Mormon on the American religious scene, Henry A. Wallace, former United States Secretary of Agriculture (a non-Mormon), concluded:

Of all the American religious books of the nineteenth century it seems probable that the Book of Mormon was the most powerful. It reached perhaps only one percent of the people of the United States, but it affected this one percent so powerfully and lastingly that all the people of the United States have been affected, especially by its contributions in opening up one of our great frontiers. [^7]

Dr. Marcus Bach, claimed to be one of the foremost authorities on the lesser-known religions in America, in his efforts to become acquainted with the history and teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, purchased a copy of the Book of Mormon. He wrote his appraisal of that book as follows:

So I paged through this American Bible wondering how many Protestants had ever seen a copy or read a verse out of any of the fifteen books. Wherever these auxiliary scriptures came from, whatever they were, they surpassed in magnitude and content my most extravagant expectations. The style was Biblical, the references to Holy Writ were voluminous, the ancient story was tremendously involved. It was not the kind of book a man would read for pastime or write for profit. It was solemn and ponderous and heavy as the plates on which it was inscribed. No Vermont schoolboy wrote this, and no Presbyterian preacher tinkered with these pages!

After wading through the First Book of Nephi, I was ready to settle for the miracle of Cumorah and let it go at that. It would surely be convenient to say, "The plates for this religious tome were hidden by an angel, discovered by a young man whom the Lord had chosen and translated by means of magic spectacles." That, of course, was exactly what the Book of Mormon itself implied. Mormon, one of God's elect, was the father of Moroni, and together they were the engravers and concealers of the ancient manuscript. [^8]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Note: Dr. Frederick J. Turner, the originator of the frontier thesis in American history, defined the American frontier as the geographical area bordering on the land of the red men. In the westward migration of the American colonists, "the frontier was the edge of the wave—the meeting point between savagery and civilization." Turner, The Frontier in American History, pp. 3-4.
[^2] Ether 10:18-29.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price.
[^4] Frederic I. Carpenter, Ralph Waldo Emerson, pp. 79-80.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 10-11.
[^6] Ibid., p. 88.
[^7] Henry A. Wallace, in an address delivered before the New York Times National Book Fair. Reprinted in the Salt Lake Tribune (November 8, 1937), p. 13.
[^8] Marcus Bach, Faith and My Friends (New York, 1951), pp. 255-256. Italics supplied by the writer.
