Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 3

BOOK OF MORMON EVIDENCES

EVIDENCES SUSTAINING THE BOOK OF MORMON INCREASING

Since the day that the Angel Moroni gave the gold plates to Joseph Smith from which the Prophet translated and published the Book of Mormon, a vast amount of marvelous evidences has accumulated. These evidences sustain the divine authenticity and truthfulness of that holy ancient record. Perhaps there has been as much new, valid evidence sustaining the claims of the Book of Mormon come forth during the past quarter of a century as the combined amount which accumulated during the previous hundred years. This vast accumulation of evidences—some of which speak as it were from the dust and others from the ancient past—continue to bear witness to the divinity of this sacred book and to its truthfulness.

Beyond a shadow of doubt, the Book of Mormon is the word of God, a divine and sacred book, preserved by the Lord and his holy angels to come forth in the latter days as a new witness to Jesus Christ and the gospel which he proclaimed.

We shall now discuss some of the astounding Book of Mormon evidences, listing them under three major headings: first—archaeological evidences; second—writings of sixteenth century Indian historians; and third—writings of sixteenth century Catholic missionaries who secured their information firsthand from the Indians.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCES SUPPORTING BOOK OF MORMON CLAIMS

American archaeology had its birth shortly before the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith. John Lloyd Stephens had visited most of the Central American countries, and the states of Chiapas (Cheeop'-us) and Yucatan in Mexico. After he had come back to the United States, he had written a glowing report of the beautiful temples, pyramids, and other archaeological remains which dotted the jungles of Central America and Mexico. [^1] From the time of the publishing of Stephens' two books, the governments of Mexico, Central America, and portions of South America, and particularly archaeological organizations from the United States and her neighbors to the south, have spent vast amounts of money, and have exerted an untold amount of effort at numerous of these archaeological sites. Also, considerable work has been done in reconstructing the ancient buildings. In reconstructing these marvelous pyramids, temples, and other archaeological ruins, the archaeologists and their helpers have placed the stones as nearly as possible in place as they were when the ancient Americans first erected the buildings. The result is that today the country from north of Mexico City southward to Chile is literally dotted with numerous archaeological sites, many of which have been excavated by archaeologists.

In 1939-1940, Dr. Matthew W. Stirling of the Smithsonian Institution conducted an archaeological expedition into the jungles of southern Mexico. The expedition was sponsored by the National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian Institution. In the jungles of western Tabasco, situated near the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, Dr. Stirling excavated at a famous archaeological site named La Venta. The people who had lived there in ancient times and had erected the archaeological structures were the Olmecs (Ol-mecs). It is possible that they could have been the Mulekites of Book of Mormon times. [^2] Dr. Stirling is credited with dating the Olmec culture from B.C. 450 to A.D. 600. [^3] Miguel Covarrubias, speaking the views of the Mexican archaeologists, places La Venta when it ". . . served as the religious—and perhaps political—capital of the Olmec civilization" [^4] at A.D. 300. [^5] According to an article which appeared recently in the National Geographic Magazine:

These people had developed a knowledge of mathematics and apparently of hieroglyphics, and were using an excellent pre-Mayan calendar. Their citizens included some first-rate architects, engineers, artists, and jewelers. Incredibly, they managed to move single stones weighing as much as 30 tons to La Venta from quarries some 60 miles away. [^6]

In 1939 Dr. Matthew W. Stirling made an archaeological find at La Venta of great importance. It was a carving of a statue of a man which reminds one of the usual portrayal of "Uncle Sam." [^7] This figure had a full flowing beard and an aquiline nose, constituting a good representation of a Hebrew priest. Covarrubias described the figure as one representing a person having ". . .surprising pronounced Semitic features." [^8] Stirling points out that the figure is depicted as wearing ". . . shoes with odd-pointed, upturned toes." [^9] Neither the shoes nor the face and flowing beard of "Uncle Sam" could have been a representation of a red-skinned Indian, [^10] but, as stated, it strongly resembles a Jewish priest of pre-Christian times.

Dr. Stirling also found in southwestern Mexico at Izapa (Ee-sap'-a) a stone covered with carvings which have been interpreted by Dr. M. Wells Jakeman of Brigham Young University as a representation of Lehi's dream of the "Tree of Life," recorded in 1 Nephi 8:1-38. To quote Dr. Jakeman:

. . . the resemblance of this sculpture to the Book of Mormon account cannot be accidental. . . It practically establishes . . . an historical connection . . . between the ancient Central American priests responsible for the sculpture and the Lehi people of the Book of Mormon! Indeed, the accurate and detailed knowledge of Lehi's vision . . . displayed by these priests in this sculpture, can be explained only by their identification as an actual group of the Lehi people. [^11]

The marvelous archaeological finds at Palenque (Pa-len'-kay) in the Usumacinta (You-soo-ma-seen'-ta) Valley—especially the crosses and the Egyptian-type burials, the famous ruins of the Old Mayan Empire in Honduras and Guatemala—especially those at Tikal (Tee-kal), Copan (Co-pan'), Uaxactun (Wash-ack-toon'), and Quirigua (Kee-ree-gwa'), all bear testimony to the Book of Mormon claims that high civilizations flourished in ancient America. The late Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley maintained that the Maya history had its beginnings as early as B.C. 300 [^12] and that pre-Maya history extends back to about B.C. 3,000. [^13] The former date would reach in the earlier part of Nephite history, and the latter would extend to the beginnings of Jaredite history.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCES IN THE ANDEAN REGION

When one considers all of the wonderful archaeological remains in Mexico, Honduras, Guatemala, and other Central American countries, and also carefully studies those of South America, one comes to the conclusion that those of the northern hemisphere do not surpass the marvelous archaeological ruins found in Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Colombia. Numerous buildings have been excavated and some of them reconstructed. Thousands of graves have been opened and from them have been taken the most beautiful and artistic workings in gold, silver, copper, and precious stones of various kinds. [^14] Also, from those graves have been taken the most finely woven, beautiful laces, the most gorgeous wool and cotton cloths, and "fine-twined linen." In fact, various archaeologists maintain that the world has known no races of people who surpassed the predecessors of the Inca civilization in these various handicrafts. For example, A. Hyatt Verrill states:

Despite the high attainment in art, engineering, astronomy and government, which were reached by the Aztecs, the Incas, the Mayas, and others, in a way these unknown, forgotten races of South America were more remarkable, and were unquestionably far more ancient. From the Chibcha (Cheebcha) district in Colombia to northern Chile, numerous races rose to a civilized state, vanished and were forgotten centuries before the first Montezuma or the first Inca saw the light of day. [^15]

As a general rule, when we find a race excelling in some one art or occupation we find the people deficient in some other art or industry but the Chimus (Chee-mus) appear to have been masters of all trades. Their textiles, especially their laces, were marvelous examples of weaving and their mosaic and mother-of-pearl work was exquisite. Many specimens of these are truly wonderful examples of this highly developed art. There are vases, cups, ceremonial utensils, ear plugs, breast plates, wooden utensils, objects made of clay and of bone that are highly and most artistically embellished with mosaic inlay of mother-of-pearl, the red Spondylus shell, colored stone and precious metals. Many of their robes and ponchos of magnificent textiles are completely covered with ornaments of gold, silver, mother-of-pearl and sections of bright colored sea shells arranged in charming patterns so as to give the effect of a mosaic cloth.

They were also highly skilled wood carvers and there is scarcely a wooden object that is not handsomely carved. . . . They had developed a unique method of weaving feathers into cloth thus producing feather robes, tunics, head coverings, etc., that are gorgeous in color and design. . . .

Even in their ordinary metal work the Chimus exhibited the greatest skill and a most artistic taste. Metals were cast, embossed, etched, engraved, pressed, hammered, spun or built up into innumerable forms by welding and soldering. In fact every means of working metals known to modern artisans was employed by the Chimus. [^16]

It is to be recalled that the Book of Mormon history took place during the period between the building of the Tower of Babel and A.D. 421, the period during which the ancient Americans made their greatest achievements in the various handicrafts as described by Dr. Verrill. The Jaredites, however, were confined to the land northward throughout most of their history. Also, we should recall that the Book of Mormon made such claims as follows:

[The Jaredites had] . . . all manner of fruit, and of grain, and of silks, and of fine linen, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious things. [^17]

[The Nephites and Mulekites also had an abundance] . . . of all things whatsoever they stood in need—and abundance . . . of gold, and of silver, and of precious things, and abundance of silk and fine-twined linen, and all manner of good homely cloth. [^18]

Later during the Nephite period, we read:

And behold, there was all manner of gold in both these lands, and of silver, and of precious ore of every kind; and there were also curious workmen, who did work all kinds of ore and did refine it; and thus they did become rich. . . .

Behold their women did toil and spin, and make all manner of cloth, of fine-twined linen and cloth of every kind, to clothe their nakedness. [^19]

Certainly all of these archaeological remains fit well with the Book of Mormon claims regarding the Jaredite, Nephite, and Mulekite civilizations; and so archaeology speaks as it were from the dust, verifying the Book of Mormon to be true—to be the word of God.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCES OF CHRIST'S APPEARANCE TO THE NEPHITES

The Book of Mormon gives a beautiful account of Christ's appearance to the Nephites following his crucifixion and resurrection. [^20] He gave the true gospel plan of salvation to them; and the people lived in almost perfect righteousness for over two hundred years. Certainly Christ's visit constituted one of the greatest events, if not the greatest, that ever occurred in ancient America.

Following the apostasy of the Nephites and the Lamanites from the true religion of the Master and the extermination of the Nephite civilization (about A.D. 400), the Lamanites or Indians retained in their traditions a memory of the appearance of the resurrected Savior to their forefathers. When the Spanish Catholic padres, the French missionaries, and the English explorers first visited the numerous American aborigines throughout the Western Hemisphere, they found traditions among practically every Indian tribe, especially the more civilized peoples of Peru, Central America, Guatemala, Yucatan, and Mexico, to the effect that their ancestors had been visited by a "White Bearded God," who had given them their culture, their civilization, and their religion, and had promised them that some day he would return to their descendants. These traditions account for the easy conquest of Mexico and Peru by the Spaniards; but more important, they all bear witness to Christ's appearance to the ancient Americans, as delineated so vividly in the Book of Mormon.

Throughout Mexico the "White Bearded God" was known by the name of Quetzalcoatl (Ket-sal-co-watl). In Yucatan he was called Kukulcan (Koo-kul-con). Viracocha (Vera-kocha) was the name given to him by the Indians of Peru; and other Indian tribes called him by various names. By whatever name he appeared in Indian traditions, he always had the same characteristics, and there was a general agreement in the various traditions regarding his accomplishments. Those people who are familiar with the teachings of the Book of Mormon and Indian traditions can readily recognize the Fair God of ancient America as being none other than Jesus Christ.

According to one popular tradition, the "White Bearded God" came to the inhabitants of ancient America through the air, and as he descended to earth the sun's rays sparkled on his beautiful white body and clothing. Quetzal (ket-sal) is the name of a beautiful bird with resplendent long green feathers, found mainly in the highlands of Chiapas, Guatemala, and Honduras. [^21] The quetzal bird as it flew through the air reminded the Indians of the glorious beauty and radiant splendor of the "White Bearded God" who had appeared to their ancestors; and so the ancient worshipers added a pagan touch to that memorable event by selecting the most beautiful, highly prized bird of the New World, the quetzal, as a symbol of the Fair God, or Jesus Christ. Also, coatl, or serpent, was an ancient symbol of Israel's Anointed One. [^22] And they adopted also another symbol, the serpent or rattlesnake. Coatl (co-watl) is the ancient Mexican word for serpent. [^23] Thus, the Indians commemorated their "White Bearded God" with the symbol of "Quetzal-bird serpent" or Quetzalcoatl. [^24]

The Temple of Quetzalcoatl, located at Teotihuacan (Tay-o-tee-wah-con), approximately twenty-six miles north of Mexico City, is of special interest to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This temple is decorated with serpent heads surrounded with quetzal feathers, symbols of Quetzalcoatl, or Jesus Christ.

Also, of special interest to members of the Church of Jesus Christ are the beautiful and famous archaeological ruins in Yucatan, especially those at Chichen Itza, Uxmal (Oosh-mal), and Kabah (Ka-bah). The massive pyramids, temples, and other important structures were erected during the tenth century A.D., constituting the workmanship of the New Mayan Empire. Those Mayas of Yucatan, as had the Toltecs (Tol-teks) of Teotihuacan, worshiped the "White Bearded God," whom they called Kukulcan. They carved motifs to Kukulcan on their buildings similar to those at Teotihuacan and at other Mexican sites, i.e., the plumed serpent. [^25] In fact, the plumed serpent is extensively used in decorating all of their buildings.

Also, the Mayas decorated their buildings with another motif or symbol—that of bearded white men bedecked with quetzal feathers. The latter carvings represented priests of Kukulcan (Quetzalcoatl), and some of them probably Kukulcan himself. These bearded men are definitely not of Indian type but are of Hebraic type. Theodore Arthur Willard points out that the ancient sculptures and murals found in Maya cities, especially at Chichen Itza, have a distinctly Semitic cast, and that they are strikingly Hebraic in appearance. [^26]

The ancestors of the American Indians—the Nephites, Lamanites, and Mulekites—were Hebrews. The first colonists came from Jerusalem. Father Lehi, one of the prophet-leaders of the Nephites, was a descendant of Manasseh; and Manasseh was a descendant of Abraham, the first man to be called a Hebrew. Ishmael, the head of the other family who came to America with Lehi, was a descendant of Ephraim, Manasseh's brother. Mulek, after whom the Mulekites were named, was a descendant of Judah; and perhaps the entire group that came with him were Jews. Thus the ancestors of the people at Chichen Itza were Semites; and so it is not surprising to find that the bearded men carved on the wall of the Maya archaeological structures do have a "distinctly Semitic cast of countenance" or to find also "the dignity of face and serene poise of those carved or painted likenesses to be strikingly Hebraic."

SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF AMERICAN CULTURES FULLY DEVELOPED

Before proceeding further, we shall point out, definitely, that perhaps the majority of the archaeological ruins that have been excavated postdate Book of Mormon times, and some of them were originally erected several hundred years following the close of Nephite history. Then the reader may ask, "What evidences do those ancient ruins give to sustain the Book of Mormon?"

I shall answer as follows: The Book of Mormon claims that great civilizations lived in ancient America. As previously mentioned, that sacred record points out that three separate peoples—the Jaredites, the Nephites, and the Mulekites—came to America in ancient times and established high cultures or civilizations. Many of the most reliable archaeologists at the present time claim that a number of the archaeological remains that have been excavated were built over earlier temples, pyramids, and other buildings, connoting earlier civilizations; and in many respects these earlier peoples were more highly developed, or more civilized, than were the people who erected the buildings of the archaeological remains that we find today. After discussing many of the more civilized tribes of the American Indians, Dr. P. De Roo stated:

. . . the general traditions of enlightened mankind and the conclusions of modern science, are proof sufficient that the remote ancestors of these tribes had attained a much higher degree of civilization than that of their fallen posterity, and that they had lived at no great distance from the biblical patriarchs, who had preserved incorrupt the memory of man's primordial history and the truths of primeval divine revelation. . . . [^27]

It is a fact of great significance that archaeologists and anthropologists, especially those of Mexico, maintain that the famous Maya civilization, and also the Toltec, Zapotec, (Zap-oh-teck), Olmec, Totonac, (To-to-nac), and other high Indian cultures of Mexico and Central America, as well as the ancient Andean cultures, all were the outgrowth of an even greater civilization—". . .a most ancient mother culture, which is found at the bottom of the specialized cultures of central Mexico and northern Central America. . . ." [^28]

Thor Heyerdahl points out that ". . . until very recent decades it has been the opinion of most followers of the contemporary school of anthropology that man, in all his local varieties, came to America as a savage barbarian, . . . Many have even inclined to the belief that, from an archaic culture based on primitive hunting and collecting, high-culture with all its diversified aspects developed out of savage mentality and activities, each tribe and nation beginning from the bottom, independent of other American cultures, and developing analogous features merely through the parallel inclinations of human nature." [^29] He continues by pointing out that this theory is rapidly losing supporters, since it fails ". . . to find verification or support in archaeological material and excavations." [^30] The opinions of many archaeologists today, especially those of Mexico, are in agreement with the following quotation from S. Linne, whose statement was made in 1939:

In the Valley of Mexico, the archaeologists have penetrated as far down as to the times of the primitive agriculturists, the so-called archaic culture. Here, already, we are confronted with the peculiar phenomenon characteristic of America, that the cultures appear suddenly, quite readily formed and without strong relations between each other. Subsequently they develop further, within the limits of a narrow margin, then disappear to be succeeded by others. A new stock with other artistic intentions but in many ways with corresponding modes of living, weapons, and tools, have taken possession of the land. [^31]

In his recent voluminous work, American Indians in the Pacific, Thor Heyerdahl quotes leading anthropologists and archaeologists who are in agreement with Linne's statement, and then he summarizes his own findings as follows:

This sudden appearance and disappearance of American culture in full bloom, and with such elaborate and intricate standards that we often find in subsequent periods signs of retrogression or cultural decay rather than a maintenance of the original knowledge and achievements, is as typical of high-culture of South America as of those of Mexico and Yucatan. If each of these American cultures and civilizations had been independently developed by the savages within its own area, one would expect, at least in some localities to find traces of a slow evolution from low and primitive forms. But as we do not, we should at least simplify our problems by admitting the possibility that high-culture may have been developed by aboriginals in one area and spread as an inspiration to others. [^32]

As early as 1925, Dr. A. L. Kroeber, one of America's outstanding anthropologists under whom I had the privilege of studying at the University of California, announced that his studies in Peru supplied definite proof that that region "had received impulses from the Isthmus or Mexico." [^33] Five years later he published a paper entitled "Cultural Relations between North and South America" in which he pointed out that the cultures of Meso-America and Peru were basically very similar. He claimed that there was a fundamental unity underlying the Mexican and Peruvian conceptions and products, stating: "There is too much in common to believe otherwise." [^34] Dr. Kroeber regards the Peruvian cultures "probably a little younger than the Mexican." In agreement with the Mexican archaeologists and Thor Heyerdahl, speaking of the Mexican and Peruvian cultures, Dr. Kroeber positively declared: "In each case the culture meets us full blown." [^35] And then he called attention to the Indians' traditions of a white and bearded race of culture institutors and concluded that those people may have been responsible for the mother culture's appearing originally in "full bloom" in the various countries of the New World preceding the rise of inferior Indian cultures.

The outstanding Mexican archaeologists date the ancient high culture of La Venta during the period from B.C. 200 to A.D. 300, and that particular period covers the time when the Nephites and Mulekites attained their greatest heights in civilization. Perhaps the following statement from Miguel Covarrubias pinpoints the ancient "mother culture" as to the time of its sudden appearance more definitely than do the writings of any other authors:

Everywhere there are archaeological treasures that lie hidden in the jungles and under the rich soil of southern Vera Cruz, burial mounds and pyramids, masterfully carved colossal monuments of basalt, splendid statuettes of precious jade, and sensitively modeled figurines of clay, all of an unprecedented, high artistic quality. The tantalizing presence of a great and remote past in what is now uninhabited, impenetrable jungle is all the more puzzling because most archaeologists now agree that many of these artistic masterpieces date back to the beginnings of the Christian era. Appearing suddenly out of nowhere in a state of full development, they constitute a culture that seems to have been the root, the mother culture, from which the later and better-known (Maya, Totonac, Zapotec, etc.) cultures sprang.

This oldest of native American high cultures is also the newest, since it was "discovered" only a few years ago and still awaits exhaustive scientific study. [^36]

Latter-day Saints know that following the flood the three oldest "native American high cultures" were developed by the Jaredites, Nephites, and Mulekites, the latter two peoples uniting together about B.C. 200. The Olmec carving of a man ("Uncle Sam") at La Venta, who had a white flowing beard and possessed "surprising pronounced Semitic features" which strongly resembled a Jewish priest of pre-Christian times, seems to indicate definitely that the Nephite-Mulekite culture was the ancient "mother culture" spoken of by the foregoing archaeologists and anthropologists.

Thor Heyerdahl agrees with the famous anthropologist, Dr. A. L. Kroeber, in giving credit to a white race for establishing the high American culture anciently which served as the "mother culture" of all later Indian achievements. In the words of Heyerdahl:

The specified traditions of light-skinned and bearded founders of culture were most prominent and complete among the Aztec, Maya, Chibcha, and Inca nations, that is, among the natives with the highest cultural standing in the New World, and we have also ample evidence to verify that these historic nations really did owe their cultural standing to other people with even more impressive high-cultures who had been active in just these same localities in earlier times. These original culture-bearers are known to us only through their archaeological remains, chiefly consisting of deserted ecclesiastical sites. It is noteworthy that all the known culture peoples concerned disclaim the honour of having constructed these monuments, or of having originated their own cultural standards, and give all the credit to foreign intruders remembered as having lighter skins than themselves, long beards, marked ecclesiastic interests and benevolent characters. [^37]

Could one have given a more accurate and beautiful description of the ancient Nephites—with their high culture, holy prophets, true gospel of Jesus Christ, and strong ecclesiastical interests—even if he were thoroughly acquainted with the Book of Mormon account, than the foregoing statement made by Thor Heyerdahl, a non-Church member? As archaeological evidences have continued to accumulate—especially during the past few years—and as historical facts of America's ancient civilizations have continued to be gathered and correlated with archaeological findings, they have all united in verifying the claims made by the ancient prophets of Book of Mormon days, claims which were translated from "gold plates" and published in 1830 by the Prophet Joseph Smith. An abundance of truth has come from the ground to testify to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon.

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are in complete agreement with Dr. Kroeber and Heyerdahl in regards to a white race being the founders of that marvelous "ancient mother culture"; and furthermore we know who those culture founders were. They were the Nephites and the Mulekites who had migrated to America from Jerusalem shortly after B.C. 600 and had merged together approximately four hundred years later. The culture they established is beautifully described in the Book of Mormon. From it sprang the astonishing Indian cultures of later dates.

WRITINGS OF SIXTEENTH CENTURY INDIAN HISTORIANS SUPPORTING BOOK OF MORMON CLAIMS

The writings of the sixteenth century Indian historians supply numerous strong evidences verifying Book of Mormon claims. When the Spanish conquistadores were conquering Mexico and Yucatan and the Catholic padres were attempting to teach Christianity to the natives, they found that the Indians had many books—large libraries. Many of the Indians knew how to read and write and were more civilized than were their conquerers from Europe. In order to destroy as far as possible the natives' civilization and do away with what the Spanish priests termed "the Indians' wicked paganism," the Catholic padres burned all of the books that they could find, completely destroying the libraries of the American aborigines. This terrible act of vandalism resulted in a terrific loss to our understanding of the history of the Indians and their ancestors. In the words of Franz Blom, an outstanding archaeologist and highly recognized authority on the Mayas:

Flames devoured the precious Maya books, in which were written the astronomical annotations of a calendar far superior to that used by the Spaniards, the list of good and bad days, the ancient history. Those flames of the auto da fe at Mani destroyed the cornerstone of the Maya civilization, reduced to ashes the scientific backbone of a highly civilized people and sounded the death-knell of independent Maya thought. (No wonder that the Maya sages and priests cried from their hearts, and that some of them even committed suicide.) Raging armies of conquistadores could not by their murdering and looting have dealt a more fatal blow than that which was given under the sign of the cross. [^38]

It was fortunate, however, that a few excellent manuscripts written by Indian historians during the first century of their contact with the Spaniards escaped that ruthless destruction. Most of those writings have been translated into English during the past several years.

One of those important writings was produced in 1554, in the Quiche (Key-chay) Maya Indian language of Guatemala, and ". . . signed by the kings and dignitaries of the Quiche court." [^39] It is known as the Title of the Lords of Totonicapan (To-to-nee-ca-pon). At the request of the Quiche Indians, Dionisio Jose Chonay, a Catholic priest, translated the document from the Quiche language into Spanish in 1834. It was first translated into English by Delia Goetz and published in 1953. However, Dr. M. Wells Jakeman published in English extracts from the Spanish version in 1945, this being the first time that any of this work had appeared in English. The Totonicapan claims that the ancestors of the Quiche Mayas

. . . came from the other part of the ocean, from where the sun rises, a place called Pa Tulan, Pa Civan [meaning Bountiful] . . . and they came from where the sun rises, descendants of Israel, of the same language and the same customs. . . . They were sons of Abraham and Jacob. [^40]

And then the authors of Totonicapan close their account as follows:

Now on the twenty-eighth of September of 1554 we sign this attestation in which we have written that which by tradition our ancestors told us, who came from the other part of the sea, from Civan-Tulan, bordering on Babylonia. [^41]

These statements are all in perfect agreement with the claims made in the Book of Mormon. [^42] We should recall that Nephi and his brethren built their ship at a place which they named Bountiful which was located on the southeastern shores of Arabia or "bordering on Babylonia"; and from that place they set sail for America. [^43]

The Totonicapan also claims that God gave to their original prophet-leader a peculiar instrument, called Giron-Gagal, through the power of which the people were guided to their new home. [^44] One is reminded of the Liahona which was given by the Lord to Father Lehi. [^45]

Another Quiche Maya book, the Popol Vuh (Po-Pol Voo), which was much more detailed than the Totonicapan, was written between A.D. 1554 and 1558. In its present printed form, it is a book containing over 200 pages. It might be termed the Lamanite account of their history and religion, as the Book of Mormon is the Nephite account. Regarding this book, Brasseur de Bourbourg wrote:

The Popol Vuh appears to have been written, in part, from memory, following ancient originals, and in part, copies from the sacred books of the Quiches, . . . This manuscript . . . is written in a Quiche of great elegance, and the author must have been one of the princes of the royal family, who composed it a few years after the arrival of the Spaniards, when all of their ancient books were disappearing. [^46]

The Popol Vuh was first translated into English by Delia Goetz and Sylvanus G. Morley and published in 1950.

In this book the Quiche Maya Indians of Guatemala gave an account of the creation of the world, [^47] of the origin of man, [^48] of the flood, [^49] of the confusion of tongues, [^50] and of the coming of their ancestors across the sea from the East. [^51] It also mentioned the fact that the colonizers were guided to their new home by a peculiar instrument, called Pizom-Gagal, [^52] comparable to the Nephite Liahona. Thus the Popol Vuh in many items sustains the teachings of the more beautiful and complete account of the history and religion of the early Americans found in the Book of Mormon.

A third book written by the Indians of Guatemala, The Annals of the Cakchiquels (Cak-chee-kels), also bears witness to the teachings of the Book of Mormon. The writers, the Cakchiquel Indians, were a branch of the Quiche Mayas. The following is quoted from their writings:

I shall write the stories of our first fathers and grandfathers, . . . that from the other side of the sea we came to the place called Tulan [Bountiful], . . .

Thus, then we were four families who arrived at Tulan (Too-lon), we the Cakchiquel people, oh, our sons! so they told us. [^53]

The greatest book of the Indian writings of the sixteenth century is the Works of Ixtlilxochitl. It was written about A.D. 1600 by an Aztec prince named Ixtlilxochitl (Eesh-tleel-sho-cheetl) who lived near the City of Mexico. [^54] This Indian writer claimed that ancient America was settled by three distinctive groups of people. The first settlers, termed the Ancient Ones, the Giants, or the First Toltecs, he claimed came from the Tower of Babel at the time of the confounding of tongues. They came to this land across the sea from the East. Many details of their history are given by Ixtlilxochitl which correspond closely to the Jaredite history given in the book of Ether, the next to last book in the Book of Mormon.

The second group of settlers Ixtlilxochitl called the Toltecs. His account of those people corresponds very closely to the story given in the Book of Mormon regarding the Nephites, event after event agreeing in their principal points. He even tells of the last great wars between the two peoples and gives important dates which occurred during those wars. Those dates are practically identical with those recorded in the Book of Mormon. The principal differences between Ixtlilxochitl's story of the Toltecs and the account of the Nephites in the Book of Mormon are that the story that Joseph Smith translated from the "gold plates" is much more detailed, as well as far superior in historical narrative and religious teachings to the account given by the Indian prince of Mexico.

According to the Works of Ixtlilxochitl, the third group of people who colonized ancient America were called Olmecs. We have already identified them with the Mulekites. Ixtlilxochitl claimed that the Olmecs came in contact with the few last survivors of the first settlers who had originally come from the Tower of Babel and exterminated them. This event reminds one of Coriantumr, the last Jaredite, who lived for nine months with the Mulekites before his death. Ixtlilxochitl even tells of the merging together of the Toltecs and Olmecs (Nephites and Mulekites) and of the dominance of the Toltecs' culture, which is in complete agreement with the Book of Mormon account. There is no way under heaven whereby that Mexican could have known such facts and numerous others which he recorded in his writings except through direct revelation from the Lord or from Indian traditions and records which were in his possession. He claimed Indian traditions and records as the sources of his information.

Some authors are prone to discredit the writings of Ixtlilxochitl and the other Indian historians on the grounds that they could have been influenced by the Spanish Catholic priests. It is a fact of great significance, however, that these Indian writers recorded numerous historical facts, as well as items pertaining to the social and religious teachings and customs of their ancestors, of which the Catholic padres could have had no knowledge save only through possessing the Book of Mormon or comparable records. Such writings the Catholic priests did not have; but the Indians did possess records and traditions of their ancestors, which resulted in their writings comparing so favorably with the Book of Mormon.

WRITINGS OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY CATHOLIC MISSIONARIES SUPPORTING BOOK OF MORMON CLAIMS

Not only have archaeologists, anthropologists, and the writings of sixteenth century Indian historians supplied voluminous evidences sustaining the claims made by the Book of Mormon, but the journals of the sixteenth century Catholic missionaries—who obtained their information directly from the Indians—furnish valuable and extensive Book of Mormon evidences.

One of the most important of these writers was Bernardino de Sahagun (Sa-ha-goon). He lived in Mexico from A.D. 1529 to 1590, and produced his scholarly work in Aztec in the latter part of the sixteenth century. [^55] It is one of the most reliable and comprehensive reports concerning the ancients of Middle America. it was first published in Spanish in 1829, and since then portions of it have been published in English. Sahagun states:

Concerning the origin of these peoples, the report the old men [of central Mexico] give is that they came by sea . . . in some wooden boats. . . . But it is conjectured by a report found among all these natives that they came from seven caves, and that these seven caves are the seven ships or galleys in which the first settlers of this land came, . . .

The people first . . . came coasting along the coast disembarking in the part of Panuco, which they called Panco, which means "place where those arrived who crossed the water." This people came in search of the terrestrial paradise, and they had as a family name Tamoanchan, which means "we are looking for our home." [^56]

We should recall the Jaredite history which tells that the fore-fathers crossed the ocean in eight barges in search of ". . . the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands of the earth." [^57] Sahagun's writings give numerous proofs which sustain the teachings and history of the Book of Mormon, but space will not permit giving more of them here.

Bishop Bartholome de Las Casas (Las Cass-us), a prominent Catholic missionary, writing in 1552-1553, said of the Indians of Guatemala that

. . . they had among them information of the flood and of the end of the world, . . . and so they believe that another Butic is about to come which is another flood and judgment, not of water, but of fire which they say will be the end of the world. . . . [^58]

Juan de Torquemada (Tor-kay-ma-da), a Spanish missionary in Mexico whose book was first published in Spain in A.D. 1613, declared that ". . . the ancients . . . put [i.e., wrote or inscribed] many things in two columns, one of metal, and another of brick or stone." [^59] It should be recalled that the Jaredites and also the Nephites inscribed their histories on metal plates.

Las Casas found an abundance of teachings among the Indians which resembled Christian doctrine, and so he concluded that the devil had arrived in America ahead of the Christians and implanted in the minds and hearts of the natives many teachings closely akin to Christianity. [^60] Since the Book of Mormon peoples had a thorough knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ, some of the divine truths naturally would have been handed down from age to age, probably in adulterated forms but retaining a resemblance to the original doctrines, just as gospel teachings given by the Savior in Palestine survived through the Dark Ages in altered and polluted forms but under the name of Christianity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Note: Dr. Frederick J. Turner, the originator of the frontier thesis in American history, defined the American frontier as the geographical area bordering on the land of the red men. In the westward migration of the American colonists, "the frontier was the edge of the wave—the meeting point between savagery and civilization." Turner, The Frontier in American History, pp. 3-4.
[^2] Ether 10:18-29.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price.
[^4] Frederic I. Carpenter, Ralph Waldo Emerson, pp. 79-80.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 10-11.
[^6] Ibid., p. 88.
[^7] Henry A. Wallace, in an address delivered before the New York Times National Book Fair. Reprinted in the Salt Lake Tribune (November 8, 1937), p. 13.
[^8] Marcus Bach, Faith and My Friends (New York, 1951), pp. 255-256. Italics supplied by the writer.
[^9] John Lloyd Stephens, Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan (New York, 1841); and Incidents of Travel in Yucatan (New York, 1843). 17. Stirling, op. cit., p. 327.
[^10] Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, California, 1950), pp. 20, 171. 18. Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya, p. 21, stated: "The Maya are not a hairy people. The men either have no beards and moustaches at all, or only very meager, sparse ones, while other parts of their body have less hair than is the case of American whites." The same facts hold true with the majority of American Indians in general.
[^11] A. Hyatt Verrill, Americas' Ancient Civilizations (1953), p. 100. 19. M. Wells Jakeman, "An Unusual Tree of Life Sculpture from Ancient Central America," Bulletin of the University Archaeological Society (March, 1953), pp. 26-49.
[^12] Philip Drucker and Robert F. Heizer, "Gifts for the Jaguar God," The National Geographic Magazine (Washington, D. C., September, 1956), vol. 110, p. 367. 20. Morley, op. cit., p. 14.
[^13] Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South—The Isthmus of Tehuantepec (1946), pp. 79-80. 21. Ibid., pp. 38, 44.
[^14] Drucker and Heizer, op. cit., p. 367. 22. Verrill, op. cit., pp. 183-195.
[^15] Matthew W. Stirling, National Geographic Magazine (Sept. 1940), p. 327; Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 133-135, 173. 23. Ibid., pp. 148, 174-175, 183, 210.
[^16] Covarrubias, op. cit., p. 90. 24. Ibid., pp. 154-157.
[^17] 25. Ether 9:17.
[^18] 26. Alma 1:29; 4:6.
[^19] 27. Helaman 6:11, 13; Mosiah 10:5.
[^20] 28. 3 Nephi, chapters 11 to 28, pp. 420-453.
[^21] 29. Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 199, 195-222.
[^22] 30. Maurice H. Farbridge, Studies in Biblical and Semitic Symbolism, p. 25; Numbers 21:8-9.
[^23] 31. Ibid., p. 199; Verrill, op. cit., pp. 101-111.
[^24] 32. George C. Vaillant, Aztecs of Mexico (New York, 1950), p. 52; Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races (New York, 1875), vol. 2, p. 511 ff.; Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 195-222; Verrill, op. cit., p. 67.
[^25] 33. Ibid., p. 101 ff.
[^26] 34. Theodore Arthur Willard, The City of the Sacred Well, p. 36.
[^27] 35. P. De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), p. 111.
[^28] 36. Alfonso Caso, cited in Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1947), p. 42.
[^29] 37. Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians in the Pacific (Stockholm, Sweden, 1952), p. 285.
[^30] 38. Ibid., p. 285.
[^31] 39. S. Linne, cited in ibid.
[^32] 40. Ibid., pp. 285-286.
[^33] 41. A. L. Kroeber, The Uhle Pottery Collection from Moche, University of Calif. Publ. in American Archaeology and History, vol. 1, No. 7.
[^34] 42. Kroeber, Cultural Relations Between North and South America, Proc. 23rd Int. Congr. Americanists, New York (New York, 1930).
[^35] 43. Idem.
[^36] 44. Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South—the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (1946), p. 80. Italics supplied by the author.
[^37] 45. Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 284.
[^38] 46. Franz Blom, The Conquest of Yucatan, p. 109.
[^39] 47. Title of the Lords of Totonicapan, p. 164.
[^40] 48. Ibid., pp. 169-170.
[^41] 49. Ibid., p. 194; Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 8, 56-64, 7, 80-84, 250.
[^42] 50. 1 Nephi 17:40.
[^43] 51. Ibid., 17:5-7.
[^44] 52. Totonicapan, op. cit., p. 170.
[^45] 53. 1 Nephi 16:10; Alma 37:38-41.
[^46] 54. Brasseur de Bourbourg, cited in Popol Vuh, p. 21.
[^47] 55. Popol Vuh, pp. 81-90.
[^48] 56. Ibid., pp. 86-89.
[^49] 57. Ibid., p. 90.
[^50] 58. Ibid., p. 36.
[^51] 59. Ibid., pp. 18, 79-80.
[^52] 60. Ibid., p. 205.
[^53] 61. The Annals of the Cakchiquels (tr. from Cakchiquel Maya into Eng. by Adrian Recinos and Delia Goetz, 1953), pp. 43-44.
[^54] 62. Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 1-450. Perhaps the four families referred to are those of Nephi, Sam, Laman and Lemuel.
[^55] 63. Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia de Las Cosas de Nueva Espana, cited in Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., pp. 30-31.
[^56] 64. Ibid.
[^57] 65. Ether 1:42; 2:7, 15; 6:5, 12.
[^58] 66. Bartolome de Las Casas, Apologetica Historia de las Indias, Cap. CCXXXV.
[^59] 67. Juan de Torquemada, Monarquia Indians, Tomo I, p. 255.
[^60] 68. Hunter and Ferguson, op. cit., p. 222.
