Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 4

HEBRAIC CHARACTERISTICS AND CHRISTIAN BELIEFS

AMERICAN INDIANS DESCENDANTS OF THE JEWS

Diego de Landa (Lan-da), a prominent Spanish missionary in Yucatan, writing in about 1556, says that, according to the Mayas, ". . . the world was destroyed by a deluge." [^1] He also stated:

Some of the older people of Yucatan say that they have heard from their ancestors that this land was occupied by a race of people who came from the East and whom God had delivered. . . . If this were true, it necessarily follows that all the inhabitants of the Indies are descendants of the Jews. [^2]

Antonio Vazquez de Espinosa (An-to-nee-o Vas-kes day Espee-no-za), a "barefooted Carmelite friar and Spanish author, was born in Spain in the last third of the sixteenth century and died in Seville in 1630." [^3] He became a distinguished theologian and missionary. He came to America and did missionary work in Peru and also throughout Mexico. He "became known as one of the most fervent missionaries in the New World." [^4] About 1622 he returned to Spain and wrote a large book entitled Compendium and Description of the West Indies. It was written in Spanish; and for the first time it was translated into the English language by Charles Upson Clark and published by the Smithsonian Institution on September 1, 1942.

Antonio Vazquez's book is literally filled with evidences which show that the Indians were descendants of the Jews. He studied their religious beliefs and customs thoroughly, having contacted many of the American aborigines before they were visited by other Europeans; and so he was of the firm conviction that they were of Hebraic stock. To quote from his book:

The Indians are very much like the Jews and similar to them in all respects, both in physique and temperament and in other characteristics, such as their customs, rites, ceremonies, superstitions, and idolatries. . . . [^5]

A little later he wrote:

. . . In New Spain there was a High Priest and various lesser priests, who were anointed with a certain liquid like balsam or liquidambar, mixed with the blood of children whom they circumcised. These false priests wear their hair long like the Nazarenes, and in almost everything they copied the priests of the Old Law; just as they offered animals in sacrifice, so the Indians offered them also; and just as the Hebrews of the Ten Tribes sacrificed children, so the Indians, descendants of the Ten Tribes, sacrificed them also. . .

God commanded Abraham that boys eight days old should be circumcised; the same custom is followed by most of the Indians of New Spain, Yucatan, Cozumel, and other regions, and the Guaicurus of Paraguay: . . . Consequently the Indians must have adopted it from the Hebrews, from whom they are sprung. [^6]

As the readers have observed, in some of the quotations taken from sixteenth century Catholic missionaries, the claim was definitely made that the American Indians were descendants of the Jews. The Spanish padres who visited Mexico, Central America, and the Andean region of South America during the colonial period were amazed at the similarities of the Indians' religious beliefs and the teachings of the Old Testament and also Christianity; for example, they found symbols of the Trinity before Peruvian altars, a rainbow legend, and a flood story. [^7] Dr. Paul Herrmann, a German scholar, in his recent book concludes that the rainbow legend and flood story ". . . might have come straight from the book of Genesis." [^8] They probably did, since the Nephites had Genesis recorded on the brass plates.

Numerous authors who have studied the writings of the Catholic padres and the Indian historians, having evaluated the massive amount of valid evidence available, have arrived at the conclusion that the evidence definitely shows that the American Indians are descendants of the Jews.

M. de la Borde, a French traveler, visited various groups of the Cariban (Ca-reeb'an) Indians during the latter half of the eighteenth century. He published an account of his travels in Paris in 1785. At the time of their first contact with Europeans, the Cariban Indians occupied most of Venezuela north of the Orinoco River, and westward to the border of Colombia, possibly penetrating as far as the lower Magdalena River. The following quotation is taken from Dr. J. Fitzgerald Lee:

A celebrated French traveler, M. de la Borde (Bor-day') (Caribbeans, Paris, 1785) says, "Many of the Caribs (Ca-reebs') told me that their early ancestors were a great and powerful people, whom I cannot help identifying with the Jews. Their laws relating to marriage were the same, and they were forbidden to eat the flesh of animals like the peccary, or South American swine." [^9]

Dr. Lee also states:

In the early part of the eighteenth century a Dutch Jew, whose name was Aaron Levy, but who wrote under the non de plume Montesinus (Travels, Rotterdam, 1840) met with a strange people in the northern Andes, of whom he says:

"My guide was Indian—at least, so he seemed to me—and he called his god after the name of the Hebrew God Adonai. He told me that in very ancient times his forefathers were called Abram, Esaak and Yakoob; that the name of his own tribe was Rooben. Through him I made the acquaintance of a number of the men of his tribe, whom I at once recognized as Jews. They kissed and embraced me as a brother." [^10]

Lord Kingsborough from England collected large quantities of original documents in America. "Between 1830 and 1848 his Antiquities of Mexico were published in nine enormous volumes, . . . These contained reproductions of native codices and sculptures and rare or unpublished accounts of native life, in full or in extract, together with Kingsborough's interpretations to support his views." [^11]

Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, one of America's outstanding Maya (Ma'ya) scholars, made the following appraisal of Kingsborough's collection:

Much of the material he put on record was of inestimable value, and, indeed, to this day, his reproductions of two or three of the Mexican codices are the only ones in existence. In the volumes are included new material on Palenque and the first reproduction of the Codex Dresden, the finest of three surviving Maya hieroglyphic books. [^12]

Lord Kingsborough was strongly of the opinion that the Indians descended from the Hebrews. To quote from his writings:

A very remarkable representation of the ten plagues which God sent on Egypt occurs in the eleventh and twelfth pages of the Borgian Manuscript. Moses is there painted, holding up in his left hand his rod, which became a serpent; and, with a furious gesture, calling down the plagues upon the Egyptians. These plagues were frogs, locusts, lice, flies, etc., all of which are represented in the pages referred to; but the last and most dreadful were the thick darkness which overspread Egypt for three days, and the death of the first-born of the Egyptians. The curious symbol of one serpent swallowing up others, likewise occurs in the nineteenth page of the same Manuscript. It is not extraordinary that the Mexicans who were acquainted with one portion of the exodus—that relating to the children of Israel journeying from Egypt—should also not have been ignorant of another. [^13]

T. A. Willard wrote the following regarding the Itza Mayas of Yucatan:

It is a curious fact that the ancient Itza Mayas had many habits and customs similar to those of the Jews. Many have remarked that some of the faces carved on the walls and stones are of the Jewish caste. . . . Both the Itza Mayas and the Jews venerated one God, of whom they made no image. Both worshipped toward the east, and both burned incense in the four directions. The confession of sins and atonement were common to both peoples. Both believed in devils. The Mayas, like the Jews, were very punctilious about washing and making ablutions. Both venerated the serpent, and some have said the Mayas practiced circumcision. [^14]

George Jones, in his book, History of Ancient America, described the numerous manners, customs, and religious beliefs of the American Indians; and then he reached the following conclusion:

Many other religious customs and ceremonies exist of a minor character, yet strictly in analogy with the race of Abraham; but enough has been brought forward in this volume to propose these (as we believe) unanswerable questions; "If they are not of the Lost Tribes of Israel, who are they?"

"What nation of ancient history can claim and identify those customs and observances as their own, if not the Hebrew?" [^15]

George Catlin spent eight years (1832-1839) living with the Mandan Indians, who inhabited the region south of the Great Lakes in the United States, as well as visiting many other tribes. Independently from the writers who had visited Indians in South America, Central America, and Mexico and reported that the traditions of the Indians in those countries showed that they were descendants of the Jews, Catlin also concluded that the North Americans were of Jewish origin. To quote his exact words:

The first and most striking fact amongst the North American Indians that refers us to the Jews is that of their worshipping, in all parts, the Great Spirit, or Jehovah, as the Hebrews were ordered to do by divine precept, instead of a plurality of gods, as ancient pagans and heathens did, and their idols of their own formation. The North American Indians are nowhere idolators. They appeal at once to the Great Spirit and know of no mediator, either personal or symbolical. . . Among the list of their customs, we meet a number which had their origin in the Jewish ceremonial code, and which are so very peculiar in their forms that it would seem quite improbable and almost impossible that two different people should ever have hit upon them alike, without some knowledge of each other. [^16]

When Lehi and his family came to America from Jerusalem, they brought with them on brass plates the Hebrew scriptures which were comparable to our Old Testament down to the time of Jeremiah; in fact, the brass plates even contained teachings of prophets that we do not have today in the Old Testament. The Nephite prophets taught the people the details of the history and religion of their ancestors just as the Jews did in Jerusalem. Speaking of the American Indians, Dr. P. De Roo stated

. . . that the remote ancestors of these tribes had attained a much higher degree of civilization than that of their fallen posterity, and that they had lived at no great distance from the biblical patriarchs, who had preserved incorrupt the memory of man's primordial history and the truths of divine revelation. [^17]

The fact that the Nephites possessed the ancient Hebrew scripure (Old Testament) and had a thorough knowledge of its contents during Book of Mormon days accounts for the Indians' religious traditions being Hebraic; and so one is not surprised to learn that during the colonial period numerous missionaries and explorers who had had close contact with the Indians claimed that they were descendants of the Jews. At least part of the ancestry of the American Indians came from Jerusalem; however, evidence is available which shows that people from other lands migrated to the Western Hemisphere following the close of Book of Mormon history.

INDIANS' RELIGIOUS BELIEFS AND CHRISTIANITY

Many writers have not only claimed that the American Indians were familiar with Old Testament religious teachings and history but a number of them have also maintained that Indian traditions definitely show that Christianity had been taught to their ancestors in ancient times; for example, F. Martin Brown stated:

Several of the rites that were common to the earlier civilizations are to be found in the Aztec ritual. It was the discovery of baptism, communion and confession and the use of the cross by these Indians that led the Spaniards to believe that at some time in the past they had been Christianized and were at the time backsliders, and therefore should be punished severely. [^18]

Dr. P. De Roo gives much evidence in his writings which definitely shows that Christianity was taught to the ancestors of the American Indians. His conclusion that Christianity was given to the ancient Americans during the early part of the Christian era is very significant, since that conclusion coincides with the facts presented in the Book of Mormon and is verified by modern revelation. Following his resurrection Jesus Christ came to America and taught his gospel to the people. Dr. De Roo had been discussing the Mayas of Central America and Yucatan, the various Indian tribes of Mexico, and even the Delawares in eastern United States at the time Europeans had their first contact with them, and then he concluded:

That these Indians, and probably several more congenial tribes, were Christians, in the broad sense of the word, at the time of their landing on American soil, can scarcely be doubted. They knew and worshipped the one eternal, spiritual, and ubiquitous God, who "caused" or created the heavens and the earth and all they contain; they knew of the happiness of our first parents eating the "fat fruit" of Eden, and of the "bad spirit" who brought them to sin, misfortune, and death; and, as they were acquainted with the circumstances of the dire tragedy, we may readily infer that they were not altogether ignorant of its most important particular: the promise of a Redeemer, which constitutes the deepest foundation of Christianity. [^19]

We trust that no intelligent reader would contradict us, if we should consider it sufficiently demonstrated that the Christian religion was preached in America during the first centuries of our era. [^20]

Dr. P. De Roo's conclusions are completely in harmony with the revelations from the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In 1830 Jesus Christ declared that

. . . the Book of Mormon . . . contains the truth and the word of God—which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites [Indians] are a remnant, that they may believe in the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come. [^21]

In April, 1830, Joseph Smith received another revelation in which the Lord declared that ". . . the Book of Mormon contains the record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . ." [^22] In August of that same year, while revealing other information to the Prophet, Jesus mentioned ". . . Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, . . ." [^23]

Soon after his resurrection, the Son of Man spent a number of days teaching the ancient Americans the gospel of Jesus Christ, as he had done in Palestine prior to his crucifixion. He had established his Church, appointed twelve disciples to preside over it, and had ascended to heaven. The disciples fasted and prayed, and in response Jesus appeared unto them. He asked them what they desired. They replied that they wanted to know what name to call the Church which Christ had established.

And the Lord said unto them: Verily, verily, I say unto you, . . . Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day.

Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake.

And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel. [^24]

And then Jesus Christ explained the meaning of his gospel which he had given to the Nephites. To quote part of his explanation:

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—

And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works.

And it shall come to pass that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world.

And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father.

And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do;

Therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall be lifted up at the last day. [^25]

THE WITNESS OF THE HOLY GHOST

A number of Book of Mormon evidences from archaeology, from Indian historians of the sixteenth century, from Indian traditions, and from the writings of the Catholic missionaries of the sixteenth century, have been given in this chapter. They all corroborate the claims made by the ancient Nephite records; however, the greatest of all witnesses to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon is the witness borne to one's heart by the Holy Ghost. In closing the story of his people, Moroni gave a vital admonition to the human family and a scientific formula which could be applied effectively if we desire to gain a testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. Moroni wrote:

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. [^26]

Thousands of Latter-day Saints have put that admonition and promise to the test and know as they know that they are alive that the Book of Mormon is true. Also, many others who were not church members have read the Book of Mormon with a sincere and prayerful heart, having faith in Christ, and a strong desire to know whether or not the claims made by Joseph Smith and the teachings and contents of the Book of Mormon are true. They have asked the Eternal Father in the name of Christ for a testimony, and through the power of the Holy Ghost the truthfulness of that book was manifest unto them. The Holy Ghost penetrated their souls and bore a sweet witness to them of the divine authenticity of that ancient record. Then they knew with as much assurance as they had of any fact which they had ever learned that the Book of Mormon is true, divinely inspired, and a sacred historical and religious account of the inhabitants of ancient America. Only those who have had the Holy Ghost bear witness to their hearts can fully understand and appreciate what I have endeavored to explain.

I encourage every honest man and woman throughout the entire world to put Moroni's admonition and promise to the test; and I believe with all my heart that each one who does with honest intentions, having a sincere desire to know the truth, and having implicit faith in Jesus Christ, will receive through the power of the Holy Ghost a testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon.

With the evidences in mind presented in the preceding chapters, we shall resume the story of our tours of Meso-America, which was introduced in chapter one.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Title of the Lords of Totonicapan, pp. 19-170; Popol Vuh, p. 23; The Annals of the Cakchiquels, p. 43.
[^2] The last Quiche Maya chief to be defeated by Alvarado is shown in the photograph with a quetzal bird perched on his hand. Shortly after the defeat of the Mayas, one of the Spanish conquistadores made this representation of the Quiche chief on a rectangular piece of iron approximately six inches in length. Jesus Carranza Juarez at Totonicapan, Guatemala, owns this important relic. While I was touring the Central American Mission in January, 1956, Mr. Juarez graciously permitted me to photograph it. He claimed that that was the first time this interesting relic had ever been photographed, and so this is first time that it has ever been published.
[^3] J. Eric S. Thompson, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization, pp. 210-217.
[^4] Mormon 4: 14-15, 21.
[^5] Alma 34:17-22, 25.
[^6] Ibid., p. 88.
[^7] Yucatan—The Land of the Maya (Mexico D. F., 1953), pp. 12-13.
[^8] Thompson, op. cit., p. 148.
[^9] Abraham 3:1-18.
[^10] Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948), pp. 87-98.
[^11] Moses 1:31-38.
[^12] Helaman 12:15.
[^13] Thompson, op. cit., p. 137
[^14] Ibid., p. 140.
[^15] Abraham 3:11-12.
[^16] 3 Nephi 11:22-28.
[^17] T. A. Willard, Lost Empires, p. 422.
[^18] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1946), pp. 184-186.
[^19] Note: Bishop Landa's description of the Indians' baptismal rite as practiced in Yucatan at the time of the Spanish conquest indicates that the Itzas were practicing baptism by sprinkling. That does not prove that their ancestors had not baptized by immersion. The mode of baptism could have been changed by the Indians from the true mode of immersion which Christ taught their forefathers of Book of Mormon times, just as the mode of baptism was changed from immersion to sprinkling on the Eastern Hemisphere during the period when the "Great Apostasy" occurred in Christendom.
[^20] Moroni 8:8-26.
[^21] P. De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia 1900), pp. 466-467.
[^22] Ibid., p. 468.
[^23] Jose A. Erosa Peniche, Guide Book to the Ruins of Chichen Itza (Merida, Yucatan, 1954), p. 9.
[^24] Jose A. Erosa Peniche, Guide Book to the Ruins of Uxmal (Merida, 1952), p. 15.
[^25] Yucatan—Land of the Maya, p. 13.
[^26] Peniche, op. cit., p. 30
