Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 5

TOURING BOOK OF MORMON LANDS

A TOUR OF ANCIENT AMERICA

The members of the touring party decided to name officially our proposed trip to Mexico and Central America "A Tour of Ancient America and Book of Mormon Lands." In selecting this name, we had no thought in mind that Mexico (including Yucatan), Guatemala, and Honduras, constituted the only places where Jaredites, Nephites, and Lamanites had lived in ancient times. But since we felt that some of the Book of Mormon peoples and their descendants had resided in that part of the country and since archaeological evidences are so abundant there, we gave our tour the foregoing title.

The personnel of the touring party were: President Alex F. and Carol Dunn; Dr. Rex D. and Helen Stutznegger; Herman and Fawn Pedersen; Elmer and Florence Elkington; Moroni H. and Rebecca Ostler—all of Tooele, Utah; President Leland W. and Alice Redd, Blanding, Utah; President Vernal W. and Estella Johns, Garland, Utah; Dr. Henry Ray and Mary L. Hatch, Idaho Falls; M. Ward and Inez Moody, Delta, Utah; Louis and Geraldine Callister, and the writer, all of salt Lake City.

FLIGHT TO GUATEMALA

In accordance with pre-arranged plans, the twenty-one members of our touring party assembled in Los Angeles on December 16, 1954. Upon arriving we were informed by the Pan American lines that the plane, which was scheduled to leave Los Angeles for Guatemala City at 11:30 p.m., was several hours late. It did not leave until seven o'clock the following morning.

The delay in the flight, however, proved to be advantageous to the party members. Instead of flying from Los Angeles to Guatemala City during the nighttime, in accordance with the regularly planned schedule, we enjoyed all of the flight in the daylight. This gave us the advantage of a good perspective of all of the country en route to Guatemala City, since the plane flew relatively low and was over land, rather than water, most of the time. A second advantage was that we had several hours while on the plane in which to discuss the various archaeological ruins which we were planning to visit. This furnished an excellent opportunity for the party members to become aware of many important factors to be observed which constitute valid Book of Mormon evidences. It also gave us an opportunity to attain a fuller understanding of the archaeological sites themselves, their histories, and the peoples who had inhabited them. We were thereby better prepared when we arrived and could receive greater benefit through our tour of Book of Mormon lands.

ARRIVAL AT GUATEMALA CITY

As we got out of the plane at the Guatemala airport, having flown approximately twelve hours and traveled nearly 2,400 miles from Los Angeles to Guatemala City, we were thrilled to see among the crowd of Guatemalans President and Sister Gordon Romney of the Central American Mission and several of the elders. We were greeted with the typical cordial missionary handshake.

Since the most recent and noteworthy achievement of the Central American Mission had been the erection in Guatemala City of a beautiful church building and a new mission home with mission offices adjacent to it, as soon as we cleared customs President Romney took the members of the touring party to see these buildings. This was done even before the Clark Touring Agency took us to our hotel. As we inspected the new mission headquarters—which are very attractive and should meet the present needs of the mission—President Romney informed us that Elder LeGrand Richards, who was scheduled to arrive in two or three days to tour the Central American Mission, would dedicate those buildings the following Sunday in connection with the Guatemala District conference.

SAN BLAS INDIANS DESCENDANTS OF ABRAHAM AND JACOB

That evening while the majority of the touring party members visited places of interest in Guatemala City, Brother and Sister Johns and I spent the evening in the mission home discussing with President and Sister Romney and some of the missionaries the traditions and beliefs of the Indians who lived within the confines of the Central American Mission. President Romney told us about his many thrilling experiences while working among the various Indian tribes of Central America. He explained that recently he had visited a group of San Blas Indians who live on an island off the coast of Panama not far from the Pacific entrance to the Panama Canal. While he was holding a meeting with them, one of their chiefs arose to his feet, pounded himself on the chest with both fists, and then with pride said: "We are the descendants of Abraham and Jacob. Back in the distant past our ancestors came from over the sea. We are Israelites—descendants from the house of Israel."

As the reader will recall, during the early years of the Spanish conquest, a similar claim was made by the Quiche and Cakchiquel Mayas of Guatemala; for example, they wrote: ". . . they [the ancestors of the Quiche Mayas] came from where the sun rises, descendants of Israel, of the same language and the same customs . . . they were the sons of Abraham and Jacob." [^1]

GUATEMALA

Guatemala, which lies immediately south and southeast of Mexico, is the northernmost country of the six which constitute Central America. It is a little larger than the state of New York. It is favored with an unusually good climate, with a mild temperature throughout the year. There are two seasons, the rainy season in our summer and the dry season during our winter months.

The population of Guatemala, as estimated on December 31, 1954, was 3,302,000. Of this number 53.6 per cent were claimed to be pure-blooded descendants of the several groups of the Maya race. The fullblood Indians live primarily throughout the higher regions, where they have preserved their ancient traditions and customs.

Guatemala has a wide variety of both flora and fauna. Because of the high mountain ranges, many plants which are natives of Mexico and more northern countries are found there. In the lowlands the vegetation is similar to that found in more southern regions, especially that of the northern parts of South America and the West Indies. Tourists are ". . . delighted with the profusion of exotic fruits and flowers, ranging from the tropical brilliance of orchids and bougainvillea to the delicately scented roses and jasmine beloved of more northern climes." The national flower is the Nonja Blanca (White Nun), a delicate white orchid which grows only in Guatemala. The quetzal, a brilliantly-plumed, long-tailed bird which will not live in captivity, was highly reverenced by the ancient Mayas, and today it is Guatemala's national emblem, signifying love of liberty.

The Guatemalan highlands offer her most spectacular scenery. The towering, pine-clad mountains, many of them volcanoes, shelter deep valleys, gorges, and lakes. Miles and miles of tropical jungles lie in northern and eastern Guatemala. Since it was in the northern and eastern portions of that country, as well as in Honduras and southern Mexico, that the marvelous ancient Maya civilizations flourished, one of the world's most extensive and important archaeological areas lies in these regions.

TOURING GUATEMALA CITY

Guatemala City is built on a mile high plateau, situated two hundred miles from the Carribbean Sea and seventy-five miles from the Pacific Ocean. It was established in 1776, the year of the American War of Independence. This city has a charm which is a combination of old and new. Its narrow streets, laid out when ox-cart and horse were the principal means of transportation, are quaint, clean, and interesting. Beautiful churches and mansions, some of colonial architecture and others modern, stand side by side; and the city is well supplied with modern stores and theaters. There are a number of public squares and well-tended gardens, the largest of which, Parque Central, forms the hub of the city. To the north of the Central Park or plaza, and facing it, stands the National Palace, the official seat of the government; and to the east is the city's most attractive cathedral, the Cathedral de la Cuidad de Guatemala (Cathedral of Guatemala City).

The members of the touring party spent a full day visiting important places in Guatemala City. The National Palace was of unusual interest. Typical of Spanish American architecture, its arched cloistered walls surround courtyards with fountain-fed patios. Inside the building large murals depicting the country's stormy history are on the walls of the spacious halls. Its magnificent reception rooms are paneled in hand-carved Guatemalan mahogany. They are beautiful.

Among the most interesting sites we visited was the Central Market, situated a block from the National Palace. Here we saw every type of native handicraft, practically all flowers, fruits, and vegetables, all kinds of meats and spices which could be found in Guatemala. Hundreds of Indians and Guatemalans do their purchasing and trading there, while tourists choose from the fascinating array of hand-woven textiles, leather goods, carved wood, and silverware.

Perhaps even more interesting to the members of our touring party than the Central Market was the one held daily in the streets toward the south end of the city. That market, which extended along the streets for three or four blocks, was typical of outdoor markets held in the various communities throughout Mexico and Central America. Numerous Indians brought their goods to sell or articles to exchange with each other. The Indian women, with large baskets filled with produce which they carry on their heads, come daily from the surrounding countryside to this Guatemalan market. The men also carry heavy loads on their heads and shoulders, sometimes more than their own individual weights.

In this open-air market in the streets of Guatemala, we saw real native life. The pride of the ancient inhabitants of that country was reflected in the present-day Indians, who maintained their ancient customs and languages and their gorgeously colored costumes. These they had woven on primitive handlooms perhaps as their ancestors in Book of Mormon days had done. The clothing of the Indians throughout all of Guatemala was the most colorful that the writer had ever seen in any other country. The people in their native attire were very attractive.

As we walked through the market and observed all these interesting things, our minds reverted back through the centuries to biblical days as we imagined them when Rachel, with her water jug on her head, met Abraham's servant at the village well. Or perhaps we thought of the time when Lehi's small colony left Jerusalem for the "Promised Land," leaving behind Hebrew maidens who were in the habit of congregating at the community well for the purpose of getting their daily water supply and at the same time keeping informed on social news, customs which had prevailed for centuries in the countries where the Israelites lived. The feeling came over us that we had been transplanted to the Old World and back in time more than 2,500 years to the period of Lehi's departure into the wilderness from the Holy City where history tells us that colorful markets were held and people bargained and traded their goods one with another. We found that the ancient customs transported from Jerusalem by the Nephites had survived in Guatemala, as well as throughout Mexico and all of Central American.

Naturally the most interesting spot in Guatemala to me was the National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. Here are housed numerous valuable carved jade and stone objects and other relics of the ancient Mayas. The members of the touring party carefully observed everything in the museum, and Elder Toby Pingree assisted me in photographing the numerous artifacts which could be considered as Book of Mormon evidences.

VISITING ANTIGUA EN ROUTE TO CHICHICASTENANGO

Our touring party's principal purpose in going to Guatemala was to visit Chichicastenango (Chee-chee-cass-ta-nan go), the headquarters of the Quiche Maya Indians, since I had concluded from my studies of the history, traditions, manners, and customs of the various Indian tribes of the Western Hemisphere that the Quiches were perhaps the most direct descendants of the Nephite-Lamanite peoples of all present-day Indians. I had been informed of the interesting religious ceremonies carried forward by those Indians on Sundays at Chichicastenango, and so we left Guatemala City Saturday morning on December 18 for that place.

Our first stop en route was at the unique and interesting town of Antigua (An-tee-gwa), one of the principal tourist attractions in Guatemala. It is situated twenty-five miles southeast of Guatemala City. There we had the unusual experience of visiting the original permanent colonial capital of Central America, which during the eighteenth century was left in ruins by earthquakes and flood.

Don Pedro de Alvarado, the Spanish general, with his hardy conquistadores, ruthlessly took over Guatemala during the early part of the sixteenth century. These Spanish soldiers treacherously and heartlessly massacred thousands of the Quiche Mayas in 1524, completely defeated them, and took possession of Guatemala in the name of the king of Spain and of Christianity. [^2]

Alvarado founded a capital city in 1524, which was transferred from site to site until finally in March, 1543, the city was established on the present site of Antigua. It was located on a beautiful spot at the foot of Volcan de Agua (Water Volcano) in the Panchoy Valley. It was named the Very Noble and Very Loyal City of Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala, but later it was called Antigua which means ancient.

When Antigua was the old colonial capital it had a population of 75,000 people. It reached such a state of progress and prosperity that it was one of the three principal American cities prior to its destruction, its two rivals being Mexico City and Lima, Peru. It counted among its possessions an up-to-date university, magnificent buildings and palaces, a fine residential district, churches and convents that were superb architectural jewels, and many works of art that bore witness to the great culture which the old romantic colonial city developed.

It enjoyed a period of peace and prosperity for 230 years, and then on July 29, 1773, a terrific earthquake reduced most of the city of Antigua to a heap of ruins. A spot in the Ermita Valley, the present site of Guatemala City, was then selected as the location for the capital city. It was founded in the year 1776 and given the name of Guatemala de la Asuncion.

Antigua at the present time is a small city of 10,000 people; in fact, there are only 15,000 living in Cabecera County, and they live in seven different villages, including that of Antigua.

Although most of the Spanish colonial buildings in Antigua are partially in ruin, they have been carefully preserved. The thing which was awe-inspiring to all of us was the gigantic size of the colonial structures, which is evidenced by the parts of the buildings which remain today. Around the ancient colonial ruins, the modern city has been rebuilt entirely in old Spanish colonial style. Modern Antigua is composed of pastel-hued houses facing narrow cobbled streets, with its background the blue-green volcano—Agua. The atmosphere of bygone centuries has been maintained so well that our touring party members felt as if we were in another world—a calm and gracious world far removed from the bustle of modern life. This was an experience to be long remembered.

DRESS OF THE GUATEMALANS

As we continued our journey towards Chichicastenango, we passed through one Indian village after another. We soon observed that all the men in each village wore identical clothing, and each woman was dressed like all the other women in her particular village. We observed also that the clothing worn in one village was entirely different from that of other villages.

One of our guides, Henry Palicos, in whose car I was riding, explained that it was the custom for the Indians in a community to dress alike, their clothing being made out of cloth with texture, colors, and weave exactly identical throughout the entire community. The same custom prevails for the men as for women. Through being familiar with their clothing, he explained, the people who reside in Guatemala can easily tell exactly in which community the Indians live.

I was somewhat amazed and intensely interested when we came to a town named Patzun (Pat-zoon) to observe that all the men on the streets were wearing a certain type of unusual, peculiar apron. The women on the other hand did not wear such aprons. I called the guide's attention to it. He informed us that the aprons constitute a portion of those Indians' regular daily costume, all the men in that particular village and perhaps the entire tribe having worn that same identical type of apron for as long as he could remember. I suggested that on our way back from Chichicastenango I would like to take some photos of some of the men who were wearing those aprons.

The following day as we entered Patzun we stopped our car and asked two men who were wearing those aprons if we could take their pictures. They readily consented. After photographing them, I asked the two Indians, "Why do you wear those aprons?"

They replied, "It is a sacred custom of our people which has come down to us from the distant past. We wear them because of our traditions and customs."

A year later near the same town, I photographed a man and his wife. As the reader will observe, the man is wearing an apron. The photo of the figurine clothed with an apron was taken in Merida, Yucatan. It is a pre-Columbian Itza Maya figurine.

LAKE ATITLAN

The road to Chichicastenango led upward into the mountains. It was a dirt road with hundreds of chucks and plenty of dust; however, we were fully compensated by the splendor of the Guatemalan mountain scenery. No matter which direction one looked, he saw an abundance of vegetation—trees, shrubs, and flowers of numerous varieties. The country is kept green by the heavy rainfall, with an average precipitation of sixty-five inches per year. In 1947, however, the guide informed us that the rainfall reached ninety-seven inches. During that year the floods were so excessive that many of the roads were washed out; and some of them had not been brought into complete repair when we were there over seven years later.

As we came around a bend in the mountain road, there lying cool and silent 2,000 feet below us—nestled in a small valley, glittering in the sunshine—was perhaps the most beautiful mountain lake I have ever seen, Lake Atitlan (A-tee-tlan). A rapturous thrill went through us. For sheer magnificence and beauty, I believe that Atitlan is surpassed by no other mountain body of water. A feature which makes it so spectacular is the fact that it is surrounded by four or five majestic volcanoes, each cone-shaped and extending to a peak high up in the blue heavens. The entire panorama was awe-inspiring. Guatemala possesses some of the most spectacular scenery found anywhere. Those of our party who had previously enjoyed the splendor of the Swiss Alps claimed that the scenery of Guatemala, especially around Lake Atitlan, equals the majesty and beauty of the Alps.

QUICHE MAYAS AND CHICHICASTENANGO

After relaxing for an hour at Atitlan, we continued our journey to Chichicastenango, an Indian village which lies high in the mountains northward from Atitlan. "Chichi" (Chee-chee), as it is ofttimes affectionately called, is a quaint, small Indian village which has served as a religious and social center for the Quiche Mayas since the time of the Spanish conquest.

We arrived at Chichicastenango shortly before dark. Lodging had been arranged for us at the Maya Inn, an interesting and unusual hotel. The inn was constructed in rambling style, somewhat similar to auto courts in the United States. Four or five Quiche Maya young men, perhaps in their early twenties, served as our bellboys. We asked them for keys to our rooms. They looked somewhat surprised, and then one of them replied: "Nobody ever steals anything here, and no one in Chichicastenango ever locks his doors; in fact, we do not even have keys nor locks." Our experience verified his statement.

The Mayas are intelligent and industrious people, having a higher culture than that of many other tribes of American Indians. It is true that their educational opportunities have been meager; however, their native intelligence is apparent to anyone who will take time to observe them. They are a good-looking, deeply religious, gentle, and appealing people.

It is claimed that the Quiches have retained the purity of their blood strain, perhaps as much so as any other tribe of Indians. Like their ancient Hebrew ancestors, the parents arrange the marriages for their children. [^3] Archaeologists claim that from the earliest times the Mayas have been adverse to marrying peoples who do not belong to their race.

Following the discovery of America, the Quiches vigorously opposed marrying Spanish conquistadores and members of successive groups of European colonists. They have held tenaciously to a traditional custom practiced by the ancient Israelites and brought to America by the Nephites who I believe were among their forebears. This custom was based on a belief that people of Israelite stock are God's chosen people and must keep their racial stock pure. While the Nephites were living the gospel of Jesus Christ during Book of Mormon days, this chosen people doctrine was a safeguard against their marrying Lamanites. After the last great war, the surviving Nephites, however, mixed with the Lamanites; but it seems that the chosen people doctrine survived and was handed down through their pagan posterity, the Quiche Mayas. It has resulted in this people maintaining themselves through successive generations as a more or less pureblood Indian race, perhaps maintaining themselves as direct descendants of Nephite-Lamanite peoples more purely than have any other tribe of the American Indians.

If the foregoing claims are correct—and many people who have made careful studies of the Mayas maintain that they are—our touring party members concluded that we might expect to find that the Indians at Chichicastenango had certain beliefs, customs, and traditions which could connect the Quiches with the Jews. We wondered if any of the Indians would have any resemblances in appearance to the ancient Hebrews. Since our principal interest in going to Chichicastenango was to study the Quiche Mayas, we spent our time observing whether or not the Indians possessed Jewish characteristics. All the members of our party were of the opinion that they did. In social customs, as well as in appearance, they reminded us of the Jews; in fact, we selected Indian after Indian of both sexes who we thought were definitely Hebraic-like in appearance and photographed them.

RELIGION OF THE QUICHE MAYAS

Toward the close of the Book of Mormon period and thereafter, the ancient American progenitors of the Quiche Mayas polluted the true gospel which their forefathers had had. They paganized their religion by instituting a multitude of religious forms and ceremonies which were contrary to those which had been taught by the "White Bearded God," or Jesus Christ, when he visited their ancestors. The most horrible of these innovations was human sacrifice. They adopted this wicked practice just before the close of Book of Mormon history. Mormon wrote on the sacred records: "And they [the Lamanites] did march forward against the city of Teancum, . . . and did take many prisoners, both women and children, and did offer them up as sacrifices unto their idol gods." [^4] This wicked practice was engaged in continuously down to the Spanish conquest by many of the Indian tribes, including the Mayas.

When the Spaniards conquered the Quiches of Guatemala in 1524, the Catholic padres were very anxious to make Christians of the pagan natives, and so they moved the headquarters of the Quiches from Quezaltenango (Kez-al-ta-nan-go) to Chichicastenango, erected a large church building for them called Santo Tomas Cathedral, and placed a Spanish priest there. The Santo Tomas Cathedral stands on the east end of the public plaza facing west. The Indians erected for themselves a church building facing east on the other end of the plaza; and also on top of a hill adjacent to the village they erected a pagan idol. It seems that these devoutly religious Indians felt that by attending mass in the Catholic Church at 8 a.m. on Sundays, followed by Indian pagan ceremonies in the same building, as well as in their own church building, and then climbing to the top of the hill to offer sincere oblations to their pagan idol, they would be positively assured of contact with the heavens.

Over four hundred years have elapsed since the Spanish conquest, and the Quiche Mayas are still pagans. The Catholic priests, failing in their efforts to do away with the numerous pagan practices and beliefs, tolerated them, and merely added as much Catholicism to the Indians' religion as they conveniently could. Therefore the religion of the Quiche Mayas today is a conglomeration, composed of adulterated forms of the original truths from Book of Mormon days with an additional multitude of pagan beliefs and practices, and the portion of the Catholicism which the Spanish padres succeeded in grafting thereon.

QUICHE MAYAS WORSHIPING

Our touring party had purposely arranged to be in Chichicastenango on Sunday so we could observe the Quiches as they worshiped and carried on their marketing. Our fortune was unusually good. We found that the Indians were in the midst of their most important religious festival, which was held annually in honor of their patron Saint, Santo Tomas. This religious festival had been in progress for several days. The Indians feel toward the Santo Tomas Festival somewhat as Latter-day Saints do toward April and October conferences, and so this was no ordinary Sunday that we were at Chichicastenango. However, their religious ceremonies are carried on in a similar way Sunday after Sunday.

In addition to the thousands who had gathered in town from the surrounding country for the religious festival, early Sunday morning witnessed hundreds more of the Quiche Mayas, clad in their picturesque black and red wool costumes, trooping into town from miles around, with their wares, consisting of such items as herds of squealing little black and white pigs, strutting turkeys, scrawny chickens, meats, fruits, pottery, and textiles. They had come to town to trade and to worship. While some of the Indians carried on their marketing, others went to the old church of Santo Tomas. There they clustered on the semi-circular steps, building fires, swinging copal incense burners, and chanting prayers for hour after hour. Indian priests kept a sacred fire burning near the bottom of the cathedral steps throughout the entire day. Other Quiche priests continued to swing their copal incense burners from early morning until the day ended, while they chanted long prayers. The smoke rising from the burning incense, so they believed, carried their prayers to heaven.

Some of our party members attended the eight o'clock mass which the Catholic priest held for the Indians in the Santo Tomas Cathedral. After the Catholic padre completed his services and departed from the room, the Indians, under the direction of their own "high priests," held their religious services. They also held similar services in their own church building.

Beginning at the front door and extending the entire length of the Santo Tomas Cathedral down to the altar, the Indian worshipers reverently placed on the floor numerous ears of corn, surrounded by rose petals of several different colors, green-leafed twigs, fruits, and lighted candles. These they placed in various patterns around which they knelt in family groups and offered lengthy prayers. We were informed that they were calling upon their divine Creator for blessings on their crops, their families, and their homes. Their petitions were sincere and reverent pleas to God for a bounteous harvest the coming year, for the immediate blessings of good health and strength, for protection from harm and evil of all kinds, for blessings in childbirth, and for the gifts of peace, love, and general prosperity.

We had employed a Quiche guide named Sebastian, a young man who—in addition to his native tongue—spoke Spanish and English fluently. He explained that the majority of the Indians hired professional priests to do the praying for them, since they didn't understand the proper incantations and religious formulas requisite to obtain the desired blessings.

I asked Sebastian, "What is the purpose of all of those rose petals that the Indians have carefully spread on the floor?"

He replied that each rose of a different color represented a particular symbol to the Indians; for example, the white petals symbolized the continuance of peace which the natives so greatly desired. Other colors symbolized such things as love, good health, prosperity, and protection in childbirth. These rose petals assisted the prayers in reaching God and the devotees in obtaining their desired blessings.

I then asked, "What is the purpose of so many ears of corn being placed on the floor surrounded by rose leaves and lighted candles?"

He replied, "The priests bless the corn before it is planted, thereby assuring a bounteous harvest."

"Do you think it does any good for your people to pray over their corn before it is planted and implore the heavens for all the other things that you have mentioned?" I inquired.

He unhesitatingly responded, "Oh, yes, I certainly think it does. If my people failed to bring their corn to the church and pray for it on several Sundays before they planted it, the winds and storms would break it down, and they would harvest no crops." With faith of that kind, who would say that God, the Father of the human family, would not hear and answer the prayers of these simple, illiterate, misguided pagan Indians?

Although I recognized the fact that the religion of the Quiches was very pagan, greatly adulterated since Nephite days, I also observed that those people were intensely religious and sincere in their worship, as their ancestors had been. As I saw them praying over their corn before planting it, I recalled that Amulek, one of their ancestors in Book of Mormon days, had carefully instructed his people to pray over their crops. He told them to pray to God with an abundance of faith, and he would bless their crops. To quote from Amulek's sermon:

Therefore may God grant unto you, . . . that you begin to call upon his holy name, . .

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning mid-day, and evening. . . .

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase. . . . [^5]

Another thing I observed while the Indians were worshiping was the large number of candles that some of them were burning. Some groups of lighted candles numbered as many as thirty-five. I asked, "What is the purpose of the lighted candles in the Indian religious worship?"

Sebastian replied, "Each member of a family is represented by a separate candle."

"Do the Indians have as many as thirty-five members in one family?" I inquired.

He explained, "Oh, yes, many families are that large. You see, a family consists of the great-grandparents if they still live, the grandparents, the parents, and all of their posterity." Once again my mind reverted back to biblical days when an ancient Hebrew patriarchal family included the entire clan. Could it be that such an idea had come down through the Nephites and Lamanites and continued on through their posterity to the twentieth-century Quiche Mayas at Chichicastenango?

Perhaps the principal event at Chichicastenango during the Santo Tomas festival was the presentation in a pageant dance of the story of the Spanish conquest of Guatemala. Several months prior to holding the festival, Quiche men were selected to represent various Spanish historical characters and take certain parts in the pageant. They were thoroughly trained in every detail. At the pageant they were dressed in gaily colored costumes, including bearded masks, representing the armor and complete attire of the Spanish conquistadores. The marimba supplied background music for several hours. The whole affair was a very impressive spectacle.

Finally Sunday drew to a close, and the members of our touring party left Chichicastenango for Guatemala City. As we traveled over many miles of the dusty highway, our thoughts remained at "Chichi," meditating on one of the most colorful, unusual, and intensely interesting experiences that we had ever had. It was unique. I doubt that anyone who has seen this festival, smelled the air perfumed with flowers and incense, and heard the soft marimba music, will ever forget his trip to Chichicastenango.

VISITING CHICHEN ITZA

Monday the members of the touring party boarded the plane at Guatemala City and flew to Merida, Yucatan, Mexico. The flight took only two hours. We were met at the airport by representatives of the travel agency and taken to the famous archaeological site of Chichen Itza, which lies approximately seventy miles southeast of the capital of Yucatan. During the following two days, we stayed at the Mayaland Inn at Chichen Itza while visiting archaeological ruins.

The Mayaland Inn is a most interesting and unusual place. The principal hotel contains a dining room, recreation room, curio shop, and a number of bedrooms, with a beautiful flower garden and patio north of the building, and to the east a swimming pool. In addition to the principal hotel, there are a dozen or more thatched-roofed cottages which are unusually attractive. Most of our party members stayed in the cottages. For sheer beauty in landscaping and peacefulness in atmosphere, it would be difficult to find a place to stay equal to the Mayaland Inn.

In the evenings we were entertained by three couples of Itza Maya dancers. Those Indians, especially the women, had white skin, and they were very attractive people. As a result of carrying objects on their heads from childhood up, the women had such perfect posture that they danced vigorously with full glasses of water on their heads without spilling a drop.

Since we were at Chichen Itza a few days before Christmas, each evening the employees at the Mayaland Inn participated in a pageant depicting the birth of Jesus and a ceremonial procession.

Early the first morning after arriving at Chichen Itza, our guides took us to see the archaeological ruins. First, we visited the North Zone where the spectacular Temple of Kukulcan stands. The majority of the party members climbed to its summit. From this vantage point we had a good view of Chichen Itza. To the east stood the spectacular Temple of the Warriors and the Thousand Columns. The market was situated to the south of where we stood; and to the north was an unusual archaeological structure called the Temple of the Tigers. It constituted one of the grandstands of the famous Ball Court.

We were standing on the top platform of the Temple of Kukulcan when our guide pointed along a trail which led perhaps a quarter of a mile into the jungles and explained: "At the end of that trail lies the Sacred Well, fed by an underground stream of water. It is called a Cenote. In addition to worshiping Quetzalcoatl, the ancient inhabitants of this city worshiped rain gods called Chacs. The Itzas were an agricultural people who depended upon rain to cause their corn to grow. In order to win and retain the favor of their rain gods, about the first of May each spring a religious festival was held here at Chichen Itza. The chief priest, bedecked in long quetzal feathers (symbol of Quetzalcoatl) and wearing his priestly robes, accompanied by several beautiful maidens who had been selected months earlier, and followed by a score or more of other priests, descended the steep steps of this massive temple. The procession went past the two platforms, called the Temple of the Eagles and the Tomb of the Chacmool, which you see standing beside the trail. Dancers were performing on top of those temples as part of the religious festival. The procession continued along the trail to the Sacred Well."

Then he said, "We will now go down the steps, as the ancient worshipers of Chichen Itza did, and along the trail to the Cenote. When we arrive I'll finish my story."

When the members of our touring party reached the brink of the Sacred Well and were gazing down its sixty-five feet of perpendicular banks to its greenish waters, our guide, standing on an eminence or platform, continued: "The high priest brought the beautiful maidens to this point, and one by one he hurled them downward into the brackish waters of this well. He and the worshipers returned to this spot at noontime. If they could see any of the girls alive, they pulled them out of the well. If the girls reported that they had visited their ancestors down in the waters of the well and that their ancestors had said that the people would have bounteous crops, the girls were permitted to live. If an unfavorable report was given, the girls were thrown once again into the well and left there to perish."

"How terrible!" gasped some of our party members.

Our guide replied, "To the ancient Mayas, it was not terrible. The girls were offered as human sacrifices to their god. He must be appeased, or the community would perish, so they believed; and so the girls who were chosen for the sacrifices were daughters of royalty. They were of noble birth, the choicest offerings that the people were capable of giving. It was considered an honor to be chosen to be sacrificed in the Sacred Well."

We next visited the Ball Court. Our guide demonstrated the astounding acoustic qualities of this structure by standing midway between the two outer walls. As he spoke, we could distinctly count several echoes.

Pointing to some carvings on the walls depicting the ancient ball game; the guide explained, "As part of the religious festival held for the purpose of securing the favor of their rain gods, and the gods of fertility, two highly trained and efficient ball teams played a game in this Ball Court. They used a large rubber ball, which they knocked with their hips, knees, or some other part of their bodies, without touching it with their hands. The captain of the team which first successfully knocked the ball through the hole in the stone ring, which you see attached to the wall of the Ball Court, cut the head off the captain of the losing team. The rain god must be appeased with a blood sacrifice so he would send rain to water the corn."

Again the response came, "How horrible! And this all took place in the name of religion."

We visited the grandstand at the north end of the Ball Court which is called the "Temple of the Bearded Man." There we observed and photographed the carving of the bearded man which writers have claimed to be an excellent Hebraic representation.

In the Middle Zone of Chichen Itza, the members of our touring party examined with intense interest the Tomb of the High Priest, the House of the Three Brothers, the Nunnery, the Church, the Observatory, and especially the Temple of the Plaques which contains the Chichen Itza horse. All of us were pleased to find that the Maya carving depicting a horse was still there.

MAYAS' INTELLECTUAL ACHIEVEMENTS

As we approached the Caracol or astronomical observatory, our guide explained: "Perhaps there is no archaeological structure at Chichen Itza which was of greater importance to its ancient inhabitants than was this one. In this building the priest-astronomers studied the heavenly bodies. They were outstanding scientists, attaining a knowledge which would have been the envy of any people in the world in their day. Perhaps their knowledge of astronomy was more complete and comprehensive than that of any race of antiquity."

The Maya priest-astrologers

. . . plotted the courses of the planets, including dim and elusive Mercury. So accurate were the measurements of those ancient Maya astronomers, that they differ only slightly in degrees and minutes from those of our present-day astronomers aided by powerful telescopes and advanced mathematical formulas. They were fully aware of a 365 1/4 day year, and developed a calendar of an eighteen-month year of twenty days each, plus a five-day week at the end of each year. To take care of the remaining one-fourth day, they made corrections for leap year at convenient intervals. This they computed and put into daily practice long before the Julian calendar was adopted in Rome and, in consequence, centuries before Pope Gregory XIII called for a conference in 1582 when our present day calendar was created.

The old Mayan astronomers didn't stop with their observations of the movements of the sun, the moon, and the five known planets, but compiled tables of lunar eclipses and predicted these with astounding accuracy. [^6]

In his most recent book, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization, Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson discussed at considerable length the astronomical knowledge attained by the Mayas. He declared that it was a great intellectual achievement for the Maya priest-astronomers to construct a table for predicting when solar eclipses would be visible. [^7] He, like most writers, gives the Mayas full credit for the complete development of all their astronomical knowledge; however, it may be possible that they inherited many ideas from their ancestors—the ancient Israelites.

The ancient Hebrew prophets attained a profound knowledge of the stars and planets by direct revelation from heaven; for example, the Lord appeared to Abraham and gave him power to look into space as if he were using a modern telescope. The Lord showed Abraham a marvelous vision of the numerous works he had created and explained the various heavenly bodies at which Abraham was looking. The ancient prophet wrote: "I saw the stars that they were very great . . . and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof." [^8] The Lord explained to the ancient patriarch the times, seasons, and the laws which govern the solar systems. The knowledge of astronomy received by Father Abraham and recorded for his posterity is in complete agreement with modern astronomical science. [^9]

Moses also received revelations from the Lord regarding astronomy and a vision of the heavenly bodies—God's creations—similar to those received by Abraham. [^10]

In their scriptures these ancient Hebrew patriarchs handed down their knowledge of astronomy to their posterity. The Nephites brought the Hebrew scriptures with them from the Holy City to the New World; and so one is not surprised to find such statements in the Book of Mormon as the following: ". . . and it appeareth unto man that the sun standeth still; yea, and behold, this is so; for surely it is the earth that moveth and not the sun." [^11] Perhaps the basic ideas on astronomy which the Nephites had were handed down to the Mayas.

Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson gives an elaborate discussion on the Maya philosophy of time. In it he states:

So far as this general outlook on life is concerned, the great men of Athens would not have felt out of place in the gathering of Maya priests and rulers, but had the conversation turned on the subject of the philosophical aspects of time, the Athenians—or, for that matter, representatives of any of the great civilizations of history—would have been at sea. No other people in history has taken such an absorbing interest in time as did the Maya, and no other culture has ever developed a philosophy embracing such an unusual subject. . . .

For the Maya time was an all-consuming interest. Every stela and altar was erected to mark the passage of time and was dedicated at the end of a period. [^12]

A little later in his book Dr. Thompson wrote:

. . .the Maya idea of the eternity of time was noble. In the Maya scheme the road over which time had marched stretched into a path so distant that the mind of men cannot comprehend its remoteness . . . indeed, we can feel rather confident that the Maya concluded that time had no beginning. [^13]

It is not surprising that the ancient Mayas considered time to be eternal, since that fact was revealed to one of their ancestors, Father Abraham. The ancient patriarch was also told by the Lord that space and matter have no beginning and no end; in other words, they are all eternal. [^14]

BAPTISM PRACTICED BY THE AMERICAN INDIANS

After we had completed our observation of the famous Maya astronomical observatory, our guide took us a few yards southwest of the observatory and, pointing to a cistern-like structure in the earth, said: "This is an ancient Maya baptismal font. It appears that the Mayas practiced baptism by immersion in it."

As the reader will see in the photograph, a Maya girl is standing in this cistern-like structure, which is circular in form. The top of it comes to her shoulders. It has steps leading down one side to the bottom. The bottom and the sides are made of rock which have been securely cemented together. There is a round hole about five inches in diameter on each side of this cistern-like structure which could have carried fresh water in and emptied water out, to keep the water fresh if it had been used as a baptismal font. The holes are perhaps four feet from the bottom of this cistern, or baptismal font, or whatever it may be.

One of our party members remarked, "This may have been the queen's bath."

Our guide replied, "It would be quite a public place for her to be taking her bath."

When Jesus Christ appeared to the inhabitants of ancient America, he taught them the gospel and instructed them how to baptize by immersion. Christ selected twelve men and gave them the priesthood. He authorized them to baptize the people, and gave them the following definite instructions regarding baptism:

. . . On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no disputations among you.

Verily I say unto you, that whoso repenteth of his sins through your words and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them—Behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them.

And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying:

Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water.

And after this manner shall ye baptize in my name; . . . [^15]

Diego de Landa, the first Catholic bishop who labored among the Itza Mayas of Yucatan following the Spanish conquest, claimed that these Indians were practicing baptism at the time of the arrival of the Europeans. He described the baptismal rite which he had seen performed many times by them. T. A. Willard, in his book, Lost Empires, wrote:

According to illustrations in the hieroglyphic books, coupled with the statements of Bishop Landa, the ancient Itza Mayas practiced baptism for which their word Caputcihil means to be born again. Landa remarks that Yucatan was the only place in the Indies where the rite of baptism was observed prior to the arrival of the Spaniards. [^16]

Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley, who was one of the world's outstanding authorities on the Mayas, in his book, The Ancient Maya, elaborated on Landa's description of baptism. [^17]

The baptism rite described by Bishop Landa was performed by sprinkling the neophyte with holy water. [^18] As has been mentioned, the Nephites practiced baptism by immersion; however, toward the close of their history they adopted the practice of infant baptism. The Prophet Mormon denounced this apostate practice in the most vehement language. [^19]

Several writers have maintained that baptism was practiced by many tribes of Indians at the time of the Spanish conquest. These writers maintain that Bishop Landa was in error when he claimed that the Indians in Yucatan were the only ones practicing baptism when the Europeans arrived in the New World. Dr. P. De Roo presents evidence to sustain the view that the practice of baptism was widespread among the Indians. To quote:

. . . these missionaries, however, and other writers of that time assure us that baptism was administered in several American districts from time immemorial.

. . . the new-born infants of the Canary Islands were baptized by women, who poured water on their heads, . . . The Caribbean islanders and the Pennsylvania continentals of old used to solemnly plunge their babies into cold water in the presence of two witnesses—a man and a woman—and give them a name on that occasion. Baptism was conferred in the territories of Cempoala, Tezcuco, Tlacopan, and throughout the vast empire of Mexico. . . . Sahagun writes that when the holy bishop of Chiapas arrived at Campeche, in the year 1554, on his way to his diocese, in company with several Dominican friars, he not only saw what Montejo had written about the baptism of the Yucatecs, but also learned that all the natives of that country were baptized, no one being allowed to marry before the sacred ceremonies had been performed on him. It was the duty of all the Mayas to have their children baptized, for they believed that by this ablution they received a pure nature, were protected against evil spirits, and possible misfortunes. They held, moreover, that an unbaptized person, whether a man or woman, could not lead a good life or do anything well.

Baptism was in the Mexican empire a religious ceremony, which in Yucatan was called "Zihil," signifying to be born again; and the Nahua nations freely admitted that it would cleanse the soul from all sin, as will soon appear from the ceremonies with which it was administered. [^20]

P. De Roo also claims that Bancroft states that "the rite was administered to children of both sexes at any time between the ages of three and twelve years." [^21]

From the evidence presented, it seems to the writer that the rite of baptism, which was practiced by the Nephites throughout their entire history, was handed down from age to age among the various Indian tribes. The rite practiced in various forms still survived at the time of the coming of the Europeans.

VISITING OLD CHICHEN ITZA

Old Chichen Itza lies securely hidden in the jungles a few miles southwest of the other two archaeological zones. Its buildings are in two principal groups. All of the members of the touring party trudged along a well-beaten path to the first group of archaeological remains. Here the guide showed us carved pillars which he claimed were definitely Egyptian-like in appearance. They date back to within two hundred years of the Book of Mormon period; in fact, it has been claimed that "the Itza occupied Chichen Itza in the year 514 of our era," [^22] or less than one hundred years after Moroni completed his work on the Nephite records. In the North Zone of Chichen Itza, earlier that same day, we had observed Egyptian-like statuary. This Egyptian influence is of marked significance, since Lehi and his family brought much of that culture to America with them.

Some of us hiked farther into the jungles and visited the other section of Old Chichen Itza. Here we observed the "Temple of the Three Lintels," a good example of the Maya classic architecture, erected back near Book of Mormon days when Maya art and architecture attained a peak in development. Night overtook us while we were at Old Chichen Itza, and so we made our way back to the Mayaland Inn along the jungle train through darkness intensified by the thick growth of vegetation.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL RUINS OF UXMAL AND KABAH

From Chichen Itza our touring party returned to Merida, the capital of Yucatan. This city is one of the loveliest, most quaint and interesting places that I have ever seen. We spent a day or two enjoying its people and places of interest, and then visited the archaeological sites of Uxmal (Oosh-mal) and Kabah (Ka-bah).

Uxmal, which lies fifty miles south of Merida, contains some of the most artistic archaeological structures found in any of the ancient Maya cities. The buildings, made by superb craftsmen, are ornamented with delicate, intricate designs of hewn stone. Writers have referred to the rockwork in the archaeological buildings at Uxmal as the ". . . jewel of Maya archaeological craftsmanship." [^23]

The Mayas were masterful builders. "As architects, designers and stone cutters, they excelled. The intrinsic beauty and symmetry of their temples and edifices, the intricate and marvelous carvings on columns and facades—sometimes covering the whole fronts of imposing buildings—are mute but striking testimonies of the knowledge and skill possessed by those ancient builders." [^24]

We arrived at Uxmal just as the sun was appearing over the eastern horizon. As our cars pulled into the place reserved for parking the first structure to meet our gaze was a gigantic pyramid called the "Temple of the Dwarf" or the "House of the Magician." Maya legend maintains that a dwarf erected this massive structure during one night. As we climbed the steps up its practically perpendicular side to its summit—which is one hundred two feet above the surrounding country—we concluded that whoever the builders of that gigantic structure were, they should be credited with an unusual accomplishment. A photograph of this tall pyramid is reproduced on the following page.

As we climbed down the west side of the Temple of the Dwarf, we observed that its cornice presented ". . . a highly elaborate ornamentation, the principal motif of which was stone panels with serpent reliefs, frets with serpent-like details . . . next [we observed] a series of jars and at the end a row of finely polished stones in the shape of snake vertebrae." [^25] The extensive use of the serpent motif gave evidence that the ancient builders of Uxmal were worshipers of Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God." [^26]

We next entered a large quadrangle plaza, measuring 258 feet by 214 feet, which was completely surrounded by four large rectangular buildings. Their ornate fronts face inward toward the enclosed courtyard. This archaeological group is called the "Nunnery." The building across the west end is "profusely ornamented with feather-like motif [quetzal feathers]. . . . At a point forty-nine feet from each end of the facade we see two entwined serpents (rattlesnakes) . . . the head and tail of each lying to either side of the entwining point." [^27] The bodies of other serpents in diversified positions appeared in various places, as well as carvings of feathers beautifully executed.

This structure is known as the building of the "high priests" of Quetzalcoatl, connoting the worship of the "White Bearded God."

The "Temple of Venus," named by archaeologists, and the structure attached to it compose the buildings on the north of the plaza. They are claimed to have been erected to the Maya royalty. The structure across the east was erected to the warriors, and the one along the south of the quadrangle to the common people. The carved rock-veneering on these buildings is a masterpiece of artistry.

We next visited the "Governor's Palace." "This building, reared on three successive colossal terraces, is regarded as one of the most important and magnificent monuments in the New World." [^28] The building is partially separated into three parts, a long middle section and two shorter end sections. The serpent symbol also appears in several places on this building. "On top of the doorway is a central V-shaped device composed of nine horizontally placed serpents with bar-like bodies and heads at both ends." [^29] From an architectural viewpoint, the Governor's Palace is a real masterpiece of antiquity. Its arches, its gigantic size, its beautiful carved rockwork, and especially the symmetry of its lines, all contribute in presenting a harmonious unit which make this building a most spectacular structure. A Mexican writer concluded:

As a matter of truth, very few archaeological sites are as important as the city of Uxmal from a general point of view: Its great temples and huge pyramids, courts and palaces, each built on a different ground plan and level, all together, because of their crowded distribution, make the whole view to bring about a never-to-be-forgotten impression in the eyes of the visitor who feels compelled to pay a tribute of admiration to the great Maya architects of those ages whose ideas crystallized into such marvelous stone gems. Take for instance, the patio-facing facades of the East and West Ranges in the quadrangle of the Nunnery; or the east facade of the House of the Governor. Could ever be found anything in its kind so delicate, so profusely ornamented and so skillfully sculptured? [^30]

Uxmal was linked in ancient times with Kabah—another large Maya city located six miles to the southeast—by a stone causeway or road which is now entirely covered with vegetation. A large arch composed of rock formed the gateway to Kabah.

About noon our touring party visited Kabah. Two beautiful buildings—the "Temple of Venus" and the "Temple of the Masks"—stand majestically on an eminence plainly visible to people who pass on the highway. They are surrounded by other archaeological ruins.

We returned to Merida that afternoon and took the plane for Mexico City, arriving after dark. It was Christmas Eve.

TOURING MEXICO

All of the members of our touring party were guests at the mission home for Christmas dinner and were entertained by a program presented during the afternoon by the missionaries. President and Sister Claudious Bowman, who preside over the Mexican Mission, stated that as long as they were preparing Christmas dinner for sixty-five missionaries, the addition of the twenty-one members of our touring party would make no added work whatsoever. Such generosity and hospitality are seldom seen.

We spent twelve days touring the various places of interest in Mexico in addition to the time we spent in Yucatan. We went to several outstanding archaeological sites in which we were intensely interested. At Tenayuca we viewed a large pyramid whose base is embellished with numerous serpents. We then went to the famous archaeological site of Teotihuacan, located twenty-six miles north of Mexico City. The extensive use of the Quetzalcoatl serpent motifs at these places connotes the worship of Quetzalcoatl, whom Latter-day Saints believe originally was the Savior. Some recent writers date Teotihuacan from the fourth to the ninth century A.D. [^31] Its beginning would be—according to those dates—during the closing period of Book of Mormon history.

We went approximately seventy miles east of Mexico City to the gigantic pyramid of Cholula which has a base covering approximately forty acres. Several ancient civilizations lived there, each building a pyramid covering the previously erected one; and so the huge Cholula pyramid presents the work of several successive peoples. The innermost structure was erected somewhere near B.C. 2500, and so it would date during the Jaredite period.

We traveled approximately two hundred miles southward to the city of Oaxaca, the center of the land of the famous Zapotec Indians. Situated on the top of a hill about four miles southwest of the city is Monte Alban (Mon-tay Al-ban) with its unusual archaeological ruins. Archaeologists state that the first temples were erected approximately B.C. 1500 (Jaredite period); and that from that date a succession of worshipers of several races down to the time of the Spanish conquest carried forward their religious ceremonies at this sacred shrine.

Our touring party traveled thirty miles southeast of Oaxaca to Mitla (Meet-la). The stone work at this archaeological site rates among the most beautiful in the Western Hemisphere. The veneered carved stones are inlaid on the walls of the buildings in exquisite mosaic patterns. These beautiful archaeological structures are commendable works of art. They were erected by the Zapotec, Mixtec, and other Indian descendants of Book of Mormon peoples.

We photographed a number of important relics in a private museum at Mitla, operated by E. R. Frissell; and then we returned to Oaxaca and visited the excellent archaeological museum in that city. The following day we returned to Mexico City.

In addition to our archaeological trips, we visited such tourist attractions as the cities of Cuernavaca (Kwer-na-va-ca), Taxco (Tass-co), and Acapulco (A-ca-pool-co); and within Mexico City, we visited the beautiful modernistic University of Mexico, the Cathedral of the City of Mexico, the Cathedral of the Virgin of Guadalupe, Xochimilco or the Floating Gardens, leather and silver shops, and especially the National Archaeological Museum and the Palace of Fine Arts.

Finally our most interesting tour of "Book of Mormon Lands" was completed, and on January 6, 1955, the party members returned by plane to Salt Lake City. I remained in Mexico, however, to study numerous additional archaeological sites with Otto Done and Jose Davila.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Matthew W. Stirling, Stone Monuments of Southern Mexico (Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution Bulletin 138) (Washington D. C., 1943), p. 61.
[^2] Dr. M. Wells Jakeman, Bulletin of the University (Archaeological Society, Provo, March, 1953), pp. 26-49.
[^3] 1 Nephi 8:1-38.
[^4] The Miraflores, Mamon-Chicanel, and Plaza de Meurtos underlie Classic Maya artifacts. They appear to belong to the early "Nahuale-Nephite-Lamanite" people of the documentary sources. Alfred V. Kidder, et al, Kaminaljuyu, Gautemala (1946), publication 561, Carnegie Institution of Washington, D.C., pp. 241-244, 260.
[^5] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (1946), p. 40.
[^6] J. Eric S. Thompson, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization (Norman, Oklahoma, 1954), p. 53.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 54-55.
[^8] Ibid., p. 55.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 70-71.
[^10] Ibid., p. 62.
[^11] Ibid., p. 67
[^12] Ibid., pp. 56-57.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 53-54.
[^14] Cited in Archaeology in Mexico Today (Mexico. D. F., 1952), p. 11.
[^15] Ibid., p. 36.
[^16] Ibid., p. 37.
[^17] George C. Vaillant, Aztecs of Mexico (Garden City, New York, 1948), p. 276.
[^18] Archaeology in Mexico Today, op. cit., p. 36.
[^19] Vaillant, op. cit., p. 159.
[^20] Ether 7:8-9.
[^21] Ibid., 10:23.
[^22] 1 Nephi 16:18.
[^23] Ibid., 4:9.
[^24] 2 Nephi 5:14.
[^25] Omni 1:17; Mosiah 22:2; Alma 1:9-12; 2:1; 17:39; 57:3; Mormon 6:15; Mormon 9:2.
[^26] 2 Nephi 5:15.
[^27] Jarom 1:8.
[^28] Mosiah 11:3.
[^29] Ibid., 11:8.
[^30] Archaeology in Mexico Today, op. cit., pp. 16-19.
[^31] Ibid., p. 45.
