Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 6

VISITING MESO-AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

MESO-AMERICA'S ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

Mexico and its adjacent countries to the south—Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador—are ofttimes referred to as Meso-America. These countries are literally dotted with archaeological sites of marked importance which bear mute evidence that past civilizations have lived there. The Americans of past ages attained a relatively high culture, and their achievements were outstanding along numerous lines. The ancient Mayas of Yucatan, Tabasco, and Chiapas—all states of Mexico—as well as the Mayas of Guatemala, British Honduras, Honduras, and El Salvador left evidences of past accomplishments which have been a marvel to modern scholars, as well as to tourists. The Toltecs, Aztecs, Zapotecs (Zap-oh-tecks), Olmecs, and numerous other Indian groups of Mexico left evidences of by-gone days of splendor and high achievements. Archaeological sites of all these ancient peoples have attracted the interest of explorers, adventurers, archaeologists, authors, and tourists. I became intensely interested.

PREPARATIONS TO VISIT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

Jose Davila, Otto Done, and I went to see Dr. Eduardo Noguero, Director of Pre-Spanish Monuments in Mexico, and secured letters authorizing us to visit and take photographs at the major museums and archaeological sites throughout all of Mexico, including Yucatan. He graciously gave me approximately forty-five separate personal letters addressed to the directors of various archaeological sites and museums. His graciousness could not have been surpassed.

I also visited the Honorable Francis White, United States Ambassador to Mexico, and was cordially received. After he had inquired about the welfare of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.—one of his personal friends for many years—and asked me to give his deep regards to him, Mr. White wrote me a letter of introduction to the United States Ambassador in Guatemala City, requesting that he extend to us any assistance or courtesy that we might need while in that country.

Otto, Jose, and I spent two or three days in Mexico City photographing the artifacts, murals, and monuments in the National Museum of Mexico and the Palace of Fine Arts, and in making preparations to leave for the jungles.

We assembled our photographic materials, which were quite extensive. We obtained army hammocks so we could sleep wherever night might overtake us. We took practically no food along, with the thought in mind that when we were in small settlements we would be able to purchase sufficient food to sustain us. One member of our party desired to take a gun along, arguing that we might need the gun to protect ourselves against hostile Indians or wild beasts, such as jaguars, which infest the jungles. We considered the matter for a few moments and then decided that it would be best not to have a gun with us. We would put our trust in the Lord, and we felt that he would bring us safely out of the jungles. The remainder of our equipment consisted of vioform tablets to ward off dysentery, paludine pills to prevent malaria, insect repellent number 612 to ward off mosquitoes, pills to disinfect drinking water which we would have to use directly from streams and lakes, canteens, matches, pocketknives, and a machete to cut away the jungle vegetation, as well as to protect ourselves against snakes and similar creatures. We also wore high-top shoes and leather gloves to give added protection against serpents and insects, and provided ourselves with an ample supply of rattlesnake serum. We took along a fairly good supply of inexpensive but useful presents for the Indians whom we hoped to induce to guide us to various archaeological ruins.

We all felt that we were blessed abundantly throughout the entire trip. We went entirely through our trip in the jungles and also in the small Indian towns without one minute's illness, without a mishap of any kind, and in all respects got along very well. We ate food on many occasions which one ordinarily might think would make him ill. We saw only two or three serpents, and they got out of our way as fast as possible. Although it is claimed that jaguars are numerous in the jungles of southern Mexico, the nearest we came to seeing one was at the home of the Lacandon Indians. One of the Indian men had recently killed a jaguar, and we saw its beautiful skin.

THE TREE OF LIFE AT IZAPA, MEXICO

On January 9, 1955, Otto, Jose, and I headed south from Mexico City by plane. Our first stop which took place early that afternoon was at the city of Tapachula (Tap-a-choo'-la), situated in the extreme southwest corner of Mexico. We arrived there in the early afternoon. After making reservations at a hotel, we hired a taxi to drive us several miles south of Tapachula to a place called Izapa (Ee-zap'-a). From the highway, we went a short distance into the jungles to a native's home where we secured the services of two small boys to guide us to the archaeological ruins. Our purpose was to see the famous stela which was discovered in 1939 by Matthew W. Stirling at Izapa on which was carved, according to archaeologists, "The Tree of Life." [^1] Dr. M. Wells Jakeman [^2] of the Brigham Young University wrote an article on this archaeological find in which he claims that the carving represents "Lehi's Dream," as recorded in the Book of Mormon. [^3] We spent the remainder of the afternoon chalking the various figures that had been carved anciently on the stela so we could be assured of obtaining good photographs of the carvings. After dark that night we returned to Tapachula and early the next morning were back at Izapa. We explored the archaeological site rather carefully, studying numerous other stelae and counted about fifty mounds which were pyramids in ancient times. We also took a number of photographs of the carving of the Tree of Life or Lehi's Dream on that famous stela.

THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RUINS OF KAMINALJUYU AND THE GUATEMALA MUSEUM

It was a short flight from Tapachula to Guatemala City, occupying perhaps no more than one hour's time. We were met at the airport by Elder Toby Pingree, who shortly thereafter became a counselor in the mission presidency of the Central American Mission. Elder Pingree had made arrangements for us to hire an aviator and his small plane to take us to the various archaeological fields in Guatemala and Honduras. The mission president graciously consented for Elder Pingree to accompany us.

The first spot of archaeological interest which we visited in Guatemala was the ruins of Kaminaljuyu (Kam-ee-nal-hoo'-you), located adjacent to the outskirts of Guatemala City. It is claimed by archaeologists that this site dates back into the early Christian peroid (about A.D. 320), and so its beginning was contemporaneous with the latter portion of the Book of Mormon. There are a number of mounds at that archaeological site which in ancient times were pyramids crowned with temples. Perhaps the temples were constructed of wood and have completely decomposed. Dr. Alfred V. Kidder, one of the greatest authorities on Maya archaeology, and other noteworthy scientists have done considerable work at this site and other ancient ruins in Guatemala. In some of these mounds at Kaminaljuyu they found tombs, the vaults of which were made of excellent cement. From these tombs they obtained such treasures as jade beads, jade beautifully decorated with Maya carvings, and other artifacts. These relics are housed in the National Museum in Guatemala City and photographs of some of them are shown later in the book.

As I looked at the cement vaults, I recalled the statements in the Book of Mormon wherein these ancient Nephites claimed to be experts in making cement. Certainly this cement which had remained in good condition for nearly two thousand years was good cement.

The archaeological sites in the Guatemala highlands, such as Kaminaljuyu, Chukumuk near Lake Atitlan, and Alta Verapaz contained artifacts which antedate the Classic Maya remains which date from about A.D. 320. This early Meso-American culture is "on a level with, and extraordinarily like, those of our own cultural ancestors of the ancient Near East, or Palestine." [^4] The Book of Mormon peoples came from that land. In the words of Sylvanus G. Morley, an eminent scholar in this field:

. . . the Maya civilization—or, better, those cultural elements which led up to it—had their beginnings between two and three thousand years ago, roughly some time during the first millennium before Christ, . . . [^5]

We completed our work at Kaminaljuyu, and returned to Guatemala City to photograph the numerous important artifacts housed in the National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. We did not arrive back at the museum until late afternoon. The museum director received us cordially. On my visit there three weeks earlier, he allowed me to photograph whatever I desired. Some of the photographs taken on the first trip were not as good as they should have been and other objects I hadn't had time to photograph; and so we once again asked for the privilege of photographing the relics in the museum. He kindly granted us the privilege. Thirty minutes later he came to me and said, "It is time for the museum to close."

I replied, "We have hardly begun photographing the things which I desire to photograph. This will be our last opportunity to do this work in your museum, since we are going into the jungles in the morning."

Thereupon he replied: "You are perfectly welcome to stay here as long as you desire. I will close the museum and all of the employees will go home except a guard that we keep here throughout the night. He will be sitting by the front door. When you complete your work, he will let you out." Such graciousness could not be surpassed in any country.

The National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology in Guatemala City has an excellent collection of ancient Maya relics. Of special interest to us were the bearded men, who were Hebraic-like in appearance, the beautiful pieces of carved jade, the ancient stela that had been moved from Piedras Negras, and especially the reproduction of the Bonampak and the Uaxactun murals. There were also a number of interesting Maya incense burners, vases, and other ceramic pieces, and a stone carving of what had the appearance of being a deer's head. It had a forelock between its ears which hung down the front of its head similar to that on a horse. In talking to the museum director, I was told that it might be a representation of a horse's head.

THE ANCIENT ART CENTER OF COPAN

The sun had hardly arisen the following morning when we put our cameras, hammocks, and other necessary equipment in a small, one-motor plane, and five of us—Elder Toby Pingree, Jose Davila, Otto Done, the aviator, and I—crowded into the two narrow seats which had been made to accommodate no more than four people. As our plane left the Guatemala airport and climbed above the high mountain peaks east of the city, we soon learned that we had an excellent pilot. His name was Alfred Silva Romero. As a young man he had lived in Colombia, South America. He had joined the United States Navy and received his training as a pilot while serving. He now owned two or three small airplanes which he used to taxi people to various places in Central America and at times into Mexico.

Although, according to the calendar, it was midwinter, the weather was perfect. The sun shone down as warmly as it does in our country on the most beautiful spring or fall days. The winter months in Guatemala are ideal.

As we passed over the rugged mountains of Guatemala and then descended to the lowlands toward the eastern side of the country, the pilot kept the plane not far above the treetops. This gave us an unusually good perspective of the landscape below us. During the next few days, we had the privilege of viewing much of Guatemala from the air. I became fully convinced that Guatemala is one of the most beautiful countries in the world.

The first stop on our journey was Copan. These famous archaeological ruins lie just over the border of Guatemala in Honduras. The plane landed on a dirt airstrip, and the aviator taxied it back to the side of a little store. As we got out of it, we were met by a small group of curious Hondurans who perhaps sit on the steps of the store and wait for the occasional arrival of airplanes bringing people to the Copan ruins.

Since our itinerary was crowded we had very little time to loiter, and so as soon as possible we took our cameras from the plane and hiked towards the archaeological ruins. They lay within perhaps a half mile of the airstrip.

Few times in my life have I had greater thrills than I experienced during the following three or four hours as we observed numerous beautiful stelae, pyramids, old temples, the Ball Court, and the Hebraic-like representation of a bearded man on a vase. These constituted the principal things of interest at these unusual archaeological ruins. Copan is considered by the archaeologists as the ancient cultural center of the Mayas during the Classic Period. The dated stone monuments or stelae in Copan go back to as early as A.D. 490, which is only seventy years after the close of the Book of Mormon records.

Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson states that during the Classic Period of the Mayas, near the date of about A.D. 300, they began to erect large stone stelae. [^6] As a result of his extensive research, he arrived at the following conclusion:

On the strength of architecture and hieroglyphs, Maya civilization was well under way by the middle of the fourth century, but it was not until the fifth century was well advanced that Maya sculpture had developed fully its own style.

Before A.D. 450 the custom of erecting dated monuments was, so far as present evidence indicates, confined to half a dozen sites clustered within an area of less than two hundred square miles in the forest land of northern Peten. By the end of the century, the custom had spread northward to Oxkintok, in distant Yucatan, and southeastward to Copan, over the border into modern Honduras. . .

. . . Maya had surely been living in Copan and Oxkintok long before they started carving stelae or erecting vaulted buildings. These were manifestations of a spreading cult, just as mosques and Arabic script mark the spread of Islam. [^7]

According to the quotations just given from Thompson and the opinion of other Maya archaeologists, it is quite likely that Copan was a flourishing town during the latter part of the Book of Mormon period. The Maya culture which developed there would, therefore, be an outgrowth of Nephite-Lamanite civilization.

In regards to the purpose of the stelae, Dr. Thompson states:

Stelae bear witness to the incredible preoccupation with the mysteries of time which so profoundly affect Maya culture. Priest-astronomers recorded on these stone shafts their progress in astronomy and mathematics; the best artists were employed in carving on them representations of their gods, and for them were reserved the most important positions before pyramids and palaces. [^8]

For perhaps four hundred years the city of Copan served as one of the great culture centers in the Old Maya Empire. It has been compared to Alexandria in Egypt by some writers. Dr. Thompson gives an excellent description of Copan, which I shall quote:

Copan, 2,000 feet above sea level, backing (not facing) on the river of the same name, stood high in both science and art. This center appears to have been in the van in solving problems connected with the length of the tropical year, a matter of supreme importance to the Maya for ritual and divination, and there is some evidence that astronomers of Copan either formulated the extremely good eclipse tables used by the Mayas, or were sufficiently intelligent to recognize the brilliance of an outsider's work and embody his ideas in their own system. Yet in art Copan was equal to any other Maya city, and in one respect perhaps the head of all, for the personages sculptured on some of its stelae stand out from the stone mass of the shafts in a remarkable manner, and the friezes depicting seated individuals reveal exceptional skill in portraiture. In architecture, the inspiring hieroglyphic stairway of Copan stands alone. The rise of each step of this stone stairway is decorated with hieroglyphics, each deeply and carefully carved. The flight of sixty-three steps rises majestically to a height of eighty-six feet above the level of the court. At intervals were seated five figures of gods or priests, each some six feet high, as though guarding the ascent to the temple which once crowned the summit. There is a decorated ramp on each side of the stairway, making a total breadth of thirty-three feet. The ramps, too, are elaborately carved with celestial bird-and-serpent monsters. . . .

From the door of this temple the Maya had a fine view of the ball court below and slightly to the right, with the stelae-studded ceremonial court beyond, or if one turned half-left, he saw the temple with its beautifully sculptured friezes of individuals and mythical beings. . . .

This great city, with its magnificent stelae, with the soft beauty of its light-green trachyte stone used in such imposing masses, and with the ornate pomp of its great hieroglyphic stairway, has an emotional magnificence enhanced by the grandeur of the surrounding mountains—"Each give each a double charm / As pearls upon an Aethiop's arm." There is a peaceful splendor here, which, the wickedness of child sacrifice forgotten or forgiven, now invokes the incomparable third movement of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. [^9]

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES OF QUIRIGUA AND TAYASAL

By mid-afternoon we had completed our photographic work and observations of the archaeological marvels of Copan; and so we returned to the plane and flew to Quirigua. Upon landing at the airport of that city, we found that we were nine miles from the archaeological ruins. There was no highway to them. The only way we could reach them was by going on the United Fruit Company's railway. To do so it would have been necessary for us to lay over until one o'clock the next day. We didn't have time in our itinerary to wait, and so we had to leave without seeing the marvelous archaeological site of Quirigua; however, the following year I had that privilege.

We next flew to Flores (Flor'-ays), located on an island in Lake Peten. We stayed there that night and the following morning visited the archaeological ruins of Tayasal (Ta-ya-sal'). This place served at one time as the home of the Itza Mayas who had fled from Chichen Itza at the time of the Spanish conquest and settled in Lake Peten. They continued the Maya culture of erecting stelae until their conquest by the Spaniards in A.D. 1697.

For sheer beauty of scenery and natural setting, perhaps the modern town of Flores and the ancient archaeological zone of Tayasal are unsurpassed. I have never seen any place which I thought was more beautiful.

VISITING TIKAL AND UAXACTUN

Before noon we left the beautiful site of Flores and flew to Tikal (Tee-kal'), located in the lowland jungle country of northeastern Guatemala. We arrived shortly before noon. As the airplane landed on a dirt airstrip covered with tall grass, a large flock of wild turkeys flew into the surrounding jungles. Tikal is one of the oldest of the Maya cities of the Classic Period. According to archaeologists, it was also the largest ancient Maya city, having perhaps at one time a population of one to two million people at its height. According to glyphs recorded on stelae, archaeologists are of the opinion that this city flourished as early as the beginning of the fourth century A.D.; i.e., by A.D. 300. A number of gigantic temple-crowned pyramids were erected at Tikal by the ancient builders. The highest of the pyramids stood 190 feet, and it was capped with a temple which stood perhaps an additional twenty feet higher. Dr. Thompson states: "A very rough estimate of the area of the pyramid and stairway alone indicates a volume of about half a million cubic feet of rubble and masonry to support three rooms which have a combined floor space of less than 150 square feet." [^10]

After getting out of the airplane we hurried along a jungle trail for perhaps about a mile from the airstrip to the first tall pyramid. During the next several hours we climbed to the top of pyramid after pyramid and enjoyed thinking of the people with their ancient ceremonies who had occupied this city during late Book of Mormon times and thereafter.

We observed cement in a number of places. The rooms were finished with a beautiful white plaster. Somebody had dug into the plaster in the doorway of one of the buildings. I measured it and found that it was eight inches thick. We recalled that the Book of Mormon historians claimed that the Nephites became experts in the use of cement; and from the appearance of that building and others, they and their posterity also became expert in the use of plaster and stucco.

The Mayas at Tikal erected many stelae. Archaeologists have counted eighty-six of them. Many of them were covered with stucco and the inscriptions carved thereon. The stucco has dropped off, and so at the present time sixty-five of the stelae are plain. [^11] In the words of Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, describing the Mayas during the Classic Period:

City after city adopted the stela cult, and the cities vied with one another in erecting temple-topped pyramids and "palaces" and in beautifying buildings and monuments with sculpture and modeled stucco. Hieroglyphic inscriptions have been found at no less than ninety sites. . . .Tikal has a number of texts sculptured on altars and wooden lintels. . . . These numerous inscriptions, taken in conjunction with the huge building programs, indicate the tremendous activity that marked the Classic Period throughout the lowlands. [^12]

Not long before sundown we flew from Tikal to Uaxactun (Wash-ack-toon). During the following forenoon we visited the intensely interesting archaeological ruins at that place. One of the earliest dates yet discovered was carved on a stela at Uaxactun.

This stela records in dreadfully eroded glyphs the equivalent in the Maya calendar (according to the most generally accepted correlation) of April 9, A.D. 328. It was still standing, although very much the worse for wear, when the late Maya scholar Sylvanus Morley found it in 1916, nearly sixteen hundred years after its erection.

Actually we can push the development of hieroglyphic writing at Uaxactun farther back towards the beginning of the Christian era. Stela 9 had before it an altar which was the reshaped lower half of an upper stela (No. 10). Unfortunately, the small glyphs on this surviving fragment are too weathered to be deciphered, and it is not possible to say whether it was placed as the altar of Stela 9 at the time of the latter's dedication. However, Tatiana Proskouriakoff, the outstanding student of Maya sculpture, believes it to be earlier than Stela 9. . . . There is, accordingly, a good chance that this monument carried the stela record at Uaxactun farther back towards the beginning of the Christian era. [^13]

Dr. Spinden's correlation of Maya dates places the dates 260 years earlier than the one used by Dr. Thompson, and so Spinden's dating would place Stelae 9 at Uaxactun at A.D. 68. Either date, however, would be within Book of Mormon times, since Moroni did not complete the records until A.D. 421.

Stela 9 stands in front of an old pyramid which some archaeologists have dated in the B.C. period. We were highly thrilled to visit the archaeological ruins at Uaxactun, knowing that we were in places which were occupied during the Nephite period. The plaster on the walls, the stucco work, and the cement were very much like those at Tikal. This is understandable, since they were developed during the same period and located only fifteen miles apart.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL RUINS OF ZACULEU NEAR HUEHUETENANGO

About noon we left Uaxactun and flew to the archaeological site of Zaculeu (Zac-a-loo). The ancient city of Zaculeu stands on a magnificent plateau in the shadow of the Cuchumatanes Mountains in western Gautemala. The site is three miles southwest of the city of Huehuetenango. (Way-way-te-nan-go). The Mayas were still living at Zaculeu at the time of the Spanish conquest. They offered the fiercest sort of resistance to Gonzalo de Alvarado before they were defeated in 1525.

Between February, 1946, and April, 1949, archaeologists, sponsored by the United Fruit Company, restored a number of the ancient buildings at Zaculeu to the condition they were at the time of the Spanish conquest. There are forty-one mounds at this ancient archaeological site. Only certain ones were selected for restoration. All the pottery, ornaments of jade, gold, copper, and alloy were classified, and a typical selection was placed in a small museum near the archaeological structures.

At Zaculeu, as at numerous other archaeological sites, we noticed that there were three rooms in many of the buildings. As the reader will see in the photographs, there are three doorways leading into two of the buildings. We observed at Chichen Itza, Yucatan, that there were three doorways leading into the "Home of the Three Brothers," and the same fact holds true in regards to the "Temple of the Painted Walls" at Bonampak. Also there are three mounds or temples on the east end of the Quetzalcoatl quadrangle of Teotihuacan, Mexico. Many of the carvings of serpents at Chichen Itza have three rattles. I do not know whether or not this continuous repetition of threes throughout the ancient archaeological sites has any special significance; however, guides at the various archaeological zones claimed that it does. Several guides told us that these repetitions of threes were symbolic of the Godhead, or the three members of the Holy Trinity. It is quite logical to believe that such may have been the case, since the ancestors of the American Indians had the true gospel of Jesus Christ, with a thorough understanding of the Godhead

We left the archaeological site of Zaculeu when darkness came and flew back to the city of Guatemala.

VISITING ARCHAEOLOGICAL RUINS IN YUCATAN, BONAMPAK, AND PALENQUE

The following day Otto, Jose, and I flew from Guatemala City to Yucatan, Mexico, leaving Elder Toby Pingree to resume his missionary labors in Guatemala. We spent one day at Chichen Itza, going there primarily to take moving pictures of the ruins. The following day we did the same type of work at Uxmal and Kabah. One of the unusual structures that we photographed was the famous "Arch of Kabah," which served in ancient times as the gateway to the city. It is situated on the west side of the Kabah archaeological zone. The ancient Maya inhabitants of that city traveled on a paved highway through the arch to the city of Uxmal. The photograph on the following page shows the writer standing between the two pillars of the Arch of Kabah. Otto Done was the photographer.

Otto, Jose, and I traveled from Kabah to Campeche by car. About five o'clock that afternoon we got on the train to travel to Tenosique, where we arrived about twelve hours later.

As soon as daylight came we arranged with a man who owned a small plane to carry us into the jungles near Bonampak. Our purpose was to visit the "Temple of the Painted Walls," situated in the jungles of southeastern Mexico. During that day and the two that followed, we had an unusual and intensely interesting experience, which included hiking thirty-two miles, seeing the unusual Maya murals of white and dark peoples on the walls of an ancient temple at Bonampak, and visiting with the Lacandon Indians. Our trip to Bonampak and our description of the Lacandons will be described in the following chapter.

After our trip in the jungles, the aviator with his small private plane met us on the dirt airstrip sixteen miles from Bonampak and flew us to the famous archaeological site of Palenque. For many years I had strongly desired to see Palenque, since I had read in the archaeological books about the famous crosses found there, and the Egyptian-type burial recently discovered by Dr. Ruz. These things furnish valid Book of Mormon evidences. Our trip to the archaeological site of Palenque was most interesting and profitable. After we had completed our work at that archaeological zone, the aviator picked us up and took us to Villahermosa (Vee-ya-air-mo-sa). At that place we boarded a plane on a commercial airline and flew back to Mexico City.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES OF COPILCO, AND CUICUILCO

According to most archaeologists, thousands of years ago the valley of Mexico was an active center of civilization. The rivers watered rich cultivated fields. The active volcano Xitle, nestled in the Ajusco Mountain Range, stood above the homes and farms of these ancient Americans. The people who lived during that ancient period are referred to by archaeologists as archaic man, but perhaps they date within the Jaredite period. The volcano Xitle erupted, spreading forth flames and rock with such fury that the inhabitants of the valley and their homes were covered with burning lava, and the river beds were completely filled. Finally the volcano tired and died, leaving part of the valley covered with black stone, a permanent reminder of her terrible wrath. The lava cooled, and as time passed, plants and animal life eventually once again filled the valley. Men returned to reoccupy it. They opened roads there and built their houses on the black rock. They called this land Pedregal.

President Claudious Bowman of the Mexican Mission, Otto Done, and I, went to the south end of Mexico City to view the archaeological site of Copilco (Co-peel-co). Through the investigations made by the Department of Anthropology, human remains, an abundance of ceramics, and utensils of stone have been found by tunneling under a thirty foot layer of lava. These remains were found in the form of a tomb, and so the scholars came to the conclusion that this spot was an ancient burial ground used by the inhabitants of Mexico Valley before the eruption of Xitle. The accompanying photograph shows President Bowman and the writer at Copilco, observing the massive layer of lave which covers this ancient archaeological site. We then went through the iron gateway into the tunnel to view the skeletons and artifacts found by those who excavated at this site.

Anthropologists claim that the human skeletons found at Copilco are anthropologically similar to modern man. I measured the length of the one shown in the photograph. It indicated that their people were very large, since this particular skeleton was six feet tall. As I looked at this large skeleton, I recalled that the Book of Mormon implied that the Jaredites were of very large stature.

We left Copilco and drove three miles south of Mexico City to the archaeological ruins of Cuicuilco (Kwee-kweel-co). It consists of a large pyramid, or truncated cone, circular in form, some 450 feet in diameter at the base. Archaeologists claim that it consists of three constructions, built at various times, each superimposed upon the other. The outside walls rise at an inclination of forty-five degrees. The walls are broken by three terraces respectively thirteen feet wide, thirty-eight feet, and eighty-six feet wide. The entire elevation of the pyramid at Cuicuilco is about one hundred feet. The fourth terrace, with a diameter of one hundred thirty feet, forms a top platform on which in the distant past undoubtedly rested a small sacred temple and perhaps a sacrificial stone. Around the bottom part of the pyramid extends a thick layer of lava. Archaeologists have excavated down the side of the pyramid for a number of feet and found that it was built before the volcano Xitle erupted.

Some writers suggest the date of Copilco and Cuicuilco at B.C. 2,500 to 3,000. Those dates would fit well with the Jaredite period. Others writers believe that these ancient cities date much earlier.

We visited a small museum near the ruins of Cuicuilco. It contains the relics which have been taken out of the pyramid. Dr. Bryan Cummings, professor of archaeology at the University of Arizona, together with Dr. Manuel Ganio, was responsible for the excavation of the temple. Dr. Bryan Cummings wrote: "Abundant remains of human artifacts uncovered at the level of the base of the great temple as well as the form and material of the edifice itself are ample evidence of the large, vigorous, and aggressive population." [^14]

TENAYUCA PYRAMID

We next visited the Tenayuca (Ten-a-you-ca) archaeological site which lies six miles northwest of Mexico City. The Tenayuca pyramid is ofttimes called the "Edifice of the Serpents," because of the numerous coiled serpents which the ancient builders placed at the base of the pyramid and also the rows of serpents' heads around the structure.

Archaeologists have excavated through the pyramid and have found that the structure was composed of five superimposed structures. It took perhaps three hundred years for the builders to construct this edifice.

Tenayuca was the capital city for an Indian ruler named Xolotl, the great leader of the Chichiluc Empire, which came to an end during the latter part of the eleventh century.

The serpents at Tenayuca are not plumed serpents like the ones at Teotihuacan, Chichen Itza, and other Toltec sites, as were also those at the numerous Maya zones. The characteristics of the Tenayuca serpents seem to differ from the Quetzalcoatl serpents.

PYRAMIDS AT TEOPANZOLCO

Otto Done, his wife, Charles Schmidt, Joseph Schmidt, David Stevens, and I, accompanied by Leland Adamson and Ernest Cald-well who had come down from Utah to join us in visiting some of the archaeological zones, traveled south from Mexico City to Cuernavaca. Near the northeast corner of the city stands a large pyramid called Teopanzolco (Tay-o-pan-zol-co). This pyramid is the last vestige of what was once the magnificent capital of the Tlahuica nation. The style of the pyramid is typically Aztec. Both of these Indian tribes were of the Nahua culture.

This large structure was formed by two pyramidal structures, one superimposed upon the other. The inner building was erected first, and sometime later the outside pyramid was superimposed on it. At the north end of the pyramid there are three superimposed structures, instead of two. A steep double stairway leads to the top of the archaeological ruin. At one time there stood two temples on top of the structure. Here the priests offered their sacrifices and performed their ceremonies.

This archaeological ruin would have very little to do with Book of Mormon history, since it was erected many years after the close of the history of that ancient people except that the Book of Mormon peoples may have constituted a part of the progenitors of the ancient inhabitants of Teopanzolco.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL ZONE OF XOCHICALCO

After leaving the ancient pyramid near the charming city of Cuernavaca, we continued on down the highway toward Taxco; however, before arriving at that city we turned off the highway at Alpuyeca to visit the hill of Xochicalco (Sho-chee-cal-co) which means the "House of Flowers." The ancient city, situated on the tops of three tall hills, is dated at approximately A.D. 1,000.

The principle temple is covered with ". . . carved colossal feathered serpents of unusually elegant undulatory design in rock. . . ." [^15]

The principle monument is the great Xochicalco pyramid. This is formed of two parts, covered with basalt rock. This possesses a similarity with the Temple of Quetzalcoatl in Teotihuacan, in that the stone base is dressed with elaborately carved rock. [^16]

Archaeologists have not fully decided who constructed those ancient pyramids at Xochicalco. Dr. George C. Vaillant, the outstanding authority on the Aztecs of Mexico, states: "The main temple has a superb carved facade which would suggest a Maya origin were it not for the fine dates and realistic symbols of Mixteca-Puebla culture." [^17] It has been suggested by other writers that "It is believed that they [builders of Xochicalco] were Toltecs." [^18]

The designs of the plumed serpents and also the carvings of men who appear to be wearing quetzal feathers seem to identify this culture with that of the Toltecs of Teotihuacan and the Mayas who worshiped Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God," or Jesus Christ. As the readers will observe from looking at the photographs of the principal pyramid of Xochicalco, the builders were masterful workmen. The carvings were beautifully executed.

The entire Xochicalco ruins consist of three hills that are connected by means of highways. The structures in ancient times not only served as a religious center but also as an effective fortress, in which may be seen high walls and deep pits built for protection in case of attack. Perhaps one of the most unusual features of the hill of Xochicalco is its great number of subterranean passages. Some of the tunnels that enter the side of the hill still preserve remains of paved floors, columns, and stuccoed walls. One of the tunnels ends in a small room that has a hole in the roof through which it is believed that the residents of this city studied astronomical phenomena.

This is an unusually interesting place and one which supplied added Book of Mormon evidences.

TEMPLE OF MALINALCO

The following day we visited one of the most unusual archaeological structures that I have seen. It is a temple that had been hewed out of solid rock near the top of a mountain. It is called Malinalco (Mal-ee-nal-co). The people who carved this edifice, called the "Temple of the Eagles and Tigers," upon the mountainside settled in a small valley south of the large valley in which Toluca is located. The snow-covered peak, Nevada de Toluca, is in full view of the archaeological ruins of Malinalco. George Vaillant describes the unusual feat accomplished in carving this temple as follows:

. . . A recent excavation in a cliff overhanging Malinalco, near Tenancingo, State of Mexico, brought to light a temple complex largely hewed from living rock, which thrusts the Egyptian rock tombs of Abu-Simbal into the limbo of provincial opera-house scenery. [^19]

Many archaeologists have claimed and many of them still do maintain that the inhabitants of ancient America did not have steel implements to use in erecting their temples and carving their stelae. The theory that has been generally accepted is that they used only rock implements to do all such work.

As our party members looked at these unusual archaeological remains of Malinalco, especially the "Temple of the Eagles and Tigers," we wondered how any people could carve such a building out of the ledge, even with the excellent steel implements that we have at the present time. Two large tigers or jaguars were carved out of solid rock. One sat on each side of the steps that led up to the main part of the temple. The temple itself had been carved completely out of the solid ledge. Inside the temple two or three large eagles, perhaps five or six feet in length, and a similar number of tigers or jaguars of similar size were carved out of the solid rock floor and also of solid rock walls. Flights of stairs carved out of the rock ran up the side of the temple as well as up the front of the temple. To the north of the main edifice these ancient builders had carved several large rooms out of the solid ledge. How they accomplished this feat was past our comprehension.

The historians who wrote both the Jaredite and Nephite histories, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, stated that these ancient Americans had iron and also highly refined steel. During the earlier part of Jaredite history, Corihor, King Kib's son, replaced his father by force upon the throne. This made one of the other brothers, Shule, very angry. We shall let the following quotation tell the story:

And it came to pass that Shule was angry with his brother; and Shule waxed strong, and became mighty as to the strength of man; and he was also mighty in judgment.

Wherefore he came to the hill Ephraim, and he did molten out of the hill, and made swords out of steel for those whom he had drawn away with him; and after he had armed them with swords he returned to the city Nehor and gave battle unto his brother Corihor, by which means he obtained the kingdom and restored it unto his father Kib. [^20]

Towards the middle of the Jaredite period, during the reign of King Kib when the Jaredites were at the height of their culture, the Jaredite historian wrote:

And they did work in all manner of ore, and they did make gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and all manner of metals; and they did dig it out of the earth; wherefore they did cast up mighty heaps of earth to get ore, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of copper. And they did work all manners of fine work. [^21]

The Nephite historians also make definite claims that their people knew how to manufacture steel and made extensive use of it. Nephi, one of the prophet-leaders who directed the group of colonists from Jerusalem to America about B.C. 600, brought with him a bow made of steel. Regarding it, he remarked: "And it came to pass that as I, Nephi, went forth to slay food, behold, I did break my bow, which was made of fine steel:. . ." [^22]

Nephi also brought Laban's sword from the Holy City to the New World. He described the sword as follows: "And I beheld his sword, and I drew it forth from the sheath thereof; and the hilt thereof was of pure gold, and the workmanship thereof was exceedingly fine, and I saw that the blade thereof was of the most precious steel." [^23] He used that sword as a pattern in manufacturing numerous others for his people. He wrote: "And I, Nephi, did take the sword of Laban, and after the manner of it, did make many swords, . . ." [^24] Throughout the thousand years of Nephite history on the Western Hemisphere, in their wars the people used swords made of steel. [^25] There are over one hundred fifty statements scattered throughout the entire Book of Mormon which definitely declare that both Nephites and Lamanites used swords in their numerous battles.

The inhabitants of ancient America not only used steel, but they also mined and refined numerous metals, including iron. After the colonists had arrived in America and Nephi had become the leader of the Nephites, he taught them many industries. To quote:

And I did teach my people to build buildings, and to work all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper and of brass, and of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores, which were in great abundance. [^26]

About two hundred fifty years later, Jarom, the record-keeper, wrote the following regarding the Nephites:

And we multiplied exceedingly and spread upon the face of the land and became exceedingly rich in gold, in silver, in precious things, and in fine workmanship of wood, in buildings, and in machinery, and also in iron and copper, and brass and steel, making all manner of tools of every kind to till the ground, and weapons of war—yea, the sharp pointed arrow and the quiver, and the dart, and the javelin, and all preparations for war. [^27]

Approximately two hundred forty years after Jarom wrote, the record-keeper describes the high taxes that a wicked king, named Noah, placed upon the Nephites. To quote: "And he laid a tax of one-fifth part of all they possessed, a fifth part of their gold, and their silver, and a fifth part of their ziff, and of their copper, and of their brass, and their iron." [^28] And then the historian told what use was made of the articles received of the proceeds of taxation:

And it came to pass that King Noah built many elegant and spacious buildings; and he ornamented them with fine work of wood and all manner of precious things, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of brass, and of ziff, and of copper. [^29]

A sufficient number of quotations have been given from both Jaredite and Nephite history to show that their records definitely maintain that those ancient peoples possessed iron and steel and used them extensively. The archaeological ruins at Malinalco seemed to the writer to indicate strongly that the descendants of Book of Mormon peoples in Meso-America continued to use steel; otherwise how could such a feat have been accomplished?

The members of our party will retain vivid memories of the trip to Malinalco. This archaeological zone was situated in the mountains off the main highway. Since we had to go over very rough roads to reach it, Otto Done and the driver of the other car preferred leaving their cars in the town on the main highway. We hired two Mexicans who took us to the ruins in their old automobiles. We soon found that their cars were heavily infested with fleas. By the time we arrived at our cars from the ruins all of us had plenty of evidence to verify that fact!

THE ROUND PYRAMID AT CALIXTLAHUACA

A few miles north of the city of Toluca, Mexico, is located the famed round pyramid at Calixtlahuaca (Ca-leesh-tla-wah-ca). The unusual feature about this pyramid is that it is round. Archaeologists claim that it was erected during three different periods of time and dedicated to the Wind God. This pyramid was built many years after the close of Book of Mormon history. It merely adds one more evidence to the cultural achievements of the people of ancient America.

After visiting this interesting archaeological site we returned to Mexico City.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES OF TEOTIHUACAN AND TULA

Three of the most important archaeological sites which we visited in the vicinity of Mexico City were Teotihuacan, Tula, and El Tajin (Ta-heen). The builders of all three of these ancient cities were worshipers of Quetzalcoatl, the "White Bearded God," or Jesus Christ. All three groups of people had a close relationship to each other and were perhaps from the same general stock—the Toltecs and the Olmecs, whom we have identified as coming from the original Nephites, Mulekites, and Lamanites.

We took a two days' trip to Tula and El Tajin from Mexico City. Tula lies a few hours' ride north of Mexico City. The famous Catholic sixteenth century missionary and historian, Father Sahagun, wrote that Quetzalcoatl, the principle deity of the Toltecs, resided in Tula. Before 1942 archaeologists were at a loss in regards to the location of Tula; however, at that date in excavating in the state of Hidalgo, Mexico, they discovered an archaeological site which proved to be Tula, spoken of by Sahagun. Indian traditions maintain that in ancient times the "White Bearded God" visited their ancestors at this particular place.

Present-day archaeologists and writers are agreed that Tula served at one time as the headquarters of the Toltec empire, and of course they think it was the Tula located in the state of Hidalgo. They differ, however, in their opinion as to the time that the city was founded. Most writers would place the date of the founding of Tula somewhere between A.D. 245 and A.D. 752, and the abandonment of the city between A.D. 960 and A.D. 1168. The exact cause for the people's leaving is unknown, but probably they left because of famine, following years of severe drought. After the abandonment of Tula, the people dispersed and went to other regions which then or later became important. Some of them perhaps settled at Cholula, Teotihuacan, Cozcatlan, Copilco, and Mazatlan; perhaps others went as far east as Yucatan. According to Indian tradition, a Toltec ruler named Topiltzin and a number of his associates led the first Toltec invasion of Yucatan. The date has been fixed by some writers at A.D. 987.

Since Topiltzin was a priest of the Fair God Quetzalcoatl, he is ofttimes called Quetzalcoatl. He should not be confused, however, with the "White Bearded God" or Jesus Christ whom the Mexicans called Quetzalcoatl.

Wherever the Toltecs erected temples, they decorated them with quetzal feathers and serpents (rattlesnakes)—symbols of Quetzalcoatl—and adorned their priests with quetzal feathers. These motifs were used extensively on the large pyramid at Tula, which connotes that the people who resided there were worshipers of Quetzalcoatl, who originally was Christ. To quote:

The Toltecs were admirable architects and sculptors. Their constructions, usually in the form of truncated pyramids with space for temples on top, were built of stone and mortar. The giant stone figures at Tula are splendid examples of sculpture. The most frequently used motif was a representation of the chief god, Quetzalcoatl (the plumed serpent). . . .

The majestic statues [at Tula] compete with sculpture of any culture in beauty, size, and purity of style, this latter classic Toltec. Few visitors will forget the impressive anthropomorphic figures that originally served as supports at the entrance of the temples. At the time of their creation, these dignified and simple forms probably had obsidian and mother-of-pearl inserts in the eyes and mouth, as was the custom among pre-conquest peoples in making statues and masks. [^30]

EL TAJIN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ZONE

That afternoon after leaving the archaeological site of Tula, we drove perhaps one hundred miles down to the Gulf of Mexico south of Tampico. We stayed at a small place near Papantla in the state of Vera Cruz, Mexico. One of the greatest cities of ancient America was located not far from the outskirts of the present town of Papantla. The ancient city was called El Tajin.

El Tajin was built by the Totonac (To-to-nack) Indians. Some writers have maintained that the great pyramids of the sun and moon at Teotihuacan were erected by the Totonacs; others disagree. As always in archaeology, since there is a lack of facts and dates, there is a certain amount of division of opinion among students of ancient cultures. It is maintained, however, that the Totonacs did inhabit the valley of Mexico, including Teotihuacan, at one time. They could have been a branch of the Toltecs. It is believed that the Totonacs were driven out of Mexico Valley by other tribes and eventually settled in the state of Vera Cruz. There they established a number of important cities, as is evidenced by several important archaeological zones situated at various places in that state. "The most important of the Totonac ruins is El Tajin, with its seven-bodies pyramid, 'The Niches'. . . . The Totonac religion was closely tied up with that of peoples of the valley of Mexico, as can be seen by representations in their temples of the same gods. Quetzalcoatl, the plumed serpent, is very much present, as are some figures representing Tlaloc [the rain god]." [^31]

The famous "Pyramid of the Niches" is one of the most beautiful archaeological structures in the entire Western Hemisphere. At one time it formed part of an extensive city. Many foundations of buildings and remains of streets have been found. Numerous large mounds arise from the jungle vegetation in every direction from the "Pyramid of the Niches." Four or five large buildings have been excavated; however, the majority of the mounds are still covered with vegetation.

The great "Pyramid of the Niches" was constructed of volcanic rock and adobe, covered with whitish basalt. Anciently the entire building was stuccoed and painted in various colors, mainly red and green. The four sides of the pyramid represented the four seasons—spring, fall, winter, and summer—and its 365 niches symbolized the days of the year.

A ball court is located at El Tajin, as was the custom throughout ancient America in pre-Columbian times. It was ". . . surrounded by altars with bas-reliefs representing the cult of Quetzalcoatl." [^32] The ball game "that was played here by the aristocrats of hundreds and maybe thousands of years ago (because ball games were reserved for the privileged classes) was a game of such intense skill that invading Spaniards were amazed at the dexterity of the Mexicans; their conquerors were never capable of competing with the conquered in this." [^33]

One important Mexican writer, Miguel Covarrubias, is of the opinion that "the builders of El Tajin were the Olmecs, . . . and that they built the ancient city about A.D. 600." [^34] "And there, too, was evidently Toltec influence in the construction here!" If those opinions are true, and if the Toltecs were originally the Nephites and the Olmecs were originally the Mulekites, the builders of this wonderful ancient civilization at El Tajin would have been direct descendants of Book of Mormon peoples.

We returned from El Tajin to Mexico City, and soon thereafter I traveled by plane to Salt Lake City, completing an intensely interesting six weeks' period of studying the archaeological ruins of Meso-America and the relics in the museums. I accumulated a vast amount of what I consider to be valid Book of Mormon evidence.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1947), p. 415.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 208, 381, 410.
[^3] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, Mexico, Supplementary Publication 46 (1955), Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D. C., p. 3.
[^4] Ibid., p. 4.
[^5] Ibid., p. 5.
[^6] Ibid., p. 5.
[^7] J. Eric S. Thompson, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization (Norman, Okla., 1954), Plate 10a.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 78, 83.
[^9] Ibid., Plate 17b.
[^10] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, Mexico. Supplementary Publication 46 (1955), Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D. C., p. 3.
[^11] Thompson, op. cit., p. 23.
[^12] Note: When one travels through the towns in Central America, he sees hibiscus, oleander, and the brilliant bougainvillea everywhere, but these are marks of civilization; they do not grow in the forest.
[^13] Thompson, op. cit., p. 25.
[^14] Morley, op. cit., p. 180.
[^15] 2 Nephi 30:6.
[^16] Mormon 5:17-18, 15.
[^17] Tortillas are made of ground corn mixed into a batter with water and cooked on a flat, earthenware grill. In appearance they are like our pancakes. In addition to beans, tortillas are perhaps the most extensively used food in Mexico and Central America.
[^18] John Lloyd Stephens, Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan (1841), (1949 ed., New Jersey), vol. 1, pp. 30-31.
[^19] Count Byron Khun de Prorok, In Quest of Lost Worlds, p. 183.
[^20] Thomas Gann, Maya Cities, p. 170.
[^21] Morley, op. cit., pp. 405-406.
[^22] Thompson, op. cit., p. 262.
[^23] Ibid., pp. 131-132.
[^24] Ibid., p. 24.
[^25] Ibid., p. 262.
[^26] Ibid., p. 263.
[^27] Jarom 1:8.
[^28] Mosiah 11:3.
[^29] Ibid., 11:8.
[^30] Archaeology in Mexico Today, op. cit., pp. 16-19.
[^31] Ibid., p. 45.
[^32] Ibid., p. 46.
[^33] Ibid., pp. 18-19.
[^34] Cited in ibid., p. 46.
