Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 7

VISITING BONAMPAK AND THE LACANDON INDIANS

CHARLES FREY DISCOVERS BONAMPAK

A dramatic chapter in the story of American archaeology was broadcast to the world by the announcement in 1947 of the discovery of murals depicting dark and light-colored Indians painted on the interior walls of a temple in the southern jungles of Mexico. The Maya name Bonampak (Bonam-pak), meaning "painted walls," was given to this archaeological site by a famous archaeologist, the late Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley. [^1]

A succession of interesting events resulted in the discovery of Bonampak. Approximately fifteen years ago, Charles (Carlos) Frey, a young man in Chicago, decided to get completely away from what we term civilization; and so he left the United States with the hope of finding a spot where he could enjoy peace and contentment with complete freedom from the multitude of worries and problems attached to modern society. In the jungles of the Usumacinta (U-sooma-seenta) River Basin near the southern borders of Mexico, he joined a group of Mayas, the Lacandon (Lackan-don) Indians, who were living under very primitive conditions. [^2] He married one of their women and made his home with them. He concluded that he had found solitude, peace, and contentment which would supply the type of life for which he had been searching. Here was his earthly paradise; and so he planned to remain with the Lacandons permanently.

While living with the Indians, he observed that occasionally the men suddenly disappeared for a few days without letting him know where they were going, leaving him at home with the women. He tried time and time again to induce them to tell him where they went and to take him with them, but he continually failed in both endeavors. Finally he went to Mexico City and purchased a small record player. When he returned to his Lacandon friends, they were amazed to hear voices and music. They were completely intrigued by this wonderful new marvel.

After Mr. Frey had whetted their desires for ownership, he told them that they could have the record player if the next time they went into the jungles they would take him to the place they frequently visited. Since by this time he had lived with them for a few years, Charles Frey had won the confidence of the Indians. Finally as a result of much persuasion in addition to the gift of the record player, the Lacandon Indians told him about Bonampak, situated some sixteen miles from their jungle-huts on the Lacanha (Laconha) River, and then they guided Mr. Frey to the "Temple of the Painted Walls" which contained unusual Maya murals. These he examined with deep interest, recognizing that he had made an important archaeological discovery. Soon after Frey's trip to Bonampak, he went to Mexico City and reported his discovery.

BONAMPAK A RELIGIOUS SHRINE

Charles Frey found that Bonampak was a religious shrine venerated by the Lacandon Indians. It had been used during ages past by their ancestors for worshiping purposes, and the modern Indians continued the practice. The men of the Lacandon tribe made periodical trips to this ancient temple at Bonampak for the purpose of engaging in their pagan practices, worshiping their gods there as their ancestors had done throughout the centuries before them. The women, however, were not allowed to participate in these religious ceremonies; in fact, they were not even permitted to visit the ancient shrine.

A number of articles have appeared during the past several years describing Bonampak—its location, its use as a religious shrine, and the Lacandon Indians. In a 1955 publication of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, entitled Ancient Mayan Paintings of Bonampak, Mexico, the following description of the location of this archaeological site is given:

Bonampak lies in the northeastern corner of the state of Chiapas (Cheeopus) in southeastern Mexico, in the valley of the Lacanha River. . . .

The area has no permanent inhabitants except for a handful of Maya Indians, known as Lacandon, the only surviving pagan Maya. A dozen of them live on the banks of the Cedro (Say-dro) River, a few miles from Bonampak, and still make pilgrimages to the ruins of the great Maya city of Yaxchilan (Yashche-lon) and to Bonampak to offer prayers and burn incense in the temples of their ancestors. On the floors of those buildings they leave their incense burners, reminders to us of a great past. There are other tiny settlements of Lacandon in the great forests of Chiapas, but they are rapidly approaching extinction. [^3]

GILES G. HEALEY DISCOVERS BONAMPAK

In addition to Charles Frey, who visited Bonampak in 1946, another American, Giles G. Healey, was taken that same year to see the murals by one of the local Lacandon Indians whose friendship he had won. Many writers have credited Healey with the discovery of the "Temple of the Painted Walls." In regards to Healey's discovery, the writer of the publication of the Carnegie Institution stated:

. . . His astonishment can be imagined, since never before had a structure with rooms entirely covered with murals been found in the Maya area. Despite the layers of lime (deposited by moisture trickling down from the limestone roof) which veiled some of their brilliance, Healey realized that he had discovered scenes which would greatly increase our knowledge of lay life among the Maya and, perhaps of more importance, would add a great treasure to surviving New World art. These are not the first murals to be discovered but they are of far greater interest than any previously known. [^4]

REPRODUCTIONS MADE OF THE MURALS

Soon thereafter Giles Healey reported the discovery to the proper authorities in Mexico City and also to the Carnegie Institution of Washington. With the permission of the Instituto Nacional de Antropolgia e Historia de Mexico, the Carnegie Institution arranged for Sr. Antonio Tejeda Fonseca, a well-known Guatemalan artist, to accompany Mr. Healey on his return visit to the "Temple of the Painted Walls." In the short time that they were there, Tejeda (Tay-hay-da) copied certain portions of the paintings and made a rather complete report regarding their extent, state of preservation, and subject matter. As a result of the report the Carnegie Institution decided that "it was almost imperative to send a fully equipped expedition to copy and photograph the paintings in all the rooms." [^5]

In accordance with this decision, an expedition was financed by the United Fruit Company and directed by the Carnegie Institution in collaboration with the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia de Mexico. The exhibition spent three months' time at the site in the spring of 1947 and a shorter period in the spring of 1948. On these two trips to Bonampak, Tejeda was able to finish copying all the paintings. The Mexican Instituto also sent its artist, Sr. Agustin Villagra Caleti to make a second set of copies. These two outstanding artists worked faithfully together reproducing the murals until the work was completed. They were both unusually well-qualified to do the work. Tejeda had previously copied murals at Uaxactun and designs on Maya pottery, often in a fresco technique similar to that of the murals, and Villagra had copied many murals at Teotihuacan and Monte Alban.

As previously mentioned, the murals were partly obscured by water having leaked through the roof of the building, leaving lime deposits on the murals. It was found that applications of kerosene to the wall-surface made this heavy layer of lime temporarily transparent and, of course, that it did no harm to the underlying paintings. This discovery greatly aided the artists in reproducing the murals accurately and caused the colors in the paintings to show up more distinctly in the photographs. Thus the ancient Maya murals were preserved by modern artists as accurately and perfectly as was humanly possible. Reproductions of the murals are found in the museums in Mexico City and in Guatemala City.

ANCIENT CITY OF BONAMPAK

While the artists copied the murals, archaeologists who had accompanied them surveyed the site. They found that Bonampak was not one of the larger of the ancient Mayan cities; but they concluded that perhaps in a cultural sense it had been of significance in ancient times and that in a political sense it had been a dependency of Yaxchilan, an important archaeological site situated in a loop of the Usumacinta River approximately twenty miles to the northwest.

Soon after the artists and archaeologists had completed their work at Bonampak, articles appeared in archaeological magazines giving thorough descriptions of the ancient city with its "Temple of the Painted Walls." These articles were illustrated by reproductions of the ancient, unusual murals.

Some archaeologists have made the claim that the murals were painted about A.D. 600 while other writers have suggested later dates. The date 600 would be only 180 years after Moroni completed the Book of Mormon records and hid them for future generations. In fact, certain archaeologists have indicated that the city of Bonampak was perhaps settled a few centuries prior to A.D. 600, which if correct would place the city in Book of Mormon times. According to the Carnegie Institution, the following conclusion has been reached:

. . . The stylistic evidence of the sculptures and the dates recorded in the hieroglyphic inscriptions indicate that the city flourished from about A.D. 600 to about 825. However, a better sample of pottery would probably show the site to have been occupied for two or three centuries prior to 600, but almost certainly would not advance the date of its abandonment by more than a few decades, if at all. [^6]

Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, one of America's outstanding archaeologists, published four illustrations from Bonampak in his most recent book. One was an incised panel showing three men making offerings to a personage seated on a dais. Dr. Thompson wrote: The "style is early, perhaps about A.D. 600." [^7] He reproduced a section of the Bonampak murals which he interpreted as a "raid on the enemy" and another section which he stated represented a scene of "judgment on the captives." He dated these scenes about A.D. 775. [^8] Later in his book he reproduced another portion of the Bonampak murals which he dated about A.D. 800. [^9]

BEGINNING OF JOURNEY TO BONAMPAK

When I read the articles written by the archaeologists and examined the reproductions of the murals from the walls of the temple at Bonampak, observing that some of the people represented in the murals were white in color and others were red or darker colored, I secretly and hopefully longed to visit Bonampak. I desired to go there and examine this marvelous discovery which could provide valuable evidence in helping to confirm the claims made by the Book of Mormon that there were dark and light-colored people in ancient America. At that time, however, my chance to go there seemed remote; but now rather unexpectedly I received the opportunity to see the temple with the murals as part of the trip of visiting archaeological ruins. On the morning of January 18, 1955, Otto Done, a photographer working for the Church, Jose Davila, a Mexican guide and former branch president at Puebla, and I got off the train at Tenosique (Tay-no-seekay), Tabasco (Ta-bassco), Mexico, at 5:30 a.m. We had ridden all night without sleep, the train having been crowded and the temperature hot. The previous day we had begun our travels at 4:00 a.m., and so by the time we arrived at Tenosique to make preparations to start the trip into the jungles we were already tired.

While we waited for daylight to come, we secured our breakfast in a small cafe at the railroad station. Here also we purchased two or three small cans of Vienna sausages and a few boiled eggs, the only food we took into the jungles, since it was too early in the morning for a grocery store to be open. While we were eating breakfast an experience occurred which is typical of the customs of our neighboring people to the south, although quite unusual and thereby interesting to us from the United States. We were sitting at a table when suddenly a rooster crowed loudly several times. It sounded as if it were practically under our table—and we soon found that it was. A woman came out of the kitchen and approached a box which was lying on the floor only two or three feet from our table. The box was turned upside down. She lifted it up and from underneath it took a turkey and a rooster. Each of them had a string tied on one of its legs. The woman carried them out through the back door of the cafe and tied them to the doorpost. We concluded that those unlucky fowl would constitute the bill-of-fare at the cafe that day.

As soon as daylight came, we hired the owner of a small plane to fly us to an airstrip in the jungles near Bonampak which had been cut for the use of workers in the chicle (chikle) industry which provides the substance from which chewing gum is made. During the rainy season, which occurs from May until October chewing-gum gatherers, called chicleros (shee-clayros), extract the sap of the sapodilla (sap-o-dila) trees for conversion into chicle, which the raw gum is called.

As we flew over the tropical jungles toward Bonampak, the fleecy-like, white clouds hovered over the dense vegetation of what seemed to be a never-ending forest. The air was fresh and exhilarating. We gazed out of the plane at the clouds below us. Occasionally an opening appeared amidst them, which made it possible for us to see the green vegetation of the vast forest over which we were flying. We thrilled as we beheld the beauty of God's creation, feeling almost as if we were flying through a strange fairyland. The photograph taken from the plane will give the reader a certain amount of appreciation of the beauty of the entire scene which we keenly enjoyed while on our flight to Bonampak.

While we were flying to Bonampak, our pilot informed us that there were only a few tiny settlements of Lacandon Indians scattered throughout the vast forest of the state of Chiapas. The race was rapidly approaching extinction; however, a small group of them lived near the airstrip on which we would land. Perhaps we could secure their services as guides to take us to Bonampak.

By 10:00 o'clock we had flown over the jungles of Mexico nearly to the extreme southeastern limits of that country and had landed on the airstrip cut by the chicleros. As the plane touched the ground a flock of wild turkeys flew out of the tall grass which completely covered the rough, dirt runway.

The small airstrip was called El Cedro, since it was near the river which bears that name. The clearing appeared to be exceedingly minute in comparison with the extensive jungles which surrounded it; in fact, in comparison with the vast jungles it appeared—especially from the air—to be only a small ribbon-like opening in the profuse vegetation. As we gazed around us, looking as far as we could toward the horizon, all we could see were trees, bushes, vines, tall grass on the airstrip, and more trees. There was no doubt in our minds that we were now really in the jungles.

After the plane landed, we went a short distance from the airstrip on a trail which led to the Lacandon camp, which to our dismay had been abandoned. The Indians had moved to some other location. Somewhat disheartened we walked back to the airplane, and the aviator told us: "You men are crazy if you attempt to hike to Bonampak. You don't stand a chance in the world of getting out of these vast jungles alive. The vegetation is so dense that you are sure to get lost."

Somewhat distressed and with a feeling of disappointment creeping over us, my two companions and I exchanged glances, and then one of them said: "Let's get back in the plane and go back to civilization. It isn't so important that we visit Bonampak."

I could not think of giving up the attainment of a long hoped-for goal now that it was so nearly within my grasp. We discussed the problem for a few moments and decided to put our trust in the Lord and continue our journey to Bonampak. We sincerely believed that the Lord would protect us and bring us back to civilization in safety and in good condition.

When our pilot heard our decision, he said: "I still think you are fools if you insist on going. But if you go and if you get lost, you won't be the first nor the last ones. Recently an American was lost in these jungles for fifteen days. When he was finally discovered by the Lacandon Indians, he was delirious as a result of malaria fever. He was really in a serious condition."

I have learned since that conversation occurred that the American who was lost was Robert Bruce, a young man from Oklahoma. He visited me in Salt Lake City nearly a year after my return home. He informed me that he was lost nine days instead of fifteen, and that he was out of his head at times as a result of a bad case of malaria. It was he who graciously supplied me with a number of photographs of the Lacandon Indians to publish in this book. I express deep gratitude to him for so kindly allowing me the privilege of publishing them.

In spite of our pilot's efforts to discourage us, we were still determined to go to Bonampak. "If you still insist on going," he said, raising his hand and pointing, "there is your trail leading out of the southern end of the airstrip. Bonampak lies some sixteen miles southeast of here in the valley of the Lacanha River, so I have been told. That river is a tributary of the Rio Usumacinta." And then the pilot turned and climbed into his plane. As he did so, he muttered, "I still think you are three very foolish men."

We arranged with the aviator to meet us at the airstrip two days hence at 10:00 a.m., waved as he flew away, and then with high anticipation in our hearts commenced hiking along a very indistinct and difficult jungle trail.

TROPICAL JUNGLES

We had not hiked far along the trail before we thoroughly understood the pilot's warning regarding tropical jungles. We were now in one of the most densely wooded regions in the world, a country of heavy rainfall and dense tropical forest.

"Many varieties of palms, giant mahogany trees, Spanish cedars, and the sapodilla, which yields the raw material of chewing gum, abound. Everywhere lianas twist from trunk to trunk; innumerable parasitic plants are lodged in the forks of the larger trees. It is the land of the tapir, the peccary, the monkey, and the parrot. The largest mammal is the seldom seen jaguar, whose skin was an emblem of chieftainship among the ancient Maya." [^10]

Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, one of America's outstanding archaeologists and authorities of the Mayas, described the jungle as follows:

. . . It is an undulating land of vast tropical forest, with trees up to 150 feet high, interspersed with large swamps. To an observer without botanical training the outstanding features are the single mahogany trees scattered through the forest, the Spanish cedar, the giant ceiba, sacred to the Maya, many varieties of palms, and the sapodilla, from which chicle (the raw product of chewing gum) is bled. Typical, also, are the bread-nut tree (not to be confused with the bread-fruit tree, but an important source of food for man and beast), occasional rubber trees and vanilla vines, and incredible numbers of aerial plants, bromeliaceae and lianas. Flowers there are, but for the most part they are hardly visible, far above one's head in the treetops. . . . [^11]

We observed thousands of orchid plants high up in the forks of trees, but only a few of them had blossomed. They would be a spectacle to behold when in full bloom. [^12]

RESCUED BY THE LACANDONS

As we made our way through the dense jungles hoping that we were still on the trail, we became fully aware that we were in a wild, thickly vegetated country where there were no civilized people and no laws to govern the few primitive Lacandons who lived there. Nevertheless we hoped that we would be fortunate enough to run across some of those Indians.

After approximately one hour's time had passed and we had almost reached the conclusion that we were lost, we met some Indians on the trail. They were Lacandons, members of El Cedro clan whom we had endeavored to locate near the airstrip. They readily consented to be our guides. If such good fortune had not come our way, it is possible that we might have spent the remainder of our days in the jungles of southeastern Mexico.

Our rescuers consisted of two Indian women and a boy, the latter whom we estimated to be approximately fifteen years old. They, having heard our plane, had left their home and hurried down the jungle trail to meet us. These interesting natives were very small people, perhaps the smallest that I have ever seen. The women were less than four and one-half feet tall, and the boy was even shorter. All three of them had long black hair, parted in the middle, which hung loosely over their shoulders. We observed that they had difficulty in keeping their hair from hanging over their faces and thereby restricting their vision. Both of the women as well as the boy were wearing loose robes which hung to their ankles, all three being dressed exactly alike. Their robes were made from cloth in texture and appearance similar to that from which we make tents. I can most aptly describe the cloth by calling it canvas.

My biggest surprise was to observe that the skin of one of the women was very white, just as white as the skin of our women. The other woman and the boy had merely a tinge of color in their skins, they being also practically white. For many years I had heard of white Indians, and now in the southeastern jungles of Mexico I had the privilege of seeing some.

The native language of these people was Maya, but they had learned some Spanish from chicle workers, and so Otto and Jose conversed with them in Spanish.

Although these Indians were very primitive in their mode of living, I soon found that they learned quickly. My companions called me President Hunter. Almost immediately these little jungle people called me "President Hunter" in English, speaking as plainly as if they had known the language all their lives. And they did not forget that that was what I was called.

One of the Indian women said that her name was Maria, and the other was Carmita. The boy claimed to have no name, but I learned later that that was merely his idea of humor. His name was Chan Kim.

After proper introductions had been made, the Indian women announced that they were the former wives of an Indian named Carranza who recently had been shot through the head and killed by another member of their tribe named Obregon. This news increased our apprehension greatly. Here we were miles and miles from civilization, with no law enforcement officers nor laws to protect us, and suddenly we were informed that the Indians of this region killed each other if they so desired. With concern we asked, "Why did Obregon shoot Carranza?"

The reply was, "Because Obregon was loco in the head."

The thought suddenly came into my mind, "I hope that we three are not Obregon's next victims." Despite this note of tragedy, we were very thankful to have these three Indians as our guides; and so, continuing to place our trust in the Lord for protection, we proceeded onward along an almost impossible jungle trail which I shall attempt to describe later.

After our Indian guides had been with us for a short time, we came to a spot where the vegetation was sufficiently open to let the light of the sun come through. I took advantage of the opportunity and photographed the two women and boy. Even with a casual glance at this photograph, one can see how white those Indians were, especially the one woman.

THE LACANDON INDIANS

We toiled through the jungles for approximately another hour after the Indian women and boy met us when finally we came to a clearing in the forest. The trees had been burned from a few acres of land upon which the Indians raised their garden products. Most of the patch had been planted to corn, and the dry corn stalks, with the ears of corn attached, were still standing. At the edge of the clearing, we were greeted by a pack of skinny, mongrel dogs who barked and yelped as we followed our Indian guides into the center of the clearing to their two thatched houses. We had now arrived at the Indians' casa or home.

Soon we were surrounded by a number of little jungle people, all of whom seemed to be duplicates of our three guides. They were as curious as a group of little children. Few times in their lives had they seen men of another race from outside their little world. They tugged and pulled at everything we were carrying with the hope of seeing what we had brought into the jungles. They asked a thousand questions regarding everything that we had in our luggage, even inspecting carefully the clothing we were wearing.

There were several women, one small baby, two boys about fifteen years of age, and—we were informed—two men who constituted the membership of this Lacandon clan. The men, however, were not at home when we first arrived. There were really two families living side by side, a father and his son being the heads of the families. Some of the women were the wives of one of the men and the others the wives of the other.

Since there were only two boys approximately fifteen years of age and one small baby in those two families with probably eight women, it was apparent that the infant mortality is very high. The Lacandons are a vanquishing race, due to the prevalence of malaria, hookworm, and dysentery. [^13] The late Dr. Sylvanus Morley maintained that there were approximately 200 of them scattered in small groups throughout the jungles. [^14]

We observed that, like the Indian women and boy whom we had met on the trail, all of the Lacandon Indians were very small in stature. The men were approximately four and one-half to five feet tall and the women approximately six inches shorter. The majority of them had black hair. Also, the men, like the women, parted their hair in the middle, permitting it to grow long and fall loosely around their faces and down their backs. They pushed it back from each side of their faces, but did not succeed in keeping it from hanging over their eyes. Their hair had the appearance of seldom having been combed and rarely if ever having been washed.

As we associated with these two families of Lacandon Indians and met two other families later that day, the one thing which impressed me most about them was the whiteness of their skin. One of the women actually had red hair, and her skin was just as white as ours. An Indian man named Jose Pepe, the religious reader of the Cedro clan of Lacandons, whom we met later that day, also had red hair and white skin. As previously mentioned, one of the women who first met us on the trail had dark hair, but her skin was as white as that of any of our women. The color of all the others whom we saw ranged from white to a slightly darker cast. The skin color of the darkest among them was no darker than mine, since I had a sun tan at that time.

While visiting in Guatemala approximately three weeks before our trip to Bonampak, I was informed by an official guide that, generally speaking, the Quiche Maya Indians of Guatemala were nearly white, but that there was another tribe of Indians—a primitive, wild people, living in the jungles of southern Mexico, known as Lacandons—who were really white. The guide claimed to have seen two boys who had been flown out of the jungle to Guatemala City and then returned to their homes. When I received this information, I had no idea that I would have the privilege of associating for nearly three days with the latter people, but suddenly and unexpectedly we found ourselves being entertained by them.

As I observed those primitive jungle natives, noting that many of them had such white skin, I recalled that the Book of Mormon claimed that in ancient times the Nephites were "a white and delightsome people." [^15] And then I thought: "Although the Lacandons are quite white in color, they certainly have degenerated greatly from the high cultural standards of their predecessors of Book of Mormon days, especially from the cultural status of the Nephites when they were living in harmony with the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ." The predictions of the ancient prophets to the Nephites and Lamanites—the ancestors of the Lacandons—came flooding through my mind. I recalled that the Lord had declared to the Nephites through a number of his prophets that when that people rejected the gospel of Jesus Christ and became seeped in wickedness their nation would be destroyed. A remnant of those ancient white people, however, would be scattered among their darker-skinned brethren, the Lamanites. I recalled that toward the close of the final wars of those ancient peoples, Mormon, a prophet of God and the leader of the Nephite nation, wrote the following regarding his people:

They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd; yea, they were led even by God the Father,

But now, behold, they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, . . .

. . . the seed of this people . . . shall become scattered, and shall become . . . a filthy, and a loathsome people, beyond the description of that which ever hath been amongst us, yea, even that which hath been among the Lamanites, and this because of their unbelief and idolatry. [^16]

As I looked at these primitive Indians, I thought: "Here is a remnant of that ancient, proud, intelligent, highly cultured, and mighty race—the Nephites—which rejected their God and his gospel plan of salvation and then they were rejected by him. These primitive Lacandons, their descendants, are certainly a degenerate people, living under slightly better conditions than the animals of the jungles."

The oldest woman of the group, whom the Lacandons called "Old Rosita" or "Grandma," invited us into their two small, thatched houses. We observed their homes had dirt floors. There was practically a total lack of furniture; however, they did possess a small amount of crude, handmade pottery, a few dishes made primarily out of gourds, and a grinder used for grinding corn. It appeared that the entire family either cuddled together at nighttime on a little fiber mat which lay near one wall or slept in hammocks. We observed that they had two or three hammocks in which to lounge or rock their babies.

Their extremely primitive life and their poverty touched our hearts, and so we gave them all the small articles that were in our pockets and regretted that we hadn't more to give; for example, shortly after our arrival I gave a wooden clothespin to "Old Rosita" or "Grandma." I showed her that she could pinch her dress together with it. She was as delighted as any child would have been with a shiny new toy; and two days later when we left the Lacandons' casas, she was still holding it in her hand. Also, soon after we first met him, I gave Chan Kim, our boy-guide, the yellow box from which I had taken my camera film. He also clutched his gift in his hand throughout the entire time that we were with them. Otto Done gave one of the women his pocket comb. I broke my comb into two pieces in order to supply two of the women with combs. The other boy, whose name was Cubano, looked wistfully at an empty pill bottle which I was about to throw away. I gave it to him and can honestly say that I have never seen a person receive a gift with more joy. When we first arrived Jose Davila gave the women a bar of soap. He took some of them to the stream of water and showed them how to use the soap, even suggesting that they could wash their hair if they so desired. We decided, however, that they would not become that venturesome.

Before our final departure from these Indians, we gave them the remainder of the presents we had brought into the jungles to pay them for serving as our guides and to reward them for their hospitality. The gifts consisted of such items as pocketknives, flashlight batteries, salt, and several boxes of bullets. These primitive folk were highly pleased and as happy as a group of children on Christmas morning.

We were very anxious to continue our journey to the "Temple of the Painted Walls." Shortly after arriving at the Indians' casas we asked the two boys of that clan—Chan Kim, our former guide, and Cubano—and the two women who had guided us there to continue on to Bonampak, not knowing that the women were not permitted to visit the sacred shrine. They declined, stating that the two men of that particular household probably would go with us if we would wait until they returned from hunting birds. Naturally to wait was our only choice; however, this afforded us an unusual opportunity to study the Lacandon Indians.

While waiting for the men to return from hunting, Otto Done, using a minute camera, took photographs of the Indians. They beheld their own likeness with astonishment, each one exclaiming, "Who is this?" when shown his own likeness. This seemed to be a new experience for them. They were a simple, childlike, primitive people. Two of the photographs show these Indians studying a photograph of themselves. Observe how intensely interested they were, and also observe the height of the Lacandons. The writer is only five feet and eight and one-half inches high while Jose Davila is about five feet and five inches. The tallest of those Indians came about to our shoulders.

While we waited for the men to return from hunting, we had ample opportunity to observe the Indians carefully, their possessions, their homes, and mode of living. In addition to their twelve dogs (I counted them), we observed that this small group of Lacandons had a herd of goats, a flock of chickens, several turkeys, a number of pigs, and a pair of parrots. The parrots perched hour after hour in one of the trees near their two thatched houses.

JOURNEY CONTINUED TOWARD BONAMPAK

We waited for more than an hour for the men to return. Finally two little Lacandons emerged from the jungles into the clearing and made their way along a trail among the corn stalks toward their casas. They were dressed in the usual type of canvas-like robes and both of them were barefooted, as were all of the other Lacandons whom we had met. Each of them was carrying a gun, and one was puffing a big, homemade cigar. It struck me as rather peculiar to see that jungle native smoking a cigar as large as any that could be purchased in the United States.

They cordially exchanged greetings with us. One of the men was much older than the other. He had a thin growth of hair on his upper lip while the face of the other was as free from hair as was that of any of their women. The older one—father of the other man—announced his name to be NaBor (Na-bore) and that of his son to be Juanito (Wahn-eeto) (Little John). We called the son Juan (Wahn).

We asked them to guide us to Bonampak. They readily consented to do so on condition that we wait while they ate their dinner. When the meal was served, all the family members took turns drinking gruel, or thin cornmeal mush, out of a large bowl. I was happy that they didn't offer me a turn.

The food having been consumed, Otto, Jose, and I, accompanied by NaBor and Juan, our guides, left the Indians' homes and continued our journey along the jungle trail toward the "Temple of the Painted Walls." As it had been heretofore, the trail was extremely difficult. The steaming heat was oppressive; and, to add to our discomfort, our Lacandon guides hiked very fast. It was all we could do to stay in sight of them as they made their way through the jungles.

JOSE PEPE AND FAMILY

After we had plodded along for approximately two hours' time, the trail led into another cultivated spot on which stood dry corn stalks. Other garden products were also growing there. At the edge of the clearing, we were met by a pack of barking dogs, such as we had encountered at NaBor's domicile. A picturesque thatched hut with an attached open-air thatched bowery stood on the banks of a majestic river, the Lacanha. This stream of water was several times larger than El Cedro which ran by NaBor's casa. The thatched house and bowery in this clearing was the home of Jose Pepe (the other white Indian with red hair previously mentioned) and family.

As we walked toward his casa, Jose Pepe arose from where he had been reclining under the bowery and came to meet us. He was a small man, only four feet eight inches in height. He extended his right hand and greeted us very cordially while he held a cigar in the other hand. NaBor informed us that this man was the religious leader of El Cedro clan of Lacandons.

After proper introductions had been made, Jose Pepe invited us to go with him into the shade of the bowery. While he and NaBor engaged in conversation in the Maya language, presumably regarding us and our trip to Bonampak, I carefully observed his family and home. Two of his wives were rocking small babies in hammocks which hung under the bowery. Another woman was busily engaged in grinding corn for their tortillas (tor-teeya). [^17]

We requested this family to permit us to take their pictures. Jose Pepe, with one of his wives and baby, courteously responded. One woman of his household refused to pose for the picture, saying, "No, I haven't a pretty dress." I wondered what made her have such unusual ideas, since her dress was made of canvas and appeared exactly like the dresses worn by the other Lacandon Indians. The following day upon inquiry we learned from NaBor that this Indian woman had been the wife of the late Carlos Frey, one of the American discoverers of Bonampak. He had probably clothed her in a dress of finer weave, possibly from Mexico City.

Approximately two years before our visit to Bonampak, Carlos Frey had been guiding a group of Mexican artists to the "Temple of the Painted Walls," beginning a second trip there. While they were crossing the river about a mile below Jose Pepe's home, the boat capsized, drowning Mr. Frey and one of the Mexicans. They were buried approximately a mile downstream from Jose Pepe's home.

I observed that this family of Lacandons also possessed a few goats, some pigs, a number of chickens and turkeys, as did NaBor's family; and of course their garden products were similar.

The Lacanha River was wide and deep; and we needed a boat in which to cross it. This we borrowed from Jose Pepe. He had made the boat by hollowing out a log with his machete (ma-chata). This would have been a laborious task. Since the boat was made from only one log, it was the type and shape that could be easily overturned in the river. We were told that it was similar to the one in which Carlos Frey and his friends had attempted to cross this same river when the boat capsized, resulting in the death of Frey and one of his companions.

We left Pepe's clearing, and Juan paddled us across the Lacanha. Jose Davila and I were taken across first. We sat quietly toward the rear of the boat, a little fearful of capsizing it, while Juan stood erect toward the front and with one oar or pole paddled and guided the boat across the stream. Then he returned for Otto Done and NaBor. As they were crossing the river, I gazed upon the thatched house, the garden spot surrounded on three sides by dense vegetation, the towering trees, parrots with bright-colored plumage flying among the branches, and the majestic river, bordering the other side of Pepe's clearing. I concluded that I had never seen a more beautiful spot. It was indeed an earthly paradise.

When our entire party were across the river, Juan fastened the boat securely to a tree which stood adjacent to the stream, leaving it there so we could cross the river in it on our return from Bonampak.

The photograph shows Juan navigating Jose and the writer across the Lacanha River. I suggest that the readers observe the typical Lacandon thatched hut near the river bank, and the thick jungle vegetation shown on the photograph.

AN EXPERIENCE WITH OBREGON

After leaving Jose Pepe's clearing and continuing our journey along an extremely difficult jungle trail for perhaps an hour's time, suddenly our guides stopped, sat down beside the trail, and the older man said: "We are not going any farther. We are returning home. Obregon's casa is a short distance from here. He will guide you to Bonampak. We do not want to see him."

The thought that Obregon was a murderer was uppermost in our minds, and so we had no more desire to see him than had our Indian guides. We replied: "We have hired you, not Obregon, to take us to Bonampak, and you must do it; otherwise you will receive no gifts."

Our Indian guides sat beside the trail for perhaps thirty minutes while we used every argument at our command in our efforts to convince them to continue on to Bonampak with us. For some time it appeared that our arguments would result in failure. Finally, after we had used the best salesmanship of which we were capable, and had given the Indians a box of bullets, they consented to continue with us on condition that we would not permit Obregon to join our party. We assured them that we would not; in fact, we were as definitely opposed to having him accompany us as they were, remembering that he had recently killed Carranza.

Once again we trudged along the trail. Soon thereafter we came into a small opening in the jungle, and there in front of us stood two thatched huts. Obregon—a naked fellow except for his breechcloth—was lounging on the ground in the shade of a bowery, while his wives were doing the work. His dogs barked viciously at our approach, evidently having taken on part of the spirit of their master. Upon seeing us, Obregon immediately jumped to his feet and ran to meet us, throwing his arms around me and giving me a firm caress. A chill went up and down my spine as I recalled that this man was a murderer. I was much relieved when he withdrew his arms, and I found that he had no knife in his hand. My desire was to get out of the company of this aggressive Indian as soon as possible. He asked, "Where are you going?"

We replied, "To Bonampak."

He answered, "I will go with you."

With firm determination, we stated, "No, you cannot accompany us to Bonampak."

Then he inquired, "Why not?"

To that we responded, "Because we have engaged these Indians to go with us."

Then he asked, "What presents did you bring?"

"We didn't bring you any presents," was our reply.

"Did you bring these men presents?"

We told him that we had given them a few articles to pay for their guiding us to the ruins.

He reverted again to the subject of going to Bonampak, still insisting on coming along also. We flatly told him that we did not want him to accompany us. It took all of the persuasion we could muster to convince him. Finally he relented by inviting us to come to his home on our return journey and "write our names and addresses in his big book." It was obvious that his principal purpose was to provide another opportunity to try to get some gifts from us.

JUNGLE TRAILS

As quickly as we could get away from Obregon, we continued our journey toward Bonampak. The trail was still as difficult as it had been from the time we left El Cedro airstrip. Never in my life before making this trip had I known what jungles and jungle trails really were. What a trail! I had been in forests in Alaska, in Canada, in Newfoundland, and in various parts of the United States, but never before had I seen vegetation so dense. The trees of numerous varieties, towering from one hundred to one hundred fifty feet upward and growing closely together, were interwoven with vines and lianas of various kinds. These not only climbed the trees from the ground to their tops, but also grew crosswise from tree to tree making the vegetation practically a solid hedge. We observed that certain varieties of plants, such as philodendrons, which are grown as house plants in our homes, climbed one hundred feet to the tops of the trees and then many of them hung downward from the treetops to the ground. Words are inadequate to describe the density and beauty of the tropical jungles of southern Mexico and northern Guatemala.

Occasionally vines grew across the trail only four or five feet from the ground. This necessitated a lot of stooping on our part, especially in the case of Otto Done who is six feet two inches tall. Because of the masses of leaves which were packed on the ground, the trail at times was extremely difficult to distinguish. We could have gone one direction almost as easily as another and still thought we were on the trail.

The tropical vegetation was so dense, regardless of how brightly the sun shone in the heavens, that it seemed practically dusk throughout the entire course of our journey. The heat was intense and the humidity high. I was unable to wear my glasses at all while in the jungles.

As we plodded along the jungle trail, it seemed as if every vine reached out and grabbed hold of our feet, tripping us over. It was really laughable to see how many times each of us fell down, but our Indian guides never stumbled. They were expert woodsmen, as agile as the jaguars which were native to their jungles.

My first really exciting fall occurred shortly after the Indians had joined us. We were attempting to cross a stream on a log covered with slick, green moss, beautiful to look at but difficult to walk on. When I reached the middle of the stream, my feet slipped, and I fell into the water. I held both cameras high out of the water while I struggled to my feet and out of the stream. How the Indians laughed! That mishap furnished them the most fun they experienced while we were with them.

Our progress was made more difficult in certain places by swampy, muddy trails, in which we sank ankle-deep; and in other places our trail was blocked by logs which had fallen on top of each other and were lying stretched across the trail. If it so happened that there was a hole large enough underneath the logs to squeeze through, the Indians dropped on their stomachs and crawled. Since they were very small people, weighing perhaps less than one hundred pounds each, and since they were carrying nothing on their backs and very little in their hands, it didn't take very large holes for them to crawl through. Unfortunately, we found it impossible to follow suit, since we were carrying so much equipment and were not built for such gymnastics, and so we were always forced to climb over the logs. I had a large movie camera strapped around my neck and hanging in front of me, with another camera hanging down my back, and water canteens hanging on each side. Otto and Jose were equally as heavily laden, their packs including hammocks, several additional cameras, and a few gifts for the Indians.

Occasionally during the earlier portion of our journey the trail crossed streams of water. Jose, Otto, and I picked our way very cautiously, endeavoring to find logs or rocks on which to walk. Soon our feet were thoroughly soaked and from then on we merely waded in the water Indian fashion whenever we encountered a stream.

We soon learned that the Lacandon Indians were decidedly in favor of using streams of water for the trail whenever opportunity afforded itself. When we came upon streams running toward Bonampak, the Indians actually walked in them on several occasions for nearly one hundred yards at a time before coming again onto the land. At certain times the streams in which we were obliged to wade were knee-deep. As is shown in the photograph, the bare-footed Lacandons lifted their robes high enough to keep them dry while we had to walk in the water fully clothed, including our high-top shoes. Without our Indian guides, we would not have known when to come out of the streams. In fact, the trail was so indistinct and difficult to follow throughout its entire course to Bonampak that had we been alone we would have never reached the "Temple of the Painted Walls"; and certainly we would not have been able to return to the airstrip. We would be ungrateful travelers if we did not extend our gratitude to the Lord and to the Indians of the tropical jungles for our safe arrival back to civilization.

John Lloyd Stephens, who has been termed by some writers "the father of Maya archaeology," since he was the first man in modern times to penetrate certain tropical jungles and visit such places as Copan and then publish an account of his trip and experiences, passed over trails somewhat similar to the one we encountered on our way to Bonampak. The principal differences were that Stephens and his party members were riding mules over a trail which was frequently used by muleteers, and so the vegetation perhaps would have been more completely cleared away than it was along the trail we walked through the dense Chiapas jungles. To quote Stephens' description:

. . . The woods were of impenetrable thickness and we could see nothing beyond the detestable path before us. For five hours we were dragged through mudholes, squeezed in gulleys, knocked against trees, and tumbled over roots. Every step required care and great physical exertion and, withal, I felt that our inglorious epitaph might well read: "tossed over the head of a mule, brained by the trunk of a mahogany tree, and buried in the mud in Mico Mountain." [^18]

A NIGHT IN THE JUNGLE

When we were approximately a hiking hour's distance from our desired goal, darkness came. We selected a spot by a small stream of water to make camp. Jose, Otto, and I attached our hammocks to some trees. We had brought no bedding, and so, wet and exhausted, we crawled into our hammocks hoping to have a good night's sleep. The intense tropical heat of the day was soon replaced by the chill of the night. A wind arose suddenly and blew through the dense foliage, making the weather very chilly. Shortly after we had climbed into our hammocks, we were lying there shivering. We twisted, squirmed, and curled up to get warm, but to no avail. Our teeth chattered as the wind continued to blow throughout the night.

NaBor and Juan, our Indian guides, built a small fire without any matches. They cuddled together by it as the hours of darkness passed. I had a strong urge to join them, but resisted, and lay in my hammock all night uncomfortably cold and most of the time wide-awake.

Now and then during the long and dreary night the thought crowded itself into my mind: "What foolish men we are—both of those Indians have guns and we are lying in these hammocks completely defenseless. They could easily shoot us at any moment, take our goods, and nobody would know where we had gone." Then I would push those disagreeable thoughts aside by reassuring myself that the Lord would protect us, which I acknowledge he did.

About midnight I saw our two Indian guides get up from beside their campfire and, silently and quickly, go along the jungle trail. They were using a flashlight which we had brought them to light their way. As I saw their light vanish in the dense darkness of the night, a horrifying feeling of being left alone in those tropical jungles came over me. For a short time I had a full realization of our utter dependence on those Lacandon Indians. I called to Otto and Jose, who were asleep, saying: "Our Indian guides have left us. Without them we shall be hopelessly lost in the jungles, since we have no idea how to get back to the airstrip."

They asked, "Where did they go?"

I explained, "They went down the trail toward their homes."

For perhaps thirty minutes we lay in our hammocks discussing our unforunate circumstances, when suddenly we saw a glimmer of light in the jungles in the direction that the Indians had disappeared. Soon thereafter our guides were with us again. They explained that they had gone in search of dry wood to rebuild their fire. Words cannot express the suspense and apprehension that we endured during the period of time that the Indians were away from us, nor can they describe the satisfaction and relief we felt at their return.

Another deterrent to our sleeping in the jungles was the variety of weird sounds that continuously filled the air. Now and then a limb fell from a tree or a tree crashed to the ground. Wild monkeys chattered, scolded at each other, and screamed; and a numerous variety of birds made diverse sounds according to their natures.

Other visitors to those jungles have had experiences similar to ours. Count Khun de Prorok wrote: "Camp at night was infernal, with the many voices of the jungle. Monkeys of all sorts, jaguars, pumas with their snarling cough, otters, racoons, tapir, and of course, deer were abundant, . . ." [^19] The archaeologist, Thomas Gann, speaking of the howling monkey, usually known as the "howler," wrote:

Great droves of these brutes are to be found everywhere throughout the entire region, . . . They are particularly plentiful in the great trees around the ancient ruined city of Tikal [and Bonampak], . . . They hold frequent concerts in the treetops, usually in the small hours of the morning. The performance starts with a dull roaring noise, which, reverberating over the dark and silent bush at these the most uncanny hours of the twenty-four, is terrifying unless one knows the cause of it. This is followed, after a short interval, by a low wailing, as of lost souls in Hades; another interval follows, to be followed by the roaring again, and so the performance goes on for half an hour or so, rendering sleep quite out of the question.

The Indians believe that the "howlers" of Tikal are reincarnations of the souls of the ancient inhabitants condemned to haunt the scene of their former lives for all time, and when one is awakened from a sound sleep, about 2 a.m., one is apt to believe that there may be something in the superstition. [^20]

The thoughts of jaguars, snakes, spiders, and other inhabitants of the jungles were disturbing factors in spoiling my night's rest. Just prior to going on that trip, I had read a number of books regarding jungle life. Those travelogues told about the numerous jaguars which infested the jungles. They described the poisonous spiders, rattlesnakes eight feet long, boa constrictors twenty feet in length, venomous coral serpents—the American cobra—and numerous other creatures of the jungles. I had read that if a person were bitten by a coral serpent he would die within twenty minutes, so deadly is its venom.

It seemed that all that I had read about that region came flooding through my mind, adding to the apprehension of the seeming dangers which confronted us. Nighttime is the time when small things become enormous in one's mind; and so the hours dragged on while I lay awake with my thoughts.

At times all of the jungle life was quiet—tensely quiet. A stillness prevailed which could almost be felt. The silence was almost unbearable. Perhaps nowhere does one experience the feeling of solitude quite so much as he does at certain times in the jungles. The hours dragged slowly onward. That night was one of the most disagreeable times that I have ever spent, a period of darkness—intense darkness and dreariness—which I shall never forget. We were happy when morning came and all was well.

CONTINUING ON TO BONAMPAK

Following that long, sleepless night, we ate a scant breakfast. Of the small amount of food we brought with us in the jungles, we had only one small can of Vienna sausages left. It contained one little sausage for each of us, including our Lacandon guides, since they had brought no food along. We supplemented the sausages by a drink of water from the stream and were soon on the trail again headed for Bonampak.

We finally arrived at the "Temple of the Painted Walls," which will be described in the next chapter. Our thrill surpassed description. We took photographs of the paintings of the dark and lightcolored peoples, and then headed back along the trail towards the Indians' homes.

RETURN TO THE LACANDONS' HOMES

Shortly after leaving Bonampak, NaBor said: "There is another trail which leads back to our homes but does not go past Obregon's casa. Juan and I are going on that trail. You men can return the way we came and sign your names in Obregon's big book."

Our reply was, "We will go with you on the new trail. We have no desire to see Obregon again, nor sign his big book."

The heat was intense, and the trail was as difficult as the one we had been on the previous day. The little Lacandon Indians had nothing to carry except a gun each, while we were carrying comparatively heavy packs. They hiked very fast, and so we had great difficulty in keeping up with them. We asked them to carry some of our equipment. They replied, "We have our burdens. We are carrying our guns." The thing which concerned us most was the possibility that they would get too far ahead and we would get lost in the jungles; and so we required that one of them follow behind us and the other go in front.

We became so intensely tired that we felt as if we would drop on the trail and remain there; but of course we realized that we must continue onward to the Indians' casas. Never before had I been so fatigued; however, with determination we pressed onward until we achieved our goal.

The pilot had told us that the distance from the airstrip to Bonampak and back was only thirty-two miles. Judging from our experiences and the way we felt, we concluded that one cipher had been omitted—making the distance 320 miles. If anyone doubts this statement, he is at liberty to make a similar trip and thereby verify or disprove our conclusions.

ENTERTAINED BY THE LACANDONS

When we finally arrived at the Indians' homes, naturally our first concern was food, since our rations had been limited to two small sausages each during that and part of the previous day. We asked the Indian women to prepare something for us to eat. In response one of them brought us three eggs. Jose Davila asked, "Cooked or raw?"

She replied, "Raw."

He suggested that she cook them.

After washing my hands and face in the river, I looked around for the cleanest place I could find in which to lie down and rest. I soon nestled down in a boat on the river near the bank. While lying in that boat, I looked towards the Indians' thatched houses and observed that one of the Lacandon women was making us some tortillas, pounding them flat on her bare leg.

Soon thereafter one woman returned with the three eggs now boiled and another brought us the tortillas. I gladly took a boiled egg, but glanced at the other little Indian woman and remarked, "No, I don't care for any tortillas." But I was so intensely hungry that my appetite overruled my first decision. The thought came into my mind: "You foolish man, take the tortillas. You are starving!" Thereupon I reversed my decision, saying, "I will take one." I ate it and concluded that it was the most delicious morsel of food that I had ever eaten. Then I said, "I will be happy to take another," and it was as delicious as the first. By this time Otto Done and Jose Davila had eaten the remainder of the tortillas, while I was wishing for more. After this the Indian woman chopped down a banana tree, providing bananas for our dessert.

Since we were not to meet the plane at the jungle airstrip until 10 o'clock the following morning, the Lacandon Indians insisted on our staying at their home that night, promising that they would guide us to the airstrip the next day in time to meet the plane. They generously offered us, as a place to hang our hammocks that night, an open-air, thatched-roofed shed or bowery which stood on the side of the river opposite their homes.

While we were hanging our hammocks and making other preparation for night, practically all of the Indians spent the remainder of the afternoon and early evening visiting with us. It extended our opportunity to become more familiar with their mode of thinking and their native customs.

I was sitting on a log near the Indians' thatched hut and happened to take off my hat for a moment. From what occurred it is possible that this was the first time one of the Indian boys, the one named Cubano, a young chap with an abundance of hair, had ever seen a bald head. A few moments after replacing my hat I felt it lift from my head, and turning around, I saw that Cubano had slipped behind me and with both hands had lifted my hat off my head so he could look at its baldness. The entire group, including the Indians, laughed heartily. This reaction caused the boy to vanish quickly from sight. However, in a few moments he returned with two pieces of sugar cane, each approximately two feet in length. He handed one to Jose Davila, and I reached for the other. He protested, saying, "No! This one is for him," pointing at Otto Done. Naturally I thought I was left out. But my new-found pal slipped behind the shed and returned almost immediately with a piece of sugar cane doubly as large as either of the other pieces. Smiling gleefully, he handed it to me. We concluded that he either felt sorry for me because of my bald head or that I had completely won his favor.

CULTURE OF THE LACANDONS

It was approximately 3:00 p.m. when we had arrived at NaBor's casa upon returning from Bonampak. This gave Otto, Jose, and me the major portion of the afternoon and early evening to continue our observations and study of those primitive jungle people.

During the past two days we had visited four Lacandon homes and had associated with approximately twenty-five Indians out of an estimated two hundred who lived in small groups scattered throughout the jungles of southeastern Mexico. Four of those we had associated with were men, two were boys, approximately fourteen were women, and there were five babies. Since the Lacandon men were practically beardless—some of them were completely so—it was difficult for us to distinguish them from the women; however, we observed that the men were slightly taller than the women and larger of stature.

Not only did all the women and children wear the type of dress that the three guides who met us on the trail were wearing, but we observed that the men were dressed also exactly like the women. All of those barefooted, jungle people were clothed in loose-fitting, cotton, canvas-like robes which hung from their shoulders to their ankles in the style of a Mother Hubbard. That one type of dress seemed to constitute those Lacandons' complete wardrobe.

Dr. Sylvanus Morley informs us that the Lacandon Indians do a certain amount of weaving of coarse cloth from a wild cotton which grows in the jungles. [^21] It comes from fiber grown on the giant ceiba, a sacred tree among this people. This silky fiber is known to us as kapok. The Lacandon women gather the fiber, clean it of seeds, spin the thread, and weave the cloth by hand on crude homemade handlooms. Maria, one of Obregon's wives, is the woman shown in the photograph who is spinning cotton into thread on a wooden spindle. The bowl she is using contains ashes which make the spindle turn more easily. The next photograph shows Carmita, first wife of Kayum (Obregon's son—a Lacandon man whom we did not see), weaving cloth on her homemade handloom. It takes, so it is claimed, most of a year's time for an Indian woman to gather sufficient cotton, clean it, and then spin and weave it into cloth to make one robe, or coton, as the Lacandons call their dress. However, from the appearance of this canvas-like cloth it looks as if one dress should last a woman or a man a full lifetime.

The Lacandons' thatched huts were intensely interesting to us. We observed that in making the walls of their homes, the Indians had taken small poles approximately two inches in diameter and six feet in length which they had stood upright one next to another. They had fastened the poles securely together by weaving tough vines and bark of trees around and between each of the poles both at the bottom ends which stood on the ground as well as at the top ends on which the roofs rested. The weaving of the tough jungle fibers around and between the poles resulted in making the walls of their homes firm and secure, but it had the disadvantage of leaving a space of perhaps an inch or more in width between the poles. On sunny days these cracks serve to let light into their houses; however, when the wind blows and the storms come, the cracks let the cold air into their homes. On such occasions living conditions are very difficult for those primitive jungle people. Imagine the dreary and cold conditions of their homes during the rainy season, which lasts from May until October. The rain falls in torrents almost every day, perhaps a hundred inches falling during six months' time.

We observed that some of their houses were built in circular form, being approximately twenty feet in diameter, while others were rectangular in shape. Some of their homes had boweries attached, while the bowery owned by NaBor stood across the river (El Cedro) a hundred yards or more from their two casas. Mother Earth supplied the floors for all the Lacandons' homes. The Indians merely placed a few small, fiber mats upon the dirt floors. The roofs, thatched with palm leaves or other similar leaves which grew in abundance in the jungles, were supported by several large poles which stood upright at various places inside the houses. There were no windows, but an opening was left in the wall of each house for a door. Small poles had been placed securely across these openings up to approximately two feet in height to keep their domesticated animals and poultry out of their houses.

The two thatched houses in which NaBor and Juan, with their families, lived stood in the center of a spot which they had carved out of the jungles. The entire setting was magnificent. Their garden was surrounded by the exceedingly green, dense, majestic forest. A river of sparkling water, El Cedro, ran nearby. This supplied them with culinary water, and also furnished ideal fishing opportunities for the Lacandon men. Since fishhooks were difficult or practically impossible for these jungle people to obtain, they resorted to fishing methods employed by their ancestors; i.e., they speared the fish. This involved a rather complicated technique, but the men were expert at it. Robert Bruce, who spent several months living with the Lacandons, claims that one of their most efficient fishermen could spear a dozen fish in a half hour's time. Kayum is shown in the photograph removing a fish, a small macawhil, from his spear or chuso. It would take much patience, calm nerves, and a steady hand to fish successfully by the Lacandons' method.

The next photograph shows Kayum getting some honey from a tree where a swarm of wild bees have deposited it. That particular type of bee does not sting; but there is another type of honey bee in the jungles which does sting, as do the bees in our section of the country. There is a third type of bee, so it is reported, in the region where the Lacandons live which does not sting, but it does get into the Indians' hair and bites.

Honey constitutes a very important item in the lives of the Lacandons. They not only use it for food, but it also serves even more important purposes as wax for candles and wax for such uses as strengthening the thread with which they tie arrowheads and feathers to shafts. The Indians also use it in waxing bowstrings, to form mouthpieces for their chors, or flutes, and for numerous other things. Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson indicates that honey and beeswax constitute valuable articles not only for the Lacandons but also for all Maya peoples. Speaking of his Maya guide, Jacinto, who was not a Lacandon, Dr. Thompson wrote:

On archaeological trips Jacinto keeps an eye open for the hives of wild bees. Honey is a treat for any Maya, but, more important, the hive yields wax. Jacinto strains the black wax and takes it home at the end of the season to use in his private intercession, for candles of black beeswax are more efficacious than store candles in religious rites. . . . [^22]

The gardens of each of the four Lacandon families which we visited consisted of several acres of land in each from which the Indians had burned the jungle growth. These people were producing bananas, sweet potatoes of several varieties, sugar cane, papayas, tobacco, beans, gourds, and especially corn, which constituted the principal items in their diet.

The Lacandon women and children plant and harvest the crops. According to the viewpoint of the men, such menial labor was below their dignity. The adult male members of the clan did only the important work—hunting and fishing. It was the duty of the women to raise the food and prepare it for eating, tend the livestock, spin and weave the cloth and make the clothing, and do all other tasks which constitute real work.

About the first of May the Lacandon women and their children plant their crops. They plant their corn by pushing sharp sticks into the ground and then dropping the kernels in the holes. Other seeds are planted in like manner. The photograph shows Chan Kim, NaBor's stepson, planting corn in the family milpa or garden. The Indians do no cultivating, irrigating, nor fertilizing of the land. Throughout the summer months it rains almost continuously. The corn and other garden products grow abundantly. In the fall the rains cease. The corn is not harvested, but it is left standing throughout the winter with the ears still attached. Whenever the Indians want corn, they simply pull off an ear, shuck it, and it is ready for grinding. This procedure protects corn from rodents and preserves it from moisture. All their products are also left on the vines or trees until needed.

The life of the Lacandons is difficult. Those primitive people face a continuous struggle to provide sufficient food upon which to subsist. Also, they have to contend with adverse conditions of nature, especially during the stormy season. Tropical diseases such as dysentery, hookworm, and malaria are constantly undermining their health and shortening their lives.

While gardening constitutes one of the principal duties of the Lacandon women, perhaps hunting is the activity most commonly engaged in by the men. The two parrots owned by NaBor and Juan are kept for the purpose of attracting wild parrots. They are constantly perched in a tree near the Lacandons' homes and effectively serve as decoys in attracting wild parrots which the Indians shoot for food according to their desires and needs. However, it should be pointed out that the Maya Indians never kill animals just for sport, as our people sometimes do. "The hunter asks the gods of hunting to send him what he requires, and usually points out that he is in need of the food; otzilem, 'I am poor or afflicted,' is the term he uses, . . . the expression really means that he needs food." [^23] The second evening that we were with the Lacandons, we saw perhaps a hundred parrots sitting in the trees around the Indians' camp, and they were completely unmolested. The men had just killed an owl which supplied them with sufficient meat for the time being.

Perhaps the most favored game hunted by these Indians is jabali, or wild pig. Each Lacandon family keeps a pack of mongrel dogs for the purpose of assisting the men in the hunt. The wild pigs travel in herds. They are extremely vicious, and because of their sharp tusks they are dangerous to the hunters and their dogs. The Lacandon men, however, hunt them even when they have no ammunition for their guns. They have the dogs cut one of the pigs out of the herd and corner it. The men then stab it to death with a machete tied to the end of a pole. Of course, sometimes the rest of the herd comes to the aid of the squealing victim, causing the Lacandons to climb the trees for safety and the dogs to head pell-mell toward home.

The photograph, showing Maria, Carranza's second wife, singeing the hair off a dead pig with an escoba (torch) while Carranza scrapes off the singed hair with his knife, gives evidence that the Lacandons have had a successful hunt. The other photograph shows Carmita, first wife of Carranza, pouring water from a jicora (gourd) while her husband completes the task of scraping the pig clean. The boy Cubano watches the entire procedure with mature dignity.

The Lacandon Indians do their cooking on open-air campfires. They build their fireplaces by placing two rocks side by side, and about eighteen inches from them they place two other rocks in a similar position. They make their fires for cooking purposes between those rocks. The photograph shows Old Rosita cooking some of the meat of the wild pigs. She has placed green sticks across the rocks to form a grill. The meat is placed on the sticks and left there while it cooks.

Old Rosita is also shown in one of the photographs cooking tortillas on an earthenware grill which is on the rocks above the fire and coals.

A NIGHT IN NABOR'S BOWERY

Darkness came, and we crawled into our hammocks, which hung from the ceiling of NaBor's bowery. By 10:00 p.m. we were again lying there shaking and shivering, as we had done the previous night. Jose got out of his hammock and built a fire between Otto's hammock and mine and another one outside the shed on the other side of his. He stayed up for approximately an hour and kept the fires burning—small, warm fires, the kind Indians build, which kept us comfortably warm—while Otto and I slept peacefully.

By 3:00 a.m., however, the fires had completely burned out. I awoke and found that I was again very chilly; and so I got out of my hammock and really built fires—big fires which gave an abundance of heat, entirely too much for the comfort of my companions. During the following hour, Otto and Jose complained because of being overheated, informing me that I didn't know how to build the proper kind of fire. However, I was quite satisfied with my accomplishment, and so I got back into my hammock and snatched an hour's sleep before morning came.

About 6:00 a.m. I got up, dressed, and went over to where Jose Davila was sleeping peacefully. I reached into his hammock to awaken him. As I touched him, he screamed. Then he awoke and said, "Thank goodness you woke me. I was dreaming that Obregon had come here and shot all three of us."

RETURNING TO THE AIRSTRIP

After eating a banana and chewing on the sugar cane, which constituted our breakfast, we returned along the jungle trial to the airstrip, accompanied by NaBor and Juan, four of their wives, the two Indian boys, and the dogs—all twelve of them.

The most memorable event that took place on the way was the killing of a wild turkey. Juan shot it. I have never in my life seen a more beautiful bird. Its back feathers were dark and glossy, somewhat greeny bronze in color, with lighter-colored plumage underneath. Its bill was rather orange, similar to that of a wild goose. On its head was a topknot composed of greenish-black feathers about two inches long, similar in appearance to ostrich plumes. Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson described the wild turkeys of that region as follows: ". . . and there are wild turkeys of the ocellated variety with greeny bronze plumage and peacock-eyed feathers." [^24] At the Indians' request, Otto Done hung the bird high up in a tree to protect it from the dogs; and then we continued along the trail to the airstrip.

We arrived at 9:30 a.m., one-half hour ahead of the appointed time. No plane was in sight. We waited and waited for five hours' time, anxiously searching the northern horizon for the approach of the plane.

While we waited we were entertained by our Indian friends, and we in turn entertained them. Otto permitted NaBor—the patriarch of the group—to use his minute camera and take pictures of his family. He practically missed them, taking only their heads and shoulders. This amused the Indians exceedingly. How they laughed! I have never seen a group of people who seemed to enjoy life more than did those Indians. They seemed to have had all the time in the world to rest and play, and certainly knew how to relax and enjoy themselves. They laughed and joked, fully demonstrating their jovial natures. During a period of more than two full days and two nights that we were with them, I never saw one disagreeable nor disrespectful act nor heard one unkind word expressed by any of them. Others who have associated with the Maya Indians have given reports of their character and dispositions similar to our evaluation of them. Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, one of America's outstanding Maya scholars, wrote:

. . . Most lowland Maya are light-hearted and seem to enjoy life—well adjusted, as the current expression puts it. . . . [^25]

And a little later in his book, Thompson wrote:

. . . Pondering whether my attitude toward the Maya, past and present, might be too sentimental and idealistic, I turned to the writings of Karl Sapper, German geographer and ethnologist, who lived for several years with the Kekchi Maya of Alta Verapaz, and to the judgment of Alfred Tozzer, who has lived among the Lacandons.

Sapper says of the Kekchi that family training and racial custom seek to instill control of every kind of mental excitement, to teach moderation in all actions, and to inculcate subordination to superiors. He comments that the quick gestures and loud speech of most Europeans and North Americans are evidence to the Indian of deficiencies in our training and of the low status of our civilization. . . .

Tozzer writes of the Lacandon that their morals are good and their family life happy, seldom disturbed by discord or strife. He notes that they view with disgust the loose morals and infidelity of whites and ladions with whom they come in contact, and that generally they are truthful, honest, generous, hospitable, and mild.

. . . These judgments of Maya character reassure me that my assessment is not unduly idealistic or influenced by sentimentality. [^26]

LEAVING THE JUNGLES

Finally the plane arrived. As the pilot alighted from it he said: "I am surprised to find you here. I am late because I believed that you would never get back from the jungles, and if you did, certainly not by the appointed time."

We replied, "We had no intention of staying in the jungles"; however, we gratefully acknowledge that the Lord blessed us and prospered our journey.

The aviator explained that the runway was so short and so covered with grass that if he attempted to take all of us together he wouldn't be able to get the plane off the ground. He first flew me, our photographic materials, and luggage from El Cedro airstrip to Tenosique. When he returned for Otto and Jose, he took to the Lacandons salt and other vital articles badly needed by those primitive jungle dwellers. We contributed those things to them in gratitude for their kindnesses; and we extended to them our deepest sympathy for the hardships which they must endure to continue to live.

Our trip to Bonampak was very strenuous but intensely interesting. We felt that our association with the Lacandon Indians, added to our other experiences, was very significant.

Otto, Jose, and I are grateful to have seen the "painted walls" in the famous ancient Maya temple at Bonampak, which gave us additional confirmation to the Book of Mormon claims that white and dark peoples—originally Nephites and Lamanites—had lived in ancient America.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Rediscovering Lost Temples of the Mayas," Travel (Baltimore, November 1948), p. 26.
[^2] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Open Sesame to the Maya," Pan American Union Bulletin (Washington, D. C., Vol. LXXXII, No. 7, July 1948), p. 379.
[^3] Wilson, op. cit., p. 24.
[^4] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Backwards a Dozen Centuries," Natural History (New York, October 1947), p. 370.
[^5] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, Mexico. Supplementary Publication 46, 1955, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington D. C., p. 6.
[^6] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1946), p. 412.
[^7] Wilson, "Rediscovering Lost Temples of the Mayas," op. cit., pp. 25-26.
[^8] Ibid., p. 24.
[^9] Ibid., p. 26.
[^10] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, op. cit., pp. 10-12, 14.
[^11] Ibid., p. 11.
[^12] Note: A marvelous account of Christ's appearances to the inhabitants of ancient America is given in the Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi.
[^13] 2 Nephi 5:21.
[^14] Alma 3:6.
[^15] 3 Nephi 2:14-16.
[^16] Moroni 1:1-3.
[^17] 2 Nephi 3:1-3.
[^18] Ibid., 9:53.
[^19] Alma 45:13-14.
[^20] 1 Nephi 13:30.
[^21] D. & C. 3:16-19; 2 Nephi 29:12-13.
[^22] Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City, 1916), pp. 521-522.
[^23] Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, The Civilization of the Mayas (Chicago, Ill., 1953), p. 20, dates the erection of New Chichen Itza from A.D. 968 to 987, and Dr. Morley, op. cit., p. 81, states that Chichen Itza was reoccupied in 968 A.D.
[^24] E. H. Morris, J. Charlot, and A. A. Morris, The Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza, Yucatan. Carnegie Institution, Publ. No. 46. (Washington, D. C., 1931), p. 444.
[^25] Ibid., p. 444.
[^26] Ibid., p. 402.
