Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 8

WHITE AND DARK PEOPLE OF ANCIENT AMERICA

BONAMPAK—THE "TEMPLE OF THE PAINTED WALLS"

As Otto Done, Jose Davila, our two Indian guides, NaBor and Juan, and I approached Bonampak early in the morning on January 19, 1955, our right to be there was vigorously protested by a number of wild monkeys. They screamed and chattered while scampering through the trees, highly indignant at our trespassing. Perhaps they felt that they were the guardians of these Maya temples which had been erected approximately 1300 years ago. However, we paid little attention to their noise because we had been informed by our guides that we were approaching Bonampak's most famous edifice, the "Temple of the Painted Walls," which is considered one of the most important archaeological discoveries made thus far in the twentieth century.

Eagerly we climbed the principal pyramid upon which stands the ancient Maya edifice. We observed that the building is approximately sixty-five feet in length, containing three rooms. Each of the rooms, approximately ten by seventeen feet in size, contains one door and no windows. The building is constructed of rocks covered with excellent stucco. The interior walls are plastered and are still in a good state of preservation even though hundreds of years have elapsed since their construction. The entire interior wall surfaces of the three rooms, including the sloping convex ceilings, are covered with murals, "painted in exquisite perspective." [^1]

We entered each of the rooms and excitedly examined and photographed the colorfully painted frescoes. Then with a machete we cleared the vegetation from the top of the pyramid in front of the "Temple of the Painted Walls," so that we could photograph the exterior of the building.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE OF BONAMPAK

Also, we examined and studied some of the other archaeological remains at Bonampak, which included other buildings, three large stelae, and two limestone altars. Charles Morrow Wilson states that one of the altars

. . . is considered one of the best examples of Maya sculpture yet discovered. It rivals the stone carvings at Palenque, which are commonly regarded as among the finest examples of Maya sculpture. [^2]

Bonampak, which is Maya for "Painted Walls," consists of at least eight standing temples which are ". . . believed to have been built in the sixth and seventh centuries A.D." [^3] "Although it may have been founded much earlier, Bonampak was in its prime during the seventh century, according to date glyphs." [^4]

As previously mentioned, the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C., suggested that the ancient Americans may have settled Bonampak two to three centuries earlier than 600 A.D. [^5] If that information is correct, this ancient Maya city could have been founded as early as 300 A.D., which would place its establishment within the Book of Mormon period.

MAYA ART AND BONAMPAK MURALS

Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley and other scholars of Meso-American cultures have maintained that "painting was a fine art among the Maya and reached a degree of excellence attained by no other people of aboriginal America." [^6] Until the discovery of Bonampak, archaeologists had made only a few fragmentary finds of Maya paintings on which to base their conclusions; however, the Bonampak murals confirm the former statements made by scholars, showing the importance of the "extremely talented painters whom the greatest Indian civilization developed." In the words of Charles Morrow Wilson:

But the amazing find at Bonampak reveals life in the Golden Age of the Maya with all the powers of strong colors, brilliantly used. The 1300-year-old murals show ceremonial processions of warriors and kings; also scenes of sacrifices, rituals, and battles. Painted on a kind of stucco which is superimposed on limestone masonry, the mural depicts a handsome pageantry featuring elaborate feather headdresses, ceremonial bars which were ancient Mayan scepters of authority and the musical instruments of the great Mayas of old—long Tibetan-style horns, huge turtle-shell rattlers and drums made of wood and clay with ornamented skinned heads.

More revealing are the costumes worn by the great Mayas of old. These are pictured as having been made of deer and jaguar skins handsomely ornamented by jade—probably imported from distant places. Cloth garments, apparently made of cotton, are interwoven with numerous figurines, glyphs, and planetary symbols. The favorite colors include red on white, rich green on brown, dark brown on white, and brilliant sashes. In all instances the ancient Mayas are pictured as a strong and healthy people, of outstanding dignity and charm. [^7]

[The principal temple contains more than 1200 square feet of murals] magnificently painted by superbly skilled early American artists who worked at least eight centuries before the great mural paintings of Europe were made. Remarkably enough the heroic wall paintings of the pre-Columbian American artists excell in many respects the best of European mural art. More important they open the way to a greatly improved understanding of what many experts believe was a Golden Age of ingenious American culture. . . . [^8]

. . . Artists are impressed by the versatility of the colors—at least eleven colors are used effectively—and it is believed that both vegetable and mineral paints were used. The perspective is amazingly skillful, even by contemporary standards. . . . [^9]

In a 1955 publication of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Maya art at Bonampak and elsewhere is discussed as follows:

The [Bonampak] murals are in no sense an ordinary discovery in the field of Middle American archaeology. They have received attention, professional and popular, that can be compared to few events in the entire range of prehistoric studies in the Americas.

One hardly need be a student of aesthetics to realize that here is exceptional art. On the other hand, one should have some knowledge of aboriginal American cultures to understand the uniqueness of the Bonampak expression. Certainly nothing comparable has appeared in the realm of Maya art, nor does it seem likely that the discovery will soon be equaled. . . .

Realism is a type of expression that is virtually unknown in Middle American delineation (the Teotihuacan murals are replete with symbolism) and indeed throughout most aboriginal American art. Yet here at Bonampak we find not only realism of forms but a straightforward handling of the subject that cannot fail to interest the observer. It may well be this quality, a quality somewhat closer to our own classic tradition and well removed from the complex and perplexing symbolism that carries through nearly all Middle American art, which has attracted such keen attention to the murals. In studying these paintings, one must appreciate the difference between Middle American art conventions and our own. There is no perspective, no chiaroscuro; the favorite Maya convention of showing faces in profile dominates the scenes. But how pleasant to be free of the great religious art of Middle America, weighted down with esoteric symbols and representations of mythological monsters, the significance of which is a source of unending speculation to present-day scholars never initiated into their mysteries!

The Bonampak scenes recount events the artist himself may have witnessed and are at least based on his own personal observations on the life of his day. There is great economy of expression, barely sufficient to indicate what is happening. The status of various individuals is indicated by differences in dress, but no single protagonist dominates the scene, as is invariably the case in monumental sculpture of the Maya. Each figure is an individual; characterization is so vivid as to have at times almost the quality of caricature. The artist does not hesitate to introduce small episodes incidental to the main theme as personal commentary on social types or personalities.

Unlike earlier Maya murals and those from other parts of Middle America, the Bonampak murals reveal a preoccupation with natural forms for their own sake. This appreciation of form itself as aesthetically expressive leads to an attempt not only to copy it faithfully, but to abstract its expressive qualities, to exaggerate them, using them in the design to create mood and motion. The artistry is so delicate, the line so sensitive, that we can fully appreciate it only by a close examination of photographs of the originals.

The sureness, accuracy, the purity of line in these paintings is truly remarkable. Nevertheless, the modern observer is likely to be shocked by the occasional glaring errors in the construction of the human form, difficult to reconcile with such subtle and acute observation of outline. The errors can be explained only by the Maya's habit of perceiving all forms in silhouette and neglecting their relation to the third dimension. The face of the Mayan figure, except in high-relief sculpture, is almost always presented in profile. Likewise, the feet, unless the figure is seated, are invariably shown in side view. Only in the study of hands did the Maya artist have a wide choice of positions, perhaps because he used the gesture of hands to express meanings, . . . Certainly on the Bonampak murals much of the action is expressed in the hands, and the stiffness of an arrangement of a row of figures is greatly relieved and enlivened by gestures suggesting conversation. . . .

. . . How much they [painters of Bonampak murals] could express in simple outline is really admirable; for example, the intensity of the drama in the scene on the wall of Room 3 is adequately conveyed by nothing more than the swirling lines of the plumed headdresses of the dancers. [^10]

During February and March, 1947, archaeologists and artists studied and photographed the Bonampak murals. Also, water color paintings were made, reproducing the scenes as nearly like the originals as possible. The reproductions have been housed in such places as the National Museum and the Palace of Fine Arts in the city of Mexico and the museum in Guatemala City.

WHITE AND DARK-COLORED PEOPLES DEPICTED—NEPHITES AND LAMANITES

A point of great interest which one observes in studying the original murals on the inner walls of the temple at Bonampak and the reproductions made by the artists is that these are life-size paintings which depict three distinctively different colors of people. It is probable that they represent the various races that were living in Bonampak at the time the frescoes were painted. Attention should be focused at this point on a statement previously quoted from the article published by the Carnegie Institution of Washington, publication 46, which states:

The Bonampak scenes recount events the artist himself may have witnessed and are at least based on his own personal observations on the life of his day. [^11]

If the foregoing conclusion is true, then why could not the artist in painting some of the people white and others red be representing two distinctively different races of people whom he had witnessed, basing his work ". . . on his own personal observations on the life of his day"? It appears that such was the case.

The murals portray people as white as the Caucasian races of Europe and as the Semitic Hebrews and other races of the Mediterranean world. The skin color of many of the others closely resembles the bronze-skinned natives of America, known since the days of Columbus as Indians. Interspersed among these are also a few representations of black people, as dark as the darkest Negroes.

The question immediately arises: Who were these white and dark peoples depicted in the Bonampak murals?

It is the opinion of the writer that the bronze-skinned persons and the white people are descendants of the Lamanites and the Nephite races, which are described in the Book of Mormon.

APOSTASY FROM THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST AND SYMBOLS OF CHRIST

The quetzal (ket'-sal) feathers shown as headdresses in the murals and those depicted on the lintels of the doors suggest that the builders of Bonampak were worshipers of Quetzalcoatl (Ket-sal-co-watl') or the "White Bearded God" who visited the people in ancient America and whom Latter-day Saints identify as Jesus Christ. [^12] Since the murals were painted less than two hundred years following the close of Nephite history, such a short time having elapsed would practically assure the traditions as those of Christ's appearances and connect the builders of Bonampak with Book of Mormon peoples.

One fact should be kept in mind: namely, at the close of Nephite history a great apostasy from Christ's true religion occurred. Following the close of the Book of Mormon, the religion of the descendants of the Nephites and Lamanites was pagan, the true gospel which Christ had taught to their ancestors having been greatly adulterated. But since the most important event that had ever occurred in the history of ancient America was the appearance of the resurrected Savior on this continent, the descendants of Book of Mormon peoples carried forward a remembrance of that great event in their traditions. They adopted the quetzal bird and the serpent, coatl (co-watl'), as symbols of the "White Bearded God," whom they named Quetzalcoatl and whom they worshiped with their diverse pagan practices.

NEPHITES AND LAMANITES IN ANCIENT AMERICA

As is well-known, two peoples—a white race and those of a darker color—inhabited ancient America for approximately one thousand years' time. The white race was called Nephites and the darker race Lamanites. Speaking of their skin colors, Nephi declared that the Lord

. . . had caused the cursing to come upon them [Laman and his associates] . . . wherefore, as they were white, and exceeding fair and delightsome, . . . the Lord God did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them. [^13]

Approximately five hundred years later, Alma wrote:

And the skins of the Lamanites were dark, according to the mark which was a curse upon them because of their transgression and their rebellion against their brethren, who consisted of Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph, and Sam, who were just and holy men. [^14]

SURVIVAL OF SOME NEPHITES THROUGH THE AGES

The reader may say: "Yes, we understand that there were a white race and a dark race in ancient America from approximately 600 B.C. until approximately 400 A.D., but we have understood also that by the latter date all the white people (Nephites), except Moroni, had been killed in a war with the darker people or Lamanites."

It is true that the Nephite nation ended toward the close of the fifth century A.D., but probably many of the white Nephites were saved from death by joining the Lamanites. These then would not be followers of Christ and would be unfaithful ones. The last great war was not fought entirely on the lines of race, but probably the determining factor was that one group allied itself with the Lamanite traditions, and the other group followed the Nephite traditions, including a belief in Jesus Christ. Thus there probably were dark and white people in each army. [^15]

The Book of Mormon gives evidence that some of the Nephites (white people) survived the last great war; for example, between the dates of 400 and 421 A.D., possibly toward the latter date and approximately thirty-five years after the last great battle, Moroni wrote:

. . . I make not myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me.

For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ.

And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. [^16]

PREDICTIONS OF PRESERVATION OF NEPHITES FOREVER

Although prophet after prophet throughout the entire course of Nephite history predicted that the Lamanites would destroy the Nephite nation when the latter people became "ripe in iniquity," the Lord through his holy prophets also promised the Nephites that some of their seed would be preserved forever. The first of these promises recorded in the Book of Mormon was made near the beginning of Nephite history by Father Lehi to his son Joseph. In giving his son a patriarchal blessing, Lehi predicted:

And now I speak unto you, Joseph, my last born. . . .

And may the Lord consecrate also unto thee this land, . . . for thine inheritance and the inheritance of thy seed with thy brethren, for thy security forever, . . .

. . . for thy seed shall not utterly be destroyed. [^17]

Jacob, the brother of Nephi, told the Nephites that God

. . . has promised . . . us that our seed shall not utterly be destroyed, according to the flesh, but that he would preserve them; and in future generations they shall become a righteous branch unto the house of Israel. [^18]

The foregoing prophecy indicates that through an apostate line the seed of the Nephites would be preserved in the land. Alma made a similar statement. He predicted the destruction of the Nephites as a nation, pointing out that some of them, however, would not be destroyed but would be numbered among the Lamanites. To quote:

. . . the time . . . cometh that those who are now, or the seed of those who are now numbered among the people of Nephi, shall no more be numbered among the people of Nephi.

But whosoever remaineth, and is not destroyed in that great and dreadful day, shall be numbered among the Lamanites, . . . [^19]

An angel from heaven had previously given Nephi this information, declaring that a mixture of the seed of the Nephites would remain forever among the Lamanites or American Indians. In speaking of the latter days—the days in which we live—the angel declared:

. . . the Lord God will not suffer that the Gentiles will utterly destroy the mixture of thy seed, which are among thy brethren.

Neither will he suffer that the Gentiles shall destroy the seed of thy brethren [Lamanites or Indians]. [^20]

MODERN REVELATION DECLARING NEPHITES STILL LIVE

In modern revelation the Lord confirmed the fulfilment of the promise made to his ancient prophets. In speaking of the coming forth of the Book of the Mormon, he declared:

Nevertheless, my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people—

And to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, through the testimony of their fathers—

And this testimony shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites, and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites, who dwindled in unbelief because of the iniquity of their fathers, . . .

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records—. . . [^21]

Certainly the Lord would not have made mention of the Book of Mormon record coming to the descendants of the Nephites if there were no descendants remaining in America at the time of its publication.

PRESIDENT WILFORD WOODRUFF'S STATEMENT

President Wilford Woodruff accepted the promises of the Lord that some of the seed of the Nephites would be preserved; and he firmly believed that he found some of the direct descendants of the Nephites in New Mexico and Arizona. He spent several months doing missionary work with the Indians in that section of the country, and then, on September 15, 1879, he wrote a letter to President John Taylor and the Council of the Twelve in which he stated:

In my short communication of the 2nd inst., I promised to give a fuller account of my visit to the Isletas, which I will now endeavor to do. I view my visit among the Nephites one of the most interesting missions of my life, although short. I say Nephites because if there are any Nephites on this continent we have found them among the Zunis, Lagumas [Lagunas], and Isletas, for they are a different race of people altogether from the Lamanites. I class the Navajo, Moquis, [Hopis], and Apaches with the Lamanites, although they are in advance of many Indian tribes of America. I class the Zunis, Lagumas, and the Isletas among the Nephites (See D. & C. 3:17). [^22]

MURALS DEPICTING WHITE AND DARK PEOPLE AT CHICHEN ITZA

In addition to the famous Bonampak murals, other similar wall paintings made by Indians, depicting white and dark people, have been discovered; for example, murals were painted on the walls of the Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza, Yucatan—according to archaeologists, painted approximately 1,000 A.D. [^23] These murals show white people in bondage to a dark-skinned race, while other murals show white people being defeated in war by a darker-colored race, as the two illustrations show. In 1931 Morris, Charlot, and Morris, in an elaborately illustrated and exhaustive study of The Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza, Yucatan, reached the conclusion that those murals thoroughly demonstrated the fact that there were two distinctively different races of people living at Chichen Itza during the pre-Columbian period. It was their opinion that in the production of those murals the ancient artists had endeavored to depict and emphasize the racial characteristics and distinctions between the white and dark-skinned people, attempting to give an exact representation of the colors of both races. The writers also concluded that the murals represented a sea battle between the two races, the dark-skinned warriors being victorious over the fair-skinned ones. In speaking of the dark-skinned Maya people that were found in Yucatan at the time of the Spanish conquest, the writers stated: "It is difficult, however, to reconcile all of these physical qualities with a member of the race"; [^24] and then the writers continued, "the painter in depicting the hair and skin with such care in order to contrast them with their black-painted armed captors evidently had some notion of a distinct physical difference in his two sets of actors." [^25]

The authors also stated:

However, . . . the fair-haired white folk are certainly suffering reverses in battle. One is being grasped by the hair and his face is fittingly distorted by unpleasant emotion. Another has his arms bound rudely behind his back. A third is being dragged backward over the prow into a canoe. [^26]

And then, speaking of the fair-skinned race, they continued:

. . . The latter type [white race] is altogether significant. Quite obviously the painter is stressing an acute dissimilarity between his own people and those of another sort. The long-flowing, yellow hair, interwoven with green beads, so painstakingly delineated in the scene as well as in that of the human sacrifice, is undoubtedly meant to emphasize a difference of tribe, or even of race. . . . Just what this unusual disparity of type may mean is purely a matter of conjecture, but it cannot help but bring to mind legends rife throughout the American continent concerning the fair skin and golden hair of a mythical race. If the picture is a historical record, speculation would become even more interesting. [^27]

The murals on the walls of the Temple of the Warriors could be a representation of historical events at Chichen Itza when white and dark races were at war with each other and when the white people were in bondage. Or perhaps they refer back to ancient historical events which occurred in the days of the Nephite and Lamanite ancestors of the Mayas, since the Book of Mormon tells the story of the former (white people) engaging in numerous wars with the latter (dark-colored people) and on certain occasions being in bondage to them. [^28] It matters little which it may be, since either constitutes valid Book of Mormon evidence.

MURALS DEPICTING WHITE AND DARK PEOPLES AT TEOTIHUACAN

Murals depicting white and dark peoples have also been discovered at Teotihuacan north of Mexico City. Since there is considerable evidence confirming the viewpoint that the early settlers of Mexico, the Toltecs (Nephites), [^29] as well as the settlers on the Gulf of Mexico, the Olmecs (Mulekites), [^30] were white people, [^31] and living beside them were the dark-skinned Lamanites, it is not surprising to find at Teotihuacan murals portraying these various races. Much evidence is available (to be presented later) which shows that some white people survived along with their darker-skinned associates in the valley of Mexico from ancient times down to the time of the Spanish conquest.

As additional evidence from the artists of ancient Teotihuacan, they not only painted murals depicting white and dark people, but they also portrayed on their murals white and dark hands, distinctly and artistically shown.

When these murals were first uncovered, the paint was well-preserved and the colors were brilliant. Exposure to the air and light during the past few years has dimmed them considerably.

MURALS DEPICTING WHITE AND DARK PEOPLE AT UAXACTUN AND MAYA DATES

In addition to the marvelous murals discovered at Bonampak, at Chichen Itza, and at Teotihuacan, other murals depicting white and dark-colored peoples were discovered a number of years ago at other archaeological sites. None of these murals, however, were as artistically executed as those of Bonampak. One of the important discoveries of murals depicting white and dark people was at Uaxactun (Wash-ack-toon'), Guatemala.

In order to arrive at an understanding regarding the possible time of the painting of these murals, and to ascertain the approximate period when the city of Uaxactun was founded, we should present briefly the interpretations of scholars regarding the ancient Maya dating system.

There are two systems of interpreting Maya dates. The one is the Spinden correlation formula, and the other is termed the Goodman-Martinez Hernandez-Thompson correlation formula. The Spinden correlation places the dates 260 years earlier than does the latter correlation formula. Many scholars, however, use the latter dating system.

The ancient Mayas erected tall monuments of stone called stelae on which they carved dates, other historical data, and usually the likeness of one of their principal citizens or gods.

The late Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley, who used the Goodman-Martinez Hernandez-Thompson correlation formula, stated:

The earliest, surely contemporaneous date in the Maya hieroglyphic writing is that engraved on the back of the Leyden Plate, a small celt-like object of jade, eight and one-half inches long by three inches wide, found near Puerto Barrios, Guatemala, in 1864; this records the Maya date . . . corresponding to 320 of the Christian Era. [^32]

According to Dr. Spinden's correlation formula, instead of the Leyden Plate containing a date of 320 A.D., when adjusted to our system of recording time, the date would read 60 A.D.

Although the Leyden Plate was discovered near Puerto Barrios, Guatemala, Dr. Morley was of the opinion that it was carved at Tikal, a large ancient Maya city which lies approximately fifteen miles south of Uaxactun, [^33] both places being situated in the northern jungles of Guatemala.

Evidence indicates that the ancient city of Uaxactun was established during Book of Mormon times. According to Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, one of the world's outstanding Maya scholars and archaeologists, the ancient Mayas were living at Uaxactun at least by the time of the early Christian centuries. He points out that:

. . . we know that when the early surviving dated monument (Stela 9) was erected, these figures had already come into use. This stela records in dreadfully eroded glyphs the equivalent in the Maya calendar (according to the most generally accepted correlation) of April 9, A.D. 328. It was still standing, although very much the worse for wear when the late Maya scholar Sylvanus Morley found it in 1916, nearly sixteen hundred years after its erection. [^34]

Dr. Thompson continued by explaining that Stela 9 was sitting on the top of an older one which the Mayas had used as its base. He stated that these people had developed what he termed ". . . the stela cult and dated hieroglyphics some 350 years earlier than the earliest surely dated Maya inscription (the Leyden Plate) which still survives." [^35] Since Dr. Thompson dates the Leyden Plate at 320 A.D., 350 years earlier would be 30 B.C. Spinden's correlation would place the date at 290 B.C.

Since the date of 328 A.D. (Spinden's correlation being 68 A.D.) was carved on Stela 9 at Uaxactun by the inhabitants of that city, which date was either 72 or 332 years before the close of the Book of Mormon period, the Nephite nation having come to an end approximately 400 A.D., it is definite that Uaxactun was inhabited during Book of Mormon times. The late Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley and other outstanding archaeologists maintain that some of the earliest Maya settlements could have been founded at least as early as 300 B.C. [^36] Dr. Spinden's dating system would place them much earlier.

To quote Dr. Morley:

. . . The Early Period of the Old Maya Empire is thus regarded here as having extended from A.D. 317 to 633, a little more than three centuries. . . . For a number of centuries prior to 317 it is obvious that the ancient Maya had been accumulating cultural experience to the point where they finally were able to carve their stone monuments. Perhaps as early as the fourth or third century B.C. they had begun to carve monuments out of wood. [^37]

The exact date of the founding of Uaxactun is not known, and so if one should give a date when this ancient city was first settled it would be pure speculation; however, evidence indicates that it could have been founded even before Christ appeared to the inhabitants of ancient America.

Whether the murals depicting white and dark peoples at Uaxactun were painted during the Book of Mormon period or later makes no particular difference regarding their value. During either period white and dark peoples, known anciently as Nephites and Lamanites, were living in America; therefore, the artist who painted the murals was merely depicting the two races of people with which he was familiar.

In addition to murals depicting white and dark peoples at Uaxactun, the Mayas have decorated their ceramics with similar depictions. A classical example of decoration in Maya ceramics is the vase which was discovered at Alta Verapaz, Guatemala.

FAMOUS ANCIENT MAYA CALENDAR AND DATING SYSTEM

Since a brief explanation of the Maya dating system has been given, and since a statement regarding the erection of stelae by this ancient people has been made, it should be appropriate at this point to present a brief sketch of the Maya calendar and its possible relationship to Book of Mormon history. Perhaps no people of antiquity developed a more astounding and accurate calendar and dating system than did the ancient Mayas. The following statement made by Dr. Herbert J. Spinden, one of America's outstanding Maya archaeologists and scholars, gives dates from the Maya calendar which are intensely interesting and important to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. To quote:

Now Mayan history does not reach back to the zero date which must be regarded as a theoretical beginning of Mundane Era. The earliest object with contemporary date is the Tuxtla Statuette with May 16, 98 B.C. It appears however, that the really historic beginning of the day count was 7.0.0.0.0., 10 Ahua 18 Zac, August 6, 613 B.C. The calendar of months was probably inaugurated in 580 B.C. when O Pop, New Year's day, coincided with the winter solstice. [^38]

Students of the Book of Mormon will readily recall that the record claims that Lehi and his colony left Jerusalem 600 B.C. to begin their historic journey toward America, the "Promised Land." [^39] It is evident that 600 B.C. corresponds rather closely to the date of 613 B.C., and so that date on the Maya calendar could represent the time of the departure of the progenitors of the inhabitants of ancient America from the Holy Land. Since Spinden maintains that the calendar of months was probably inaugurated in 580 B.C., that date could be the exact time that Nephi inaugurated the calendar for his people after the arrival of Lehi's colony on the Western Hemisphere. Scholars have observed the close similarities between the Egyptian calendar and that of the Mayas. It is a well-known fact that the Nephites brought much Egyptian culture with them to America, even writing some of their records in the Egyptian language. [^40] Nephi could have used the Egyptian calendar as the basis for creating a calendar for his people by making such alterations as eighteen months of twenty days each and five extra days instead of twelve months of approximately thirty days each as used in the Gregorian calendar. Both the Gregorian calendar, the one we have inherited, and the one the Mayas used made adjustments for the extra fraction of a day each year.

CONCLUSIONS

In the evidence that has been presented, the author has attempted to show that white and dark-skinned peoples—Nephites and Lamanites—lived in ancient America and that many of the white people escaped death at the close of the Book of Mormon period.

Since the information is not available, it is impossible to state definitely the exact number of Nephites who denied Christ and joined the Lamanites; and yet it is probable (judging from the large number of white peoples in various parts of ancient America following the close of Book of Mormon history) that a considerable number survived the last great war. There is much evidence in the Book of Mormon, as has been presented, that such would be the case.

The murals depicting white and dark-skinned peoples described in this chapter were painted at various times during the several centuries which followed Nephite history. Perhaps the earliest of them—the ones at Uaxactun—could date near Book of Mormon times. According to the opinions of archaeologists, those at Bonampak were painted from two to four hundred years after the close of Nephite history. The murals at Teotihuacan were produced sometime during the first several Christian centuries; and the murals at Chichen Itza date approximately six hundred years after Moroni hid the records in Hill Cumorah. These murals supply valid evidence that white people persisted in ancient America throughout the decades following the close of the Book of Mormon period; otherwise the ancient artists would have had no valid reason for depicting such peoples in their paintings.

The numerous predictions of the Nephite prophets proclaiming that a remnant of their people would persist in the land forever combine with those murals to give an abundance of evidence that dark and white peoples lived in ancient America, as is claimed in the Nephite records. The post-Book of Mormon evidence shows that white people persisted until the coming of the Spaniards. Certainly the Prophet Joseph Smith would have had no knowledge of all these evidences when, "under the inspiration of God," he translated the Book of Mormon and gave to the world the story of the Nephites (white people) and the Lamanites (bronze-skinned race). Thus in conclusion the writer maintains that the ancient Nephites are at least partially accountable for the white peoples who inhabited America between the dates of 421 A.D. and the discovery of America in 1492 A.D.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Rediscovering Lost Temples of the Mayas," Travel (Baltimore, November 1948), p. 26.
[^2] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Open Sesame to the Maya," Pan American Union Bulletin (Washington, D. C., Vol. LXXXII, No. 7, July 1948), p. 379.
[^3] Wilson, op. cit., p. 24.
[^4] Charles Morrow Wilson, "Backwards a Dozen Centuries," Natural History (New York, October 1947), p. 370.
[^5] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, Mexico. Supplementary Publication 46, 1955, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington D. C., p. 6.
[^6] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, Calif., 1946), p. 412.
[^7] Wilson, "Rediscovering Lost Temples of the Mayas," op. cit., pp. 25-26.
[^8] Ibid., p. 24.
[^9] Ibid., p. 26.
[^10] Ancient Maya Paintings of Bonampak, op. cit., pp. 10-12, 14.
[^11] Ibid., p. 11.
[^12] Note: A marvelous account of Christ's appearances to the inhabitants of ancient America is given in the Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi.
[^13] 2 Nephi 5:21.
[^14] Alma 3:6.
[^15] 3 Nephi 2:14-16.
[^16] Moroni 1:1-3.
[^17] 2 Nephi 3:1-3.
[^18] Ibid., 9:53.
[^19] Alma 45:13-14.
[^20] 1 Nephi 13:30.
[^21] D. & C. 3:16-19; 2 Nephi 29:12-13.
[^22] Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City, 1916), pp. 521-522.
[^23] Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, The Civilization of the Mayas (Chicago, Ill., 1953), p. 20, dates the erection of New Chichen Itza from A.D. 968 to 987, and Dr. Morley, op. cit., p. 81, states that Chichen Itza was reoccupied in 968 A.D.
[^24] E. H. Morris, J. Charlot, and A. A. Morris, The Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza, Yucatan. Carnegie Institution, Publ. No. 46. (Washington, D. C., 1931), p. 444.
[^25] Ibid., p. 444.
[^26] Ibid., p. 402.
[^27] Ibid., p. 402.
[^28] Mosiah, chapters 19-22, pp. 170-178; 23-24, pp. 178-182.
[^29] Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, 1950), pp. 162-174, 240, 244-245.
[^30] Ibid., p. 247.
[^31] Harold I. Velt, America's Lost Civilizations (Independence, Mo., 1949), p. 84; Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races (New York, 1875), vol, 5, pp. 202-203.
[^32] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya (Palo Alto, 1947), p. 43; J. Eric S. Thompson, The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization (Norman, Okla., 1955), p. 252.
[^33] Morley, op. cit., p. 43.
[^34] Thompson, op. cit., p. 53.
[^35] Ibid., p. 50.
[^36] Morley, op. cit., p. 18.
[^37] Ibid., p. 52.
[^38] Herbert J. Spinden, Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America. Handbook Series No. 2, American Museum of Natural History (New York, 1922), p. 136.
[^39] 1 Nephi 17:13.
[^40] Mosiah 1:4; 9:32.
