Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 10

ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCES OF WHITE AND DARK PEOPLE ANCIENTLY

NEPHITE OR HEBRAIC ANCESTRY OF WHITE MAYAS

It is a well-known fact that on the temples at Chichen Itza, Yucatan, appear many pre-Columbian stone carvings of bearded or whiskered men. A. Hyatt Verrill, referring to the "City of the Serpents"—dedicated by the Mayas to Kukulcan—wrote:

. . . its "Temple of the Jaguars" surpasses any other known prehistoric structure in its beauty of design, its impressive carvings, its magnificent coloring and its wonderful frescoes. . . . Among the innumerable bas-reliefs, which cover both the exterior and the interior of the temple, are many figures of bearded men. It has been suggested that these represent priests of Kukulcan or the "Plumed-Serpent-god," who was always depicted with a beard, the supposition being that his priests either wore real beards or donned artificial ones. But is it not equally probable that these bearded figures represent those mysterious "white bearded ones" who, according to Mayan, Aztecan and Incan legends, visited America ages before the coming of the Spaniards? There is a remarkable frequency of bearded gods and figures in both Mayan and Aztec sculptures and art, . . . [^1]

The archaeologist Dr. Gregory Mason, in his book South of Yesterday, stated, "Maya sculpture showing bearded men, in the attitude of conquerors, led Dr. George Vaillant to suggest that a bearded race ruled these lands before the ascendancy of the Mayas." [^2] It should be recalled that the Nephites and their progenitors, the Hebrews, were races whose men had heavy growths of hair on their faces and wore beards, while the Indians had very little hair on their faces and as a general rule did not wear beards. To quote Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley:

The Maya are not hairy people. The men either have no beards and moustaches at all, or only very meager, sparse ones, while other parts of their body have less hair than in the case of American whites. [^3]

The Book of Mormon record claims that the Hebrews, a bearded people, were among the progenitors of the American Indians.

Dr. Gregory Mason also, in his book Ancient Cities and Modern Tribes, described the two races of people who lived side by side in ancient America and constituted the Maya society. I maintain that these two races were white and dark in color and that they were the descendants of the Nephites and the Lamanites. To quote Dr. Mason:

More extended study of the Maya, especially of their sculptures in stone, figurines in pottery, skeletal remains from the ancient graves, and modern descendants, cannot fail, I think, to convince one that there were at least two separate and distinct races involved; the one, the ruling race, to which belonged the kings, nobles, and astronomer-priests, depicted upon the monuments throughout most of the larger ruined cities of the Old Empire, the other the workers or slaves, by far the more numerous, who, under the dominion of the ruling class, built those gigantic cities throughout this part of Central America, with their palaces and temples, courts, plazas, and sculptured monoliths, whose ruins, now buried in the depths of the primeval forests, are the wonder and admiration of all who have had the privilege of visiting them.

The faces of the priests and rulers are quite familiar to us sculptured on the monoliths of Copan, Quirigua, Naranjo, Tikal, and Yaxchilan, and moulded in stucco at Palenque and other cities.

Considerable variation may be noticed amongst them, depending on the skill of the artist, the material from which they had been sculptured, and the period to which they belong; but, generally speaking, the type is fairly uniform throughout; the nose is Roman and narrow, the chin and brow somewhat receding, and the lips very prominent, the lower lip often protruding well beyond the upper.

The stelae from Copan show this type of face, and the outline of a head from one of the monuments at Ixkun exhibits it in profile. The type is found from one end of the Old Empire to the other, and in the majority of the cities is the only one handed down to posterity, for it must be obvious that, no matter how greatly the workers might outnumber the ruling classes, the heads of the former would never occupy a prominent position upon the sculpture. [^4]

Dr. Mason came to the conclusion that the white ruling class among the ancient Mayas reminded him of Mediterranean peoples. He wrote:

To me their features are strongly reminiscent of those of the ancient Romans as one sees them portrayed in the marble statues of their best period; the same large, arched nose, firm mouth, and short chin are present in both. [^5]

Other writers claim that the ancestors of the Mayas are Mediterranean people, but Jews instead of Romans; for example, Theodore Arthur Willard, after visiting Chichen Itza and other archaeological Maya sites, came to the conclusion that the bearded men portrayed on their temples and stelae were strikingly Hebraic in appearance. To quote:

An interesting side light . . . is the distinctly Semitic cast of countenance of some of the ancient sculptures and murals found at Chichen Itza and in

other old Maya cities. The dignity of face and serene poise of these carved or painted likenesses is strikingly Hebraic. [^6]

One of the best examples at Chichen Itza of a bearded man which is definitely Semitic in appearance is on the wall of the building at the north end of the ball court. Since the carving is so interesting and distinctive, the building on which it stands is called the "Temple of the Bearded Man." Many similar representations of bearded men, definitely representing white men of Hebraic type, appear on the other buildings and stelae at Chichen Itza.

Bishop Diego de Landa, a prominent Spanish missionary during the first century of the Spanish conquest in Yucatan, writing in about 1556, claimed that the Mayas were descendants of the Jews. [^7]

HEBRAIC-LIKE PEOPLE DEPICTED THROUGHOUT MEXICO AND CENTRAL AMERICA

At numerous places throughout Mexico and Central America portraits of bearded men have been discovered which definitely are not representations of the average American Indian but of a white race of people who preceded them in those places. One of the outstanding examples is the portrait of the aristocratic and beautiful bearded individual which was found in the country of the Totonac Indians, state of Vera Cruz, Mexico. It is at the present time housed in the American Museum of Natural History. This profile of a bearded man was carved on the back of a slate mirror. It represents an outstanding example of early American art. Anyone who examines it is easily convinced that it does not represent an Indian, but one of the early white inhabitants of Mexico.

An expedition under the direction of the National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian Institution discovered at Tres Zapotes, Vera Cruz, a clay head which was described as "one of the best examples of ceramic art yet found in the New World." The man represented in this clay figurine is wearing a sharply pointed beard and a stocking cap. The cap is similar to the type worn by the Jews in the Holy City at the time Lehi left Jerusalem. This Olmec figurine, dated at about the time of Christ, is housed in the National Museum of Mexico. It was excavated by Dr. Matthew W. Stirling in 1939-1940. The account of the discovery and a description of the figurine were published in the September, 1940, issue of the National Geographic Magazine.

In the words of Thor Heyerdahl, "Such a vividly presented race-type is not the product of the artists' fancy." [^8] The writer believes that it (Fig. 100) is a representative depiction of a white and bearded race known in the Book of Mormon as Nephites.

Another photograph showing a man wearing a stocking cap similar to that on the Olmec figurine is reproduced in this chapter. About fifteen inches in height, it is a representation of a man's head. This Maya relic is housed in the National Museum of Guatemala. Like the Olmec figurine, this one from the Maya culture is Hebraic in appearance. It is suggested that the reader compare these two representations of men wearing stocking caps with an artist's drawing of King Jehu of Israel, who is depicted wearing a similar type of cap. The artist made his drawing from a picture on an official document which shows King Jehu doing homage to King Shalmenezer of Assyria. The drawing depicts quite accurately the type of cap worn by the people in Jerusalem about the time Lehi and his associates migrated to America. King Jehu dates approximately two hundred years earlier than Lehi's departure from the Holy City.

On our recent trip to the various archaeological sites of Mexico and Central America, we saw several carvings of men wearing stocking caps similar to those shown in the photographs; for example, the depiction of a man carved on the "Tree of Life" stela at Izapa, Mexico, which Dr. M. Wells Jakeman designates as a representation of Father Lehi, is wearing a stocking cap. He also has a long pointed beard. There are also men depicted in the Bonampak murals with stocking caps. On one of the temples at Uxmal, a man is shown wearing a cap. A statue (Fig. 105), housed in the Oaxaca

Museum, represents a man wearing a cap; but as the readers will observe, his cap is not pointed as are the others shown in the photographs.

In addition to the bearded men wearing Hebraic-like caps, we photographed and studied a number of representations of bearded men carved on stelae at Copan, Quirigua, Chichen Itza, and in the National Museum of Mexico. There are also a number of bearded men depicted on the stone monuments at Monte Alban and others shown on the temples at that archaeological site. We photographed some interesting figurines and monuments, showing representations of bearded men, at the museums in Mitla, Mexico, Zaculeu near Huehuetenango, Guatemala, and San Jose, Costa Rica. All of them supply evidence that ancient America was inhabited by a bearded race of white people.

Perhaps the most interesting collection of figurines of bearded men which we saw is owned by Alberto G. Marquez. They are housed in his private museum in Merida, Yucatan, Mexico. He kindly permitted me to photograph all of the artifacts in his collection. I am reproducing eight of the figurines of bearded men in this book for the reader's benefit. These are all early Maya figurines; and they are quite similar to others that I saw in the Guatemala Museum and other museums of Meso-America. The writer is of the opinion that they are Hebraic-like in appearance and that they supply a vast array of evidence supporting the claims made by the Book of Mormon that the ancestors of the Indians came from Jerusalem.

Perhaps the outstanding portrait carved on an ancient monument which clearly depicts a member of the white race was discovered by Matthew W. Stirling in 1939 and 1940, while on an expedition for the National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian Institution. At La Venta, Tabasco, on the southern coast of the Gulf of Mexico, Stirling discovered a stela fourteen feet high on which was carved a full-bearded figure in low relief which his party members named "Uncle Sam." [^9]

In a report of the discovery, Stirling described the carving of the man's profile as a representation of a "remarkably handsome individual with an aristocratic aquiline nose and a curious longflowing beard." [^10] The figure perhaps is a representation of an Olmec or Mulekite priest. Matthew W. Stirling pointed out that both this figure and another on the same stela were wearing shoes with "odd-pointed, up-turned toes." [^11] The shoes depicted on the stela and the clothing shown on the bearded man are the types worn by the white inhabitants of ancient America and also by their forefathers in Palestine at the time Lehi left Jerusalem for the New World. The bearded man shows a realism and a masterly design which indicate that it is a representation of the white race. Neither the shoes nor the face nor the flowing beard of "Uncle Sam" could be claimed to belong to a "red-skinned Indian."

While at the museum in Copan in 1955, I saw a vase approximately a foot high and nearly as wide, decorated with a bearded man which to Jose Davila, Otto Done, and me seemed very Hebraic in appearance. According to Dr. J. Eric S. Thompson, the founding of Copan, an early Maya city of the Classic Period, was as early as 436 A.D. This date is not long after the close of the Book of Mormon period. Perhaps the ancestors of the Mayas were living at Copan even before that date.

Numerous other examples of bearded men depicting members of the white race carved on the stelae and buildings at the various archaeological sites throughout Mexico and Central America as well as those collected in museums, could be presented, but it will suffice to end this portion of our discussion with the following quotation:

Beards are drawn in several codices. Thus in Codex Vaticanus 3773, another pre-Columbian book from Mexico and in Anahuac handwriting, eleven men with realistic, unmistakable beards are represented. Humboldt (1810, p. 47, 48) reproduces about a dozen other bearded men from the hieroglyphic paintings in the Mexican manuscript preserved in the Imperial Library of Vienna. [^12]

SKELETAL REMAINS SUPPLY EVIDENCE OF CAUCASIAN PEOPLES IN ANCIENT AMERICA

Skeletal remains are another form of evidence supplying help in determining the racial type or types of inhabitants of ancient America. As a result of the dampness of the climate in Middle America, the bodies of deceased people have in most cases decomposed; however, the skeletal remains which have been studied are said to date after A.D. 400. These found and studied, however, do in part reflect the racial type or types of the earlier people.

The bones of the ancient Mayas in northern Yucatan (the "hooked, beaky noses" helping the work of classifying them) resemble the skeletal remains of the Near East. Dr. Ernest A. Hooton, professor of anthropology at Harvard University, has applied perhaps as much as anyone else the principles of somatology (comparative study of the structure and development of the human body) to the ancient Maya skeletal remains and those of Peru. Regarding the Mayas, he wrote as follows:

It is of considerable interest to ponder the fact that intentional artificial deformation of the skull in a people with hooked, beaky noses is associated with the development of high civilizations in two widely separated areas—the Near East and the Western cordillera of the Americas. . . . I am inclined to think that the ancestors of the classical Mayas were not very different from the white hybridized type which we call Armenoid—hook noses from . . . the Iranian Plateau race, round heads from the good old Alpines—and inspired with similar aesthetic ambitions to improve their head form. Eventually they picked up some Mongoloid features—hair, pigmentation, cheek-bones, et cetera. These may have been fairly recent accretions, because Mongolization is a late racial phenomenon in the Old World and probably still later in the New. It's a long, long way to Chichen-Itza [Yucatan], but the Roman-nosed god and the Long-nosed god both made it. [^13]

In regards to Professor Hooton's conclusions, J. Eric S. Thompson remarked:

If Hooton is right—and there are few to challenge him in his field of physical anthropology—it is an exciting thought that the Maya were, so to speak, second cousins once removed to peoples such as the Sumerians, who were busy erecting pyramids, developing astronomy, and adapting and expanding a high civilization about three thousand years before the Maya. Were those parallels fortuitous? Did the Maya and others of their race carry the seeds of such ideas with them when they crossed to the New World? Or can there be something in the Armenoid blood which inclines them to such interests? [^14]

Dr. Thompson's suggestion that the Sumerians may be relatives of the ancestors of the Mayas is exactly in line with the claim made by the Book of Mormon that the Jaredites migrated from the Tower of Babel, the land of the Sumerians. Thompson also commented as follows on Professor Hooton's conclusions:

. . . Earnest Hooton, of Up from the Ape fame, in describing a series of Maya skulls, remarks that they could be duplicated without difficulty in Pueblo crania from New Mexico or Arizona or from burials of coastal Peru. After nothing that cranial deformation is found in the Near East and in the western parts of the New World, but is absent among Asiatics describable as Mongoloids, . . . [^15]

The dryness of the climate in Peru has made it possible for anthropologists to study several hundred well-preserved mummies taken from graves in that country and compare them with other skeletal remains found elsewhere in the Americas.

MONGOLOIDS AND CAUCASIANS IN ANCIENT AMERICA

Perhaps the most important result of recent work done in the field of racial anthropology of the people of the Western Hemisphere is the establishing as a fact that all the "Indians do not stem from one physical type. Diverse types are represented which include elements from both the Mongoloids and the Caucasians." [^16]

There is no indication in the Book of Mormon of Mongolians coming into contact with Book of Mormon peoples; however, following the close of the Nephite history, many Mongolians came to America and mixed with the Indians. This fact helps to explain why Mongoloid as well as Caucasian elements appear in the archaeological monuments which postdate the Book of Mormon period.

The evidence regarding the physical characteristics of the Mayas who colonized Yucatan has been summarized by Dr. M. Wells Jakeman as follows:

These [documentary] descriptions, at least as to their features, are confirmed and also established for ancient times by the evidence of the sculptured, modeled and painted representations of Itzan priest-rulers at the various ruined temple-cities of the Old Empire and at Chichen Itza. For according to these representations the Itzas had the orthognathic faces and narrow, high-bridged noses of Caucasians. In fact their noses—their most distinctive feature—are exclusively Caucasian in type: long, relatively narrow and high-bridged, and either convex (that is, "Hebrew" or Armenoid Caucasian), or straight or slightly aquiline (that is Mediterranoid and Nordic Caucasian).

Also Caucasian in type are their receding foreheads (extreme cases due to artificial compression), full, curved lips, and somewhat recessive but firm chins.

Moreover, a close study of these representations reveals additional Caucasian-like facial traits, in mixture with some "Mongoloid" more characteristics of the native. In some figures the face is relatively long or narrow, presenting an entirely Caucasian appearance, while in others it is broad, especially at the cheek-bones, giving a distinctly Mongoloid cast. Again, the eyes may be depicted in a horizontal line like those of Caucasians, or they may be shown with a decidedly Mongoloid slant.

Finally, as noted previously, some of the Itzan priest-rulers are depicted with long chin-beards like the ancient Caucasian priest-rulers of Egypt and Babylonia, while others are shown without beards like most Mongoloids. [^17]

CAUCASIAN-LIKE BEARDED MEN DEPICTED IN PERU

There are also many examples in Peru of representations of Caucasian-like bearded men. Some of them are carved on large stones; however, the majority of them appear on pottery. Especially during the early Chimu period, the ancient Peruvians ofttimes decorated their pottery with portraits of bearded men, as the reader will observe in the photographs. The depictions of bearded men in Peru support the documentary evidences and Indian traditions of a white and bearded race of people who were the founders of the early high culture in that country, a culture which dates back to the time of Christ.

MUMMIES OF WHITE PEOPLE IN PERU

Hundreds of mummies have been dug from burial grounds in Peru and in the adjacent regions. Since the climate is very dry along the west coast of South America, remains of the ancient inhabitants of that region are recovered in a good state of preservation. Some archaeologists claim that many of these remains are of white people who inhabited that land in the distant past. Many of the mummies have hair which in color and texture resembles the hair of the white races. The following is quoted from Thor Heyerdahl:

. . . Next, by turning our attention to the well-preserved Peruvian mummies from the desert tombs at Paracas and other pre-Inca necropoli from later centuries B.C. and earlier centuries A.D., we found that one of the problems they offered modern science was the colour and structure of their hair. Among these best preserved, which had been kept away both from light and from contact with the sand, some had the coarse, straight and black hair of the Mongol and the average modern Peruvian Indian, but there were also a great number with reddish-brown hair (sometimes interspersed with yellow), and with a fine, silky, and sometimes even clearly wavy texture. [^18]

In his recent book, American Indians in the Pacific, Thor Heyerdahl gives a comprehensive presentation of the results obtained by anthropologists in their studies of several hundred pre-Inca mummies which have been taken from various burial grounds in Peru. He points out that an anthropologist named T. D. Stewart studied many of those skeletal remains and declared that ". . . these mummified individuals were of a noticeably taller stature than formerly known Indians in Peru, and that they differ from known Indians also in facial form. Both cranial deformation and trepanning were observed. . . . They differ from the Peruvian skeletal remains thus far studied, particularly in general size and in narrowness of facial features." [^19]

Many of the mummies had coarse, black hair, similar to that of the typical American Indians and Mongolians. The hair showed a wide variation in color, ranging from black to blond, with various shades between. An unusually large number of the mummies had brown hair, and some of them even had red. The hair of some was quite definitely wavy and of a fine texture while that of others appeared to be straight. Anthropologists are of the opinion that the hair of the mummies had not changed color after the death of the ancient people. [^20] In the words of Heyerdahl:

Apart from colour and degree of waviness of hair, its fineness and also the shape of its cross section are, as is well known, the two additional characteristics used for classifying hair types. Mongoloid hair, like that of the common American Indian, is wide in cross section area and circular in cross section form. The degree of ovalness in cross section form seems closely associated with the degree of waviness or curliness of the hair itself. [^21]

Although the cross section form of the hair on different mummies showed a wide variation, the hair itself was much finer than the hair generally found on Indians; in fact, the hair of the mummies studied was thirty per cent finer than the hair of the ordinary Indian.

It is claimed by those who made the study that the hair of the Peruvian mummies was similar in texture, fineness, and color variations to that of the Caucasian races.

As a result of the study of the hair of these Peruvian mummies, some anthropologists have suggested that those skeletal remains were of a people that should not be classified as Indians. They perhaps represent a white race which lived in Peru about the time of the beginning of the Christian era, and as time passed they became absorbed into the dark-skinned Indian population. Thor Heyerdahl reached the following conclusion:

. . . On the other hand, while drawing more exaggerated conclusions, it can safely be said that nothing discovered in the Paracas caves argues against the hypothesis that a foreign or Caucasian-like [white] race entered into the culture complex of pre-Inca Peru, and that this race was comparatively tall in statute, with a narrow face, and hair in varying shades of brown, fine in texture, and occasionally wavy. . . . They [the mummies] confirm what was indicated by the Inca memories and the pre-Inca pottery heads: that a non-Mongoloid and Caucasian-like element seems to have been present in the early local era. [^22]

An anthropologist, M. Trotter, who studied the Peruvian mummies, states that ". . . the cross section area of the hair is closely correlated with its weight, and with that hair of the Arab of Central Iraq, which was tested for change in weight before and after dehydration." [^23] The fact that the anthropologists have classified the hair with that of the Arabs is important, since the Arabs were of the same race originally as the Hebrews, and the Book of Mormon claims that the Nephites and Lamanites were descendants of the Hebrews.

CONCLUSIONS

The numerous carvings of bearded men on monuments found at various places in Meso-America and the Andean region, the large number of figurines and statues which depict bearded men Hebrewlike in appearance, the study made of mummies indicating a race of people taller than the Indians and Caucasian-like in appearance, and the wide variation both in texture and color of hair found on mummies, all unite in supporting the claims made by the Book of Mormon that ancient America was settled by a bearded white people. The writer identifies this white race, which preserved itself as a strong nation until about A.D. 400, as the Nephites whose ancestors came from Jerusalem. Thus archaeology and anthropology have brought forth numerous evidences to sustain the claims made by the Book of Mormon.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 45:14.
[^2] Milton R. Hunter, "White and Dark Peoples of Ancient America," The Improvement Era (Salt Lake City, July, 1955), p. 496.
[^3] Paul Herrmann, Conquest by Man (New York, 1954), p. 175.
[^4] P. De Roo, History of America before Columbus (Philadelphia, 1900), pp. 306-307.
[^5] A. Hyatt Verrill, The American Indian—North, South and Central America (New York, 1927), p. 45.
[^6] Moroni 9:24.
[^7] Ibid., 1:1-3.
[^8] 1 Nephi 13:30-31; 2 Nephi 3:1-3.
[^9] Alma 45:14.
[^10] 2 Nephi 9:53.
[^11] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 154.
[^12] Ibid., p. 167.
[^13] Sahagun, Historia de las Cosas de Nueva Espana, Libro Noveno, Capitula 29, Sec. 7, cited in Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland, Calif., 1950), p. 247.
[^14] 2 Nephi 5:21.
[^15] Ibid., 5:9-20.
[^16] Ibid., 5:24.
[^17] Enos 1:20.
[^18] Jacob 7:24.
[^19] Thomas Gann, Maya Cities (New York, 1928), p. 38.
[^20] Andres de Avendano y Loyola, Relacion de las dos Entradas que hize a Peten Ytza (1697), Eng. tr. by Philip Ainsworth Means, cited in Means, History of the Conquest of Yucatan and of the Itzas (New York, 1917), p. 22.
[^21] Letter from George G. Sloan to Milton R. Hunter, June 16, 1956.
[^22] The Annals of the Cakchiquels (Eng. tr. by Delia Goetz, Norman, Oklahoma, 1953), p. 43.
[^23] The Title of the Lords of Totonicapan (Eng. tr. by Delia Goetz, Norman, Oklahoma, 1953), p. 170.
