Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 11

WHITE INDIANS IN MESO-AMERICA

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

In the preceding three chapters a considerable amount of evidence was presented which showed that white and dark peoples lived in ancient America from the time of the close of the Book of Mormon until the discovery of this land. Prophecies made by the Nephite leaders were quoted, showing that a part of the Nephites would not be destroyed at the time of the destruction of their nation; "but whosoever remaineth [of the Nephites] and is not destroyed in that great and dreadful day, shall be numbered among the Lamanites." [^1] Thus the writer concluded "that the ancient Nephites are at least partially accountable for the white peoples who inhabited America between the dates of 421 A.D. and its discovery in 1492 A.D." [^2]

SURVIVAL OF WHITE INDIANS FOLLOWING AMERICA'S DISCOVERY

Certain questions now arise: "Did any of these white peoples—descendants of the ancient Nephites—live until after the discovery of America? If so, are there available reports made by missionaries, explorers, and others who were among the first to have personal contact with white Indians?" The answer is, "Yes!" Since the discovery of America, numerous reports have come from the regions of the upper Amazon of South America, from Colombia, and Venezuela, from Darien, Guatemala, and Mexico, and even from the northwestern Pacific Coast of the United States, from New Mexico and Arizona, as well as from the Mississippi Valley, to the effect that numerous white Indians were observed by the early Europeans and others who first visited those Indian tribes. A part of that authentic evidence is presented in the following three chapters. Regarding these white Indians, Paul Herrmann, a German scholar, has recently written:

. . . In many parts of the New World there are white Indians, whose European discoverers time and again declared: "These are not Indians!" The natives of America are distinguished by a great variation in the colour of their skins. Alongside peoples with markedly red skins there are others with pale yellow or bronze skins, and the Dakota, Menomini and Zuni look almost white, although their physiognomy is entirely Indian. Besides these "almost white," but nonetheless Indian tribes there are peoples of completely European appearance, with white skins, fair hair, blue eyes, and altogether un-Indian features. The white Indians of Venezuela, who still exist, are mentioned in the chronicles of the Spanish conquerors, and the Boroanos Indians on the Rio Imperial in Chile were known to the conquistadores as "white Indians."

In North America too there is a whole series of white Indian tribes. . . . [^3]

Dr. P. De Roo, in his book History of America before Columbus, summarizes the vast amount of evidence of the wide distribution of tribes of white Indians throughout the Americas at the time of the coming of the Europeans. To quote:

The Uskihs, the Puruays, the Parias, the Chons, etc., were as white as the Spaniards, and fifty such tribes were found in South America. Along the whole of the northwest coast Meares, Marchand, La Perouse, Dixon, and Maurelle have observed populations which, judging from some of their descriptions, we would take to be of pure white ancestry. On the upper Missouri the Kiawas, Kaskaias, and the Lee Panis possess, we are assured, the attributes of the purest white races, including their fair hair. The Mandans have from our present point of view, always attracted attention. . . . Ferdinand Columbus, in his relation of his father's voyages, compares the inhabitants of Guanahani to the Canary Islanders, and describes the inhabitants of San Domingo as still more beautiful and fair. In Peru the Charazanis also resemble the Canary Islanders, and differ from all the surrounding tribes. . . .

Women as fair as English milkmaids were found in Central America. Along the northwest coast dwell numerous tribes which, according to accounts, must be widely distinguished from the Indians of the interior. The Tlinket or Koloshian family, consisting of several tribes, are represented as lighter-colored than any other North American aborigines. They have, indeed, been described as having as fair a complexion, when their skins are washed, as some inhabitants of Europe; and this feature accompanied sometimes with auburn hair, has been considered as indicating an origin different from that of the copper-colored tribes. [^4]

A. Hyatt Verrill made the following comment regarding white Indians:

Although the majority of North American Indians have brown eyes and coarse, straight black hair, there are tribes whose eyes are hazel, grey, or even blue, and whose hair is brown rather than black, and is soft and fine. Indeed, if we read over all the accounts of the old discoverers and explorers we will find that, even in those days, the men who had actually travelled among the Indians had accurately described these variations. Dampire, the pirate naturalist, Ringrose, Esquemeling, and many others called particular attention to the light skins and brown hair of many tribes and, in several places in their journals, they state that the women are "as fair as any woman of Spain," or that their hair "is exceedingly long and soft and of pleasing brown shade." This proves that the light skins, brown hair, and grey eyes of some Indian tribes are not due to any admixture of Caucasian blood. [^5]

It is a significant fact of great importance that the first Europeans to visit Indian tribes in the Americas made their reports of white Indians before there were opportunities for the intermarriage of the natives with the European discoverers and colonizers of the New World. Thus, it is obvious that the various groups of white Indians came from some original white ancestry. Although various theories have been presented by different writers—some claiming Irish, others Welsh, others Viking, and others Hebrew ancestry for the American Indians—a vast amount of evidence has accumulated which indicates that the progenitors of the white Indians were principally the Nephites of Book of Mormon days, who were of Hebraic or Israelitic origin.

WHITE INDIANS IN SONORA, MEXICO

I received my first definite evidence regarding the white Indians of Mexico about twenty-five years ago while taking a class under Dr. Herbert E. Bolton, chairman of the history department at the University of California. In one of his lectures, Dr. Bolton stated that Father Eusebio Francisco Kino (Kee'-no), a Catholic priest who spent the major portion of his life doing missionary work among the Indians, wrote in his journal that he had discovered in the mountain region of Sonora, Mexico, an entire village of white Indians. The Catholic padre described them as being superior in appearance and culture to their darker-skinned neighbors—a characteristic which prevailed throughout most of Book of Mormon times in connection with the Nephites' superiority over the Lamanites. Father Kino also stated that those white Indians did not intermarry with the bronze-colored ones, and that the latter rendered the white Indians definite respect and protection.

WHITE INDIANS DESCENDANTS OF NEPHITES

Upon returning to Utah, I presented the foregoing information to students at the Institute of Religion who were attending the Utah State Agricultural College. Naturally they inquired regarding the origin of those white Indians. I conjectured, "They were descendants of draft evaders of the last great war between the Nephites and Lamanites." And then I explained that the evidence indicated that they were descendants of the Nephites, because many of those people joined with the Lamanites and thereby avoided death at the time of the last destructive battles which ended the Nephite nation. Mormon gives us this information in a letter to his son, Moroni, written shortly before the last great battle. To quote:

. . . we know that many of our brethren have dissented over unto the Lamanites, and many more will also dissent over unto them; . . . [^6]

Sometime between 400 and 421 A.D.—possibly toward the latter date and probably more than twenty years following Mormon's death—Moroni wrote:

. . . I make not myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me.

. . . because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ.

And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whither-soever I can for the safety of mine own life. [^7]

The fact that many Nephites would survive the last great war, [^8] be numbered with the Lamanites, [^9] and be preserved in the land forever, [^10] is completely in accord with the promises of the Lord through his holy prophets to the Nephites.

CORTES' LIGHT-SKINNED FRIEND, DONA MARINA

Paul Herrmann, a German scholar, recently described the famous Dona Marina, who for many years was Hernando Cortes' ". . . truest comrade and the only trustworthy companion of his life," [^11] as ". . . a light-skinned princess exiled by Moctezuma (Mock-ta-su'-ma), a member of the imperial house." [^12]

WHITE INDIANS NEAR VERA CRUZ, MEXICO

Not only did the historians and Spanish missionaries report discoveries of white Indians in Peru and other South American countries, but also Catholic missionaries and explorers of the colonial period noted in their journals that they, too, had visited white Indians in Central and North America; for example, the eminent Padre Bernardino de Sahagun (Sa-ha-goon'), born in Spain (1499) and a missionary in Mexico among the Indians from 1529 to 1590, wrote an important and scholarly work entitled History of the Things of New Spain, which is accredited as being among the most reliable and comprehensive reports concerning the ancients of Middle America. He described the Huastecas (Guastecas), a Mayaspeaking people who lived on the lowlands of northern Vera Cruz and the adjacent foothills of San Luis Potosi, as a white people. To quote:

All of them, men and women, are white and of good and well-proportioned faces and good features; their language is very different from the others [of the central mesa and northern gulf-coast of Mexico], . . . And they are very expert and good officers of song; they dance gracefully and with beautiful movements.

These lived in good breeding, because the men wore good clothes and mantles; they wear shoes, jewels and beads around the neck and feathers and they have fans and amulets and they are curiously shaved. They look at themselves in mirrors and their women put on painted and elegant skirts and blouses. They are polished and expert in everything because they said they were Guastecas; . . . [^13]

It is apparent from Padre Sahagun's description that these white Indians retained many of the characteristics of their ancestors—the Nephites—who were throughout most of their history ". . . white, and exceedingly fair and delightsome," [^14] being a superior, intelligent, industrious, moral, and God-fearing people; while their darker-skinned brethren—the Lamanites—"were . . . an idle people, full of mischief and subtlety," [^15] wild and ferocious, and a blood-thirsty people, "full of idolatry and filthiness," [^16] delighting in wars and bloodshed, and during much of their history of Book of Mormon days, having a burning hatred against the Nephites. [^17]

WHITE MAYA INDIANS IN BRITISH HONDURAS

During the early part of this century, an important British archaeologist, Thomas Gann, was on a field trip through the jungles of Honduras and Guatemala, studying the Maya Indians. In his book, Maya Cities, he reports that there were white Indians among the Mayas of British Honduras even as late as that time. To quote:

Ojeda, our guide, when fighting in the Mexican army against the Santa Cruz [of British Honduras], had been taken prisoner by them, and had some curious adventures to relate, which were of especial interest to me, as we hoped to penetrate the Santa Cruz country during the dry season of 1927. The Indians, he said, allowed him the freedom of their sacred city, and what astonished him most was to see a number of fair-haired men and women amongst them, with blue eyes and light complexions, who seemed to lead the same life and be in no way distinguished from the other Maya. . . . [^18]

LIGHT-COMPLEXIONED ITZA MAYAS

In 1696-1697 A.D. Padre Andres de Avendano y Loyola, a noble Catholic priest, visited a surviving remnant of the former inhabitants of Chichen Itza at Tayasal (Tah-yah-sal'), on an island in Lake Peten (Pay-ten'), Guatemala. He described the skin color of those people as follows:

These Ytzas are well-featured and, like mestizos, nearly all of a light complexion and of very perfect stature, and of natural gifts. [^19]

WHITE YAQUI INDIANS

The Yaqui (Yah'key) Indians live in Old Mexico near the border of the United States. They are an intelligent, hard-working, outstanding tribe of Indians. They earn their own livelihood, not depending upon the government nor any other agency for help. George G. Sloan of Mesa, Arizona, has spent many years associating with and working among the Yaqui Indians. He is well-acquainted with practically every one of them. He informed me that as a group they are not as dark as many tribes of Indians. Occasionally one with red hair is born among them. The following is quoted from a letter from George G. Sloan, written June 16, 1956:

Many of these people [Yaqui Indians] are light colored and have brown eyes and a few even have blue eyes. They are highly intelligent and are striving to become an enlightened people.

Their morality is the highest that I have ever seen. There are three things they will banish their own people for, and they are to murder wilfully, to steal, or to commit adultery. [^20]

LIGHT-COLORED QUICHE MAYAS

My first experience in mingling with large numbers of light-colored Indians—some of them nearly white—whose progenitors had intermarried very little with European settlers, was on our recent trip to Mexico and Central America. Approximately sixty-five percent of the inhabitants of Guatemala are fullblood Indians, principally Mayas. As a result of studying the problem of the origin of the Indians, I had reached the conclusion before going to Guatemala that the Quiche Mayas were as nearly direct descendants of the Nephite-Lamanite peoples as any other Indians. Furthermore, the Quiches' writings maintain that ". . . they came from where the sun rises [from the other side of the sea], [^21] descendants of Israel, of the same language and the same customs . . . they were sons of Abraham and Jacob." [^22]

Our party of twenty people spent the first week end while in Guatemala at Chichicastenango, the headquarters of the Quiche-Maya Indians. Fortunately, these peoples were having an elaborate religious celebration in commemoration of St. Tomas—their patron saint. There were perhaps four to five thousand Indians participating.

We were informed by our guide while on our way to Chichicastenango that the Quiche Mayas were practically white. After our arrival, I was delighted to observe that the skin color of hundreds of them was much lighter in shade than that of the average Indian in our section of the country—namely, the Navajos, the Utes, the Piutes, and the Apaches. Furthermore, all of our party members were impressed with what appeared to us to be resemblances of the Quiche Mayas to the Jewish people. In fact, it would not have been difficult for one to make himself imagine while at that religious festival in Chichicastenango that he was walking the streets of Jerusalem some 2,000 years ago. It is not surprising that such should be the case, since the ancestors of these people came from Jerusalem, a part of them being of the tribe of Ephraim, others of Manasseh, and the remainder of Judah.

In February, 1956, the following year after visiting Chichicastenango with the touring party, I had the privilege of visiting practically every town and city in Guatemala, including Chichicastenango, while touring the Central American Mission with President and Sister Edgar Wagner. We held meeting after meeting with the Indians. This supplied an excellent opportunity for me to observe carefully the skin-color of thousands of the Quiche Mayas. Some of them were very dark in color, while others had light-colored skin. I saw a number of them that were actually white.

The photographs of the Quiche Mayas printed herein illustrate the wide range of skin-color of these people, showing that some of them are white Indians.

WHITE LACANDON MAYA INDIANS

Approximately one month after I first visited Chichicastenango, I had a thrill which I shall never forget. As was pointed out in an earlier chapter, Jose Davila, Otto Done, and I made a journey into the jungles of southern Mexico to Bonampak. While on the jungle trail, we were met by three Lacandon Indians. My first great surprise was to observe that one of them was positively white and the other two nearly so; and then I recalled that when our guide in Guatemala had informed us that the Quiche Maya Indians were practically white, he had also remarked that there was a primitive, wild, tribe of Indians—the Lacandons—living in the jungles of southern Mexico, who were absolutely white.

As we continued onward through the jungles, we met several more Lacandons. Most of them had black hair, but some of them were positively white-skinned while others had a slight amount of dark color in their skins.

Since our guides to Bonampak were the Lacandons, we were with those Indians for nearly three days. This afforded us considerable opportunity to observe and study them. As mentioned earlier, one of the Indian women had red hair; and her skin was just as white as that of any of our women. She had a small baby. It also was very white with dark blue eyes and brown hair. One of the Indian men, Jose Pepe, the religious leader of the El Cedro clan, also had red hair and white skin. (See photograph.) We associated with approximately twenty-five Lacandons. Their skin color ranged from pure white to slightly dusky shades. There were no really dark-skinned ones among them. There were no albinos among the Lacandon Indians. The ones who had white skin were of a natural whiteness just as is our skin color.

In addition to the baby already mentioned, we saw two babies at Jose Pepe's casa and perhaps two more at Obregon's home. The skin color of all the babies was white. Most of them had brown hair and hazel eyes; however, it is claimed that occasionally one is born with blue eyes. It seems that the skin color becomes a little darker on some of them as they grow older; however, from what we observed, many of the women seemed to remain very white in color throughout life. The color of the men in general appeared to be slightly darker than that of the women, although it should be recalled that Jose Pepe was as white as the women.

Robert Bruce, the young man from Oklahoma who was lost in the jungles of Chiapas and after nine days of wandering was rescued by the Lacandon Indians, spent several months with them. He became well acquainted with practically all these primitive, jungle dwellers. He graciously supplied me with a number of photographs of Lacandon Indians; some were pictures of the same people that I visited and others of Indians that I did not see while visiting Bonampak. One was the photograph of a white Lacandon Indian with red hair and with her one with blond hair and blue eyes. He also photographed another Lacandon woman with blond hair and blue eyes. These photos are printed herein.

A question of vital importance is, "Who are these Lacandon Indians?" Charles Morrow Wilson, who in 1947 visited the same group of Lacandons that we visited, answers this question as follows:

But the people who live in the lost valley are by far the most interesting and significant of all its colorful inhabitants. These are the little-known Lacandon Indians, direct and least changed descendants of the great Mayas of old. These Indians continued to live and worship very much as their illustrious Maya forefathers did. . . . [^23]

In the matter of blood, the Lacandons are unquestionably the purest descendants of the builders of the great ruins of Yucatan and Peten. Their forefathers, stubbornly resisting every attempt to bring them under Spanish rule, fled to the most inaccessible part of their former realm, and for four centuries they have kept themselves aloof from every outside contact. . . .

Gradual encroachment by chicleros and mahogany cutters has driven the Lacandons farther and farther back from the main rivers. Always shy and fiercely adverse to mixing with outsiders, some of the more remote groups occupy the least-known frontiers of present-day Mexico. [^24]

One may ask: "Is it not possible that the members of the Lacandon tribe who are positively white are children of white men who had intermarried with the women of this primitive tribe?" Wilson gives us the answer:

. . . This group, the Cedro clan, had rarely before seen a white man. Only four years ago, they had for the first time seen a chiclero, or wild chicle harvester—an Indian-Spanish cross. They had apparently never heard of Mexico, taxes, or voting; or autos, airplanes, or any other wheeled vehicle. [^25]

The white Lacandons that we saw—the Cedro clan—were too old to be offspring of whites, since—according to available evidence they were first visited by white men probably less than fifteen years ago, and so the history of the Lacandons rules out that possibility. The other possible answer, therefore, is that the white color must have come as an inheritance from their ancient ancestors—through the illustrious Mayas of the Old Empire and on back to their predecessors, the Nephites.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard Oglesby Marsh, White Indians of Darien (New York, 1934), p. 213.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 15-16.
[^3] Ibid., p. 26.
[^4] Idem.
[^5] Ibid., p. 37.
[^6] Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States (New York, 1875), vol. 1, p. 157; A. C. Haddon, The Races of Man and the Distribution (New York, 1924), pp. 33, 128; Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians of the Pacific (New York, 1953), p. 85.
[^7] Marsh, op. cit., pp. 37-38.
[^8] Ibid., p. 63.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 198-199.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 203-204.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 206-209.
[^12] Ibid., p. 221.
[^13] Popol Vuh (English version by Delia Goetz and Sylvanus G. Morley, Norman, Oklahoma, 1950); The Annals of the Cakchiquels, and Title of the Lords of Totonicapan (English version by Delia Goetz, Norman, Oklahoma, 1953).
[^14] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 175.
[^15] Letter from Cia. Shell de Venezuela, by Rafael Morello, to Milton R. Hunter, July 20, 1955.
[^16] Republic of Venezuela—Ministry of Justice Bulletin of the Venezuelan Indians Organ of the Commission for Indians (Caracas, June to December, 1953), p. 440.
[^17] . . . Bulletin of the Venezuelan Indians . . . op. cit., pp. 530-531.
[^18] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 184.
[^19] Pedro Pizarro, cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 326.
[^20] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 185.
[^21] A. Hyatt Verrill, The American Indian—North, South and Central America (New York, 1927), p. 45.
[^22] C. R. Markham, The Incas of Peru (London, 1911), p. 121.
[^23] William Montgomery McGovern, Jungle Paths and Inca Ruins (London, 1927), p. 73.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 184-185.
[^25] Ibid., p. 357.
