Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 12

WHITE INDIANS IN DARIEN AND SOUTH AMERICA

WHITE INDIANS OF DARIEN

One of the largest groups of white Indians found in either of the Americas was that which lived in Darien. Richard Oglesby Marsh estimated that of the Indian population of 40,000, approximately 2,000 or five percent were white in color. [^1] The country of Darien is located on the southern end of the Isthmus of Panama directly north of where the isthmus joins South America.

In his book, White Indians of Darien, Marsh described in an interesting manner his observations and study of the inhabitants of that country—known as the San Blas Indians or, as they called themselves, the "Tule (Too-lay) People." He explained that the Spaniards had appeared early on the San Blas coast in their search for gold, but soon thereafter the Indians drove them out with great slaughter. From that day until the time Marsh visited them in 1934, the Tule people had maintained their independence. He wrote:

When the Tules finally got rid of the Spaniards, they set about taking steps which would preserve them in the future. Very wisely they did not refuse to trade with their late enemies, but they would never allow a trader to spend the night in their territory nor go back into the interior. This law has been enforced rigidly upon everyone with the exception of myself, and my dealings with the San Blas Indians were wholly unusual. As a result no one explores interior Darien from the Caribbean. It just isn't done. [^2]

The enforcement of this law prevented the intermarriage of Spaniards and Indians; and so the white Indians of Darien are not the offspring of post-Columbian Europeans.

While on a scientific expedition to Darien, Marsh and a Negro companion were near one of the Indian villages one day. They happened to be looking at a small clearing which extended a few yards into the encompassing jungle when Across the narrow clearing were walking three young girls, perhaps fourteen to sixteen years old. They wore nothing but small loin-cloths and their almost bare bodies were as white as any Scandinavian's. Their long hair, falling loosely over their shoulders, was bright gold! Quickly and gracefully they crossed the open space and disappeared into the jungles. [^3]

His Negro companion explained:

"They come from a tribe which lives in the mountains up the Chucunaque. . . . Before this they haven't come so far down the valley. But a little time ago they built a house above our village, and families of them come down to trade with us. Some are white. Some are dark like other Indians." [^4]

Marsh followed the trail which the girls had taken into the jungles and overtook them at their home. Describing the incident, he wrote:

. . . I examined their skin closely to make sure it was not colored artificially. It was not. I looked at their golden hair, which was of much finer texture than the coarse hair of other Indians. Their eyes were hazel or bluish-brown.

White Indians! I remember the tales of such people—tales from all over Latin America. And also I remember the universal derision with which such tales were received. But these were certainly Indians; and they were most certainly white. They were not albinos in the commonly accepted meaning of the term—for albinos have white hair, wholly colorless skin, pink eyes, and blue gums. My three little girls looked like healthy Norwegians, not biological monstrosities. Neither were they the half-breed offspring of some American gold prospector. I'd seen plenty of these, and they were invariably dark. [^5]

Since Marsh was acquainted with the fact that Leif Ericson and other Vikings had visited America approximately 1000 A.D., naturally he thought that the white Indians of Darien might be descendants of the Scandinavians. Those who had light-colored or golden hair interested him most because they best sustained his Nordic theory. However, it is evident that he was not acquainted with the fact that Israelites migrated from Jerusalem to America approximately 600 B.C.; and for 1000 years a great nation of white people flourished here, finally to be destroyed; and that thereafter the white survivors mingled with their darker-skinned, former enemies.

It has been pointed out that Jesus, who came from a common ancestry with these peoples, had hair somewhat red or "of a colour of a chestnut full ripe." White Indians having red hair have been found in many native tribes; [^6] and so it could be possible that the white girls with "golden hair," described by Marsh, could also be of Israelitic origin. On the other hand, it may be that some of the Vikings went as far south as Darien and augmented the white blood found among those Indians.

Marsh reported his experience to General Babbitt, commandant at Quarry Heights and ranking American army officer in the Panama Canal Zone. The general replied that recently he had sent a Lieutenant Arnold on a plane trip. Arnold flew across the interior of Darien to Colombia, the clouds forcing him to fly very low. The general remarked: "When he returned, he reported orally to me that he had passed over a village in the interior which was inhabited by white-skinned people living like Indians." [^7]

Later Marsh and his associates met four Americans, employees of the Sinclair Oil Company, who reported that they had seen ". . . numerous white Indians—'White as any white man,' some on the Lower Chucunaque and some on the Rio Paca, a tributary of the Upper Tuyra." [^8]

After experiencing the thrill of actually seeing the white Indians and now receiving definite information that numerous others lived in the interior of Darien, Marsh determined to travel throughout Darien and study as many of the white Indians as possible and if feasible take some of them to the United States for scientists to study. He successfully won the friendship of an important Indian chief who promised that he would arrange for Marsh to see as many white Indians as he desired. Soon thereafter, at an Indian town named Portogandi, Marsh reports that the following incident occurred:

And here we saw . . . white Indians—one of whom, a boy of fourteen, . . . I looked at him with amazement. Here was my white Indian at last . . . the scientists would have a grand time explaining him. At least they couldn't fall back on the theory that white Indians existed only in the imagination of wild-eyed explorers. We had not only seen them, but were bringing them back to America to be studied at leisure. [^9]

The Indian chief then brought out a little naked white boy about eight years of age. Marsh went to the home of this white Indian boy and concerning the experience wrote:

. . . When I entered I got a surprise. The mother and father of the boy were not white. They were ordinary Indians without anything unusual about them except that the father was rather tall. They had three other children. The second boy was also white, but the two girls were olive-brown like their parents.

I didn't know what to make of it, but I had no time to think, for I had other surprises in store for me. Chief Nelle's message had gone out to the surrounding country, and more white Indians were coming into town from the mountains, the jungle rivers, and the smaller islands along the coast. Some were pure white, others were midway between white and brown. We took pictures of them and questioned them without reserve. . . . [^10]

Marsh and his group sailed on the river nearly to the next Indian village, Alligandi. The chief sent for them. Marsh narrates the following events:

. . . As we dropped anchor, half a dozen canoes with white Indians in them came out to meet us. Among the crowd on shore were many more, women and girls as well as men and boys. . . .

. . . we saw many more white Indians in the street—whole families of them. The word had passed up the coast, and they were flocking in from the mainland. There were even more than in Portogandi. I was amazed and bewildered. . . . [^11]

Eventually Marsh brought some of the white Indians of Darien to Washington, D. C., and kept them in the United States and Canada for several months to be studied by the scientists. He states:

However, in spite of their hesitancy to pronounce a final word on the "scientific composition" of the white Indians, the scientists' committee did formally announce, through Dr. Alex Hrdlicka, that the Tule people apparently were a practically pure-blooded remnant of the ancient first dynasty Mayas and also related anthropologically to the early coastal cultures of Peru, the Yuncas and the Chimu. This alone was of great scientific importance, for the original first-dynasty Mayas and the pre-Inca coastal Peruvians are now vanished races, overwhelmed and amalgamated by later conquering peoples. [^12]

After the scientists had studied the white Indians brought to Washington, D. C., Marsh took them back to Darien.

The fact that the scientists pronounced the white Indians of Darien to be "a practically pure-blooded remnant of the ancient first dynasty Mayas" and early Peruvians is also very important to students of the Book of Mormon, because the Quiche Mayas of Guatemala have left three written documents (books) which claim that their ancestors were Israelites. [^13] Numerous claims are made in these Maya books and in their traditions which closely parallel Book of Mormon teachings; and so those who accept the Nephite record as a divine book can unhesitatingly identify the Mayas as being basically descendants of the Nephite-Lamanite peoples.

WHITE INDIANS IN VENEZUELA

There is an abundance of evidence, as Paul Herrmann, a German scholar, recently wrote, to demonstrate the fact that ". . . in many parts of the New World there are white Indians." [^14] I talked to a man in Montana over a year ago who for many years had been an employee of the Shell Oil Company in Venezuela. He reported that many times in the jungles of Venezuela he had seen white Indians, as white as any of us. Desiring to investigate further, I wrote to the Shell Oil Company in Venezuela, South America, and asked for information regarding white Indians in that country. I received a reply from the company written by Sr. Rafael Morello. He sent me the addresses of several people from whom I could get definite information regarding the white Indians of Venezuela. In the course of his letter, Sr. Morello remarked:

Many people here, however, have heard of white Indians, especially Motilones (Mot-eel-on-es), and rumours are that they not only have a white skin but even blond hair and blue eyes. [^15]

From an official publication of the Venezuela government, a 1953 report from the "Venezuelan Indians Organ of the Commission for Indians," Brother W. Ernest Young translated from Spanish the following:

The skin of the Guaikas (Guy-kahs) is more clear [white] than that of the other Indians and of the majority of the oriollos (mixed blood) that inhabit the Federal Territory of the Amazons.

The hair of the majority of the individuals is fine, but some have it moderately rough or shaggy. The color of the hair is black or chestnut color and some few have hair with a light mixture of red. Some of the children have a very light-colored hair, that seems to turn more dark as they grow up. Few of the oldest persons have gray hair.

The majority of the men have a very thin beard or none absolutely. Their arms, legs and breast are generally free from hair.

The eyes of the majority of them are dark-gray and some are dark-eyed. Some of the children have blue eyes. [^16]

Photographs of fullblood Indians in that official government publication show some natives who are practically black, others of a bronze-colored skin, and others positively white. These Guaika Indians go nearly naked. With the permission of the Venezuela Government, we are reproducing the photos of four white Indians and, for the purpose of contrast, two very dark Guaika mothers with their babies.

The second photo is of a young Indian woman with her goods on her back. She seems to be on her way to the market or is perhaps returning to her jungle home. Observe her very white skin and light brown hair. Also, a photo is shown of a white Indian mother with her baby.

The fourth photograph is of a white Indian woman who is said to be a very superior person. The peculiar black lines on her face are designs which the natives of her tribe wear on certain festive occasions.

This very attractive Indian woman has abandoned the jungles and the Indians' primitive way of living and affiliated herself with the white people and their way of life. She has received a very up-to-date education and, according to a biographical sketch regarding her, is a very intelligent and outstanding woman. Her name is Maria de los Angeles Montiel. She lives in the city of Maracaibo, Venezuela, where she works in the fiscal magistrate's office as a secretary and especially as an interpreter of the Indian language. Since she is very proficient in the use of her native tongue, as well as of Castilian Spanish, she has a deep understanding of the Indians and helps them to transact their business. She is of special assistance to her people in preparing their legal papers. The following is quoted from the biographical sketch of this white Indian woman:

But the true merits of this intelligent and dynamic . . . [Indian woman are] the social work that in silence she carries out in favor of the Indians who are disinherited or afflicted by different calamities. . . . In Maria de los Angeles they find a generous heart and valiant at all times, one who listens to them, understands and helps them materially when it is necessary, or she rushes courageously to defend them against abuse or injustice. [^17]

She has many accomplishments. She has learned Italian, received a diploma of dressmaking as an efficient seamstress, holds the title of chauffeur and also that of nurse. Her accomplishments are indicative of what perhaps could be attained by many Indians if they had the opportunities afforded by modern education.

WHITE INDIANS OF PERU

As early as 1502, Angelo Trevisan wrote a letter to the King and Queen of Spain in which he described the Indians of a certain Arawak tribe. To quote: "The men, of light color, with long hair and beards, are of fine stature, gentle, and show a desire for new things, and this was indicated by signs." Since Trevisan's letter contains the earliest description of the natives of South America, it should be given the most careful consideration.

Francisco Pizarro and those who assisted him in the conquest of Peru were surprised to find that many of the Indians of that land, especially those of the ruling class, were white and remarkably beautiful. In speaking of the Spanish conquistadores, Herrmann wrote:

. . . They were most deeply impressed, however, by the large number of fair and white-skinned people they met amongst the Inca Ayllus, the Peruvian aristocracy. In particular, the coyas, the ladies of the great Inca families, seem in many cases to have looked exactly like European women. Pedro Pizarro, a cousin of the conqueror of Peru, writes of them with positive consternation in his Story of the Discovery and Conquest of Peru. These princesses were neat and clean, stately, and beautiful to behold, he reports. They considered themselves well-formed, and were so in fact. "These people are corn-blond," continues Pizarro. [^18]

The following is quoted directly from Pedro Pizarro's written account:

. . . Among the ladies there were some tall ones, not among the daughters of the Kings, but among (those of) the orejones, their kinsmen. . . . They considered themselves beautiful, and almost all the daughters of these Lords and orejones were so. The Indian women of the Guancas, Chachapoyas and Canares were the common women, but most of them beautiful. The rest of the womanhood of this kingdom were plump, neither beautiful nor ugly, but of average appearance. The people of this kingdom of Peru were white but of a tawny hue, and among them the Lords and Ladies were whiter than Spaniards. I saw in this land an Indian woman and a child who did not differ from those who are white and blond. These people say that the latter were the children of the heathen gods. [^19]

When one recalls the splendor of the nobility of the Spanish court at the time of Charles V and Philip II and the ideals of beauty as depicted in Spanish paintings of that period, it is evident that Pedro Pizarro's conception of beauty would differ little if any from ours.

. . . At all events, the haughty grandees of Castile, so proud of their noble birth, married the blond Inca princesses in large numbers, regarding them as their equals in birth and presenting them to their Spanish Majesties at court in Madrid. Two generations later, in 1603, a petition for tax relief signed by 567 representatives of old Inca families was presented to the crown of Spain. This speaks volumes—and in favor of Pedro Pizarro. [^20]

A. Hyatt Verrill described the Indian races found by the Spaniards in the New World as follows:

. . . the Mayas, the Aztecs and the Incas were not homogenous races of one blood. In all cases they were the result of conquest and confederation of many races and tribes by an intellectually superior people. No doubt these superior people, who formed the ruling classes,—the priests, etc.—were of a distinct type from the bulk of the population. . . . The Incas themselves were, we know from the records of the Spaniards, a much lighter-colored lot than their subjects, and possessed almost Caucasian features. Portraits made from life soon after and even during the conquest prove this, and the same is true of the aristocracy of the Aztecs. [^21]

C. R. Markham, a historian who wrote a reliable account of the Incas, also informs us that the skin color of the Inca family of Peru was white. To quote:

We see the Incas in the pictures at the church of Santa Ana at Cuzco. The color of the skin was many shades lighter than that of the down-trodden descendants of their subjects; the forehead high, the nose slightly aquiline, the chin and mouth firm, the whole face majestic, refined, and intellectual. [^22]

One of the ruling Incas received the name of Viracocha (Vera-ko-cha) (the Peruvian name for the "White-Bearded God") because he was able to grow a beard. Inca Viracocha's sister-wife was called Mana-Runtu, which meant "Mother Egg." She was given that name because of her fair complexion, as she was supposed to be "as white as an egg." Many other examples could be given of white Indians in Peru.

WHITE AMAZONIAN INDIANS

Approximately thirty-five years ago an Englishman named William Montgomery McGovern, Assistant Curator of South American Ethnology of the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, made a trip across the entire South American continent. He travelled up the Amazon River in a small boat to the Andes and then continued his journey by horseback across the high mountain range to the Pacific Ocean. He was accompanied by Indians from numerous Amazonian tribes which he encountered as he passed through their various regions. Certain Indians rowed his boat and took care of his supplies on the trip until he passed beyond the boundaries of their tribe, and then those Indians were replaced by members of the next tribe. This process was continued while he crossed the continent. McGovern's principal purposes in making this journey was to study the Indians of the Amazon region and to make a collection of artifacts for the Field Museum. He wrote an interesting book, which he entitled Jungle Paths and Inca Ruins.

In numerous passages in the book McGovern described the Indians he encountered while crossing South America. Some of them were nearly as dark in color as Negroes. Others had a yellow cast in their skin and in general appearances reminded him of Mongolians. The majority of the natives of the Amazon Basin however were bronze-colored Indians similar to those ordinarily found throughout both of the Americas. Occasionally tales reached him of tribes of "white Indians," who, it was claimed, were just as white as the Europeans. Those aborigines lived in the jungles, so the reports stated, at some distance from the river. White Indians! How he would like to see them; however, since he was traveling by boat, the possibility of seeing them seemed remote. Finally he saw a white Indian boy who was held as a slave by a tribe of darker-colored Indians. We shall quote his description of that boy later. When McGovern had gone a considerable distance up the Amazon River, he came to a region which was inhabited by a tribe of wild aborigines whom he did not get to see but about whom he heard many tales. Following is his statement regarding them:

In the course of our journey we passed the mouth of an important northern tributary called the Canabury. Although rich in rubber and balata, it remains virtually unexploited, because of the ferocity of its native inhabitants. Unlike the half-civilized or rather quarter-civilized Indians on the banks of the main stream, the wild aborigines who dwell on the Canabury have steadily refused all contact with Europeans. They abandon their homes at the approach of any stranger and fly into the heart of the forest, until the pioneer, lured by the supposed absence of all danger, relaxes his guard, with the usual result that he is taken by surprise attack and murdered.

Many were the gruesome tales concerning this dread river which were poured into our ears by our host. He ticked off the names of various rubber prospectors who had gone up the river, never to return. The few who had escaped from native attacks had brought back stories that the Indians of the region were virtually white (strange, this ever-recurring story of white Indians) with semi-European features, although their mode of life is most primitive. [^23]

Perhaps a month after McGovern and his party of Indians had passed through the country just described, they came to the territory inhabited by the Pagsas Indians. These natives were perhaps the most interesting ones whom he met, since they were "of a very light lemon color, lighter than the average Latin." To quote his statement further:

The interesting question now arises: is the insuperable barrier between the Pagsas and the other Indians due entirely to cultural differences, or can it be traced back to racial differences? . . .

. . . Whereas most of the Amazonian Indians have retained the broad face and round heads of the Mongolians, all of the Pagsas in this little forest settlement had thin tapering faces and markedly long heads. In many ways the heads of these living Pagsas correspond closely to very primitive skulls which have been dug up in Patagonia and other parts of South America and which are supposed to represent an extinct race. Several scholars, including Joyce, believe that this race had its origin in Europe.

At present it is wise to avoid any sweeping statement or high-flown theory; but at least it is a remarkable fact that, whereas most of the ordinary South American Indians are brown or copper-colored, the Pagsas whom I saw were either much darker or much lighter. I could observe two distinct types among them. One was almost black, though apart from color they showed little or no negrioid characteristics. The other resembled the Desano [a tribe of Indians McGovern described earlier] shade, a very light lemon color; in fact it was even lighter than that of the average Latin. From time to time various well-known travelers have come back with stories of white Indians in the depths of the Amazonian forests, although details have always been missing. . . . [^24]

Sometime later while visiting with a group of very dark-colored Indians, Mr. McGovern observed one very light-colored boy among them. To quote his own statement:

One boy from a neighboring maloka was an exception to this rule. He was of so light a color and of such a semi-European cast of countenance that I thought at first he must be the half-breed son of some Colombian pioneer, but I at last found that he was a specimen of the light Pagsas type, one who had been captured from his wild roaming brethren several years before. . . . [^25]

William Montgomery McGovern's report of his trip through the Amazons gives us more additional evidence of white Indians and sustains the viewpoint that some of them are still in existence in the more remote and inaccessible regions of the Americas.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] James Cook, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London, 1784), vol. 2, p. 303.
[^2] Ibid., p. 367.
[^3] G. Dixon, A Voyage Round the World, but more particularly to the Northwest Coast of America Performed in 1785-88 (London, 1789), p. 238.
[^4] George Vancouver, A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and Around the World (London, 1798), vol. 2, p. 262.
[^5] Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States (New York, 1875), vol. 1, p. 157.
[^6] Francis Poole, Queen Charlotte Islands (London,1872), cited in Idem.
[^7] Bendel, cited in Idem.
[^8] Gilbert Malcolm Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage Life (London, 1868), p. 24.
[^9] Horatio Hale, Ethnography and Philology (Philadelphia,1846), cited in Bancroft, op. cit., p. 157.
[^10] Niblack, cited in Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians of the Pacific (New York, 1952), p. 83.
[^11] Bancroft, op. cit., p. 157.
[^12] A. C. Haddon, The Races of Man and the Distribution (New York, 1924), pp. 33, 128.
[^13] Sproat, cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 85.
[^14] Bancroft, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 157.
[^15] Letter from Mrs. Ballard Hadman to Milton R. Hunter, July 31, 1956.
[^16] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 175.
[^17] Ibid., p. 176.
[^18] Verandrye, cited in Ibid., p. 177.
[^19] George Catlin, The North American Indians . . . written during eight years travel amongst the wildest tribes of Indians in North America, 1832-1839 (Edinburgh, 1926), cited in Herrmann, op. cit., p. 176.
[^20] Ibid., p. 177.
[^21] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 179.
[^22] Ibid., p. 178.
[^23] William Bartram, Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia (Philadelphia, 1791), cited in Chapman J. Milling, Red Carolinians (Kingsport, Tennessee, 1940), p. 6.
[^24] Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff—History of His Life and Labors as Recorded in His Daily Journals (Salt Lake City, 1916), p. 523.
[^25] 2 Nephi 3:3.
