Milton R. Hunter, Archaeology and the Book of Mormon ( 1956)

CHAPTER 13

WHITE INDIANS NORTH OF THE RIO GRANDE

WHITE INDIANS OF THE NORTHWESTERN PACIFIC COAST REGION

Not only were white Indians found south of the Rio Grande, but various groups have been encountered north of the Mexican border also; for example, the early explorers who came by sea to the northwestern coast of North America described in their journals the skin color of many of the Indians whom they visited as being as white as the skin color of the average native of Europe. Since many of the present-day Indians have mixtures of white blood, it is a significant fact that these early voyagers—like the explorers of Mexico and Central America—saw many Indian tribes before they had opportunity to intermarry with white people from the Old World. Captain James Cook, the English sea captain and explorer, in 1784 discovered the Nootka Indians who lived on the ocean side of Vancouver Island. He recorded in his journal regarding the natives that

. . . the whiteness of their skin appeared almost equal to that of Europeans; though rather of that pale effete cast which distinguished those of our southern nations. The children whose skins had never been stained with paint also equalled ours in whiteness. [^1]

Later in his journal, Captain Cook described the Indian tribes which he met in Prince William's Sound, Alaska, as follows:

The complexion of some of the women and some of the children is white, but without any mixture of red. [^2]

Captain G. Dixon visited the northwestern Pacific Coast (1785-1788) and made the following statement regarding the Indians:

In regards to their complexion, it is not easy to determine what cast that is; but if I may judge from the few people I saw tolerably clean, these Indians are very little darker than the Europeans in general. [^3]

In 1798, Captain George Vancouver, in whose honor the principal island has been named, described as follows the Indians he saw along the Burke Channel in the heart of the northwestern coast:

The prominence of their countenances and the regularity of their features resembled the northern Europeans. [If it were not for all the oil and paint]. . . there is great reason to believe that their colour would have differed but little from such of the laboring Europeans, as are constantly exposed to the inclemency and alterations of the weather. [^4]

WHITE HAIDA INDIANS

Regarding the Haida (Hay'-da) Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands, Hubert Howe Bancroft in 1875 reported that "The few who have seen their faces free from paint pronounce their complexion light. . . ." [^5] Bancroft then quoted Poole, who claimed that he observed that their skin was "nearly as white as ours," [^6] and Bendel, who held it to be "of a remarkable light color." [^7] Gilbert Malcolm Sproat maintained that "Their young women's skins are as clear and white as those of Englishwomen." [^8] Horatio Hale found some of those coastal islanders "fair in complexion, sometimes with ruddy cheeks." [^9] Speaking of the Haidas, Niblack (1888) wrote:

In complexion both sexes are surprisingly light colored. This is in no way due to intermixture with whites. . . . The Haidas are markedly fairer skinned than the others. . . . [^10]

Ordinarily the hair of the American Indian is straight, coarse, and black, but it has been observed by various writers that the white Indians' hair ofttimes diverges from the norm, being soft and wavy, and sometimes auburn and brown in color. [^11] A. C. Haddon pointed out that the hair of the northwestern Indians ". . . is frequently slightly wavy and brownish. . . there are a few tribes among whom red hair and an almost white complexion occur." [^12] According to Thor Heyerdahl, Gilbert M. Sproat describes

. . . a local Indian woman who had "curly, or rather wavy, brown hair," pointing out that: "Now and then, but rarely, a light-haired native is seen";. . . and Sutil y Mexicana declared that the hair of these aboriginals "varied in colour between reddish, dark, auburn, and black." [^13]

The early explorers who came by sea to the northwestern Pacific coast region state that the Haida Indians were rather large in stature. Many of the men were six feet tall. Also, men of six feet have not infrequently been found among the Kwakintl tribe who inhabited northwestern Vancouver Island. In regards to the Haidas Herbert Howe Bancroft wrote: "The hair is not uniformly coarse and black, but often soft in texture, and of wavy shades of brown." [^14] Quite frequently the noses of the Haidas were narrow and aquiline in shape, similar to those on the carvings that appear on many of the monuments in Middle America.

WHITE HAIDA INDIANS TODAY

(Mrs.) Ballard Hadman, an author and artist who lives in Ketchikan, Alaska, read my articles on "White Indians" in The Improvement Era. Although she is not a Latter-day Saint, she became interested, especially in the discussion of the white Haida Indians. She wrote me a letter in which she stated that she had spent considerable time in the Haida Indian villages, studying those people, and that many of them at the present time were just as white as any people she had ever seen. She mentioned the fact that she had seen fullblood Haida Indians with hair of fine texture. Some of them had brown hair, some blond, and others even had red hair. Although the Indian villages were a considerable distance from Ketchikan, she volunteered to visit them, and if I were interested in obtaining photographs of some of the white Haidas she would photograph them for me. Of course I was pleased with her kind offer, and so I asked her to visit the Haida villages and photograph some of the white Indians, especially those with red and blond hair. I suggested that she check carefully with the chiefs of the Haida tribe and the ones who knew the genealogies and traditions of the people thoroughly to make sure that the ones she photographed were fullblood Indians. I did not want photos of any whose ancestors had intermarried with the whites.

In July, 1956, Mrs. Hadman flew to the Indian village and very carefully investigated the genealogies of certain Haida families. These Indians, like many other tribes, memorize their genealogies and have an accurate and perfect knowledge of their ancestral lineage. She selected two families who could definitely trace their family line back directly through Indian ancestry to the period before the arrival of Europeans. Many of the Haida Indians are fullbloods, none of their ancestors having intermarried with white people.

Mrs. Hadman selected two prominent Haida families, the Cogo family and the Edenso family, to photograph. She took pictures of three generations of each family, tracing the reoccurrence of red hair as it skipped and reoccurred from grandparents through parents and grandchildren. She photographed the grandmother of the Cogo family, her son William, and three of his four children. Two of William Cogo's children have red hair, and the oldest boy and the girl have brown hair. As the reader will observe, all the members of the Cogo family—the three generations—are very white, just as white as any other people. In a letter written on July 31, 1956, Mrs. Hadman described the Cogo family as follows:

The grandmother of the Cogo family is an aristocrat of the Haida tribe. Her clan genealogy is tattooed on the back of her wrist. She was very shy about having her tattoo shown and so I had her hold up the two totems. Please observe the remarkable similarity of the larger totem to Maya carving. She is a woman of great power and distinction.

Her son, William Cogo, and his brothers and sisters all have dark hair, save for one sister with dark auburn red hair. (Note the Maya structure of the head, particularly forehead, nose, set of eyes with deeply hooded lids of William Cogo.) William Cogo's wife has dark hair. She was away with the smallest baby when the photo was taken. That baby is also red haired. [^15]

Ballard Hadman photographed both the grandfather and grandmother of the Edenso family, their daughter, and her four children. She described them as follows:

Grandfather Edenso would permit only one exposure—I trust you will agree from the expression on his face, it wasn't wise to crowd him—nor would he remove his hat. His hair is dark, but he has grey eyes. His father was known as Red Dan, his hair was so fiery. Grandmother Edenso, his wife, has red hair which is turning grey. Their daughter and daughter's husband both have dark hair. Three of their children, however, are red-haired and one is darkish blond with blue eyes.

She also photographed some of the ancient totems of the Haida Indians. She maintained that representations of Haida gods and important men in their ancestory were carved on the totems, in addition to other figures of ritualistic importance. She was very interested in the depiction of a white man on each of the four totems shown in the photographs, claiming that they were representations of important white Haida Indians who had earned a place of importance in their traditional history. One of the white men depicted on the totem had red hair.

Mrs. Hadman said that "The Haida people, generally speaking, are extremely intelligent, very clean, and very civilized. They have never been wards of the government. In old days, they kept slaves in quantity, taken in war from other tribes, but themselves were never slaves. They killed themselves rather than submit to slavery, because they were the aristocracy." She informed me, also, that studies had been made of the Haida Indians which connect them with the famed Mayas of Yucatan and Guatemala.

The writer is of the opinion that at least a part of the ancestors of the Haida Indians were the Nephites. This perhaps accounts for the fact that so many of the Indians are white.

WHITE MANDAN INDIANS

White Indians have been found in other parts of the United States, as well as on the northwestern Pacific coast region. The best example is the Mandan Indians who during the colonial period inhabited the whole area of the states of North and South Dakota, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. White farmers did not settle this district until the middle of last century, "shortly after the Mandan had been wiped out by a smallpox epidemic." [^16] When the whites first discovered the Mandan Indians, according to Paul Herrmann,

. . . About a fifth of this strange people were white-skinned and blue-eyed. Fair hair was also not infrequent, and the physiognomy of all Mandan was entirely different from that of the usual Indian type. [^17]

Early in the seventeenth century rumors of a tribe of white Indians (the Mandans), who lived many miles away in the western wilderness, reached the Atlantic seaboard explorers; in 1615 Father Champlain wrote in his journal about them. Later Jean Nicolet expected to find white Indians on his trip westward. But probably the first white man actually to see them was de la Verandrye, a French Canadian fur trader and explorer. He visited the Mandan Indians in 1738, and became intimately acquainted with them. This personal contact makes his report historically valuable. Verandrye states in his diary:

. . . This tribe is partly white and partly red-skinned. The women are extremely beautiful, especially those who are white, some of whom have lovely fair hair. Both men and women are very industrious and work with a will. Their lodges are big and spacious; they are divided into several rooms by partitions of thick planks. . . . The men are tall, strong and courageous. They are very active, and of good appearance with pleasant features. Their women do not look in the least Indian. [^18]

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, an American, George Catlin, spent considerable time wandering among these Indians and studying them. He wrote:

The Mandans are certainly a very interesting and pleasing people in their personal appearance and manners; differing in many respects, both in looks and customs, from all other tribes which I have seen. . . .

. . . and so forcibly have I been struck with the peculiar ease and elegance of these people, together with the diversity of complexions, the various colours of their hair and eyes; the singularity of their language, and their peculiar and unaccountable customs, that I am fully convinced that they have sprung from some other origin than that of the other North American tribes. . . .

A stranger in the Mandan village is first struck by the different shades of complexion, and various colours of hair which he sees crowd about him; and he is at once almost disposed to exclaim that "these are not Indians."

There are a great many of these people whose complexions appear as light as half breeds; and amongst the women particularly, there are many whose skins are almost white, with the most pleasing symmetry and proportion of features; with hazel, with grey, and with blue eyes—with mildness and sweetness of expression, and excessive modesty of demeanour, which render them exceedingly pleasing and beautiful. [^19]

Writers have speculated regarding the origin of the white Mandan Indians. Catlin suggested "that the Mandan might be descended from the Welsh king, Madoc, . . ." [^20] Some writers have suggested Irish settlers while others have felt that the Scandinavian Vikings were responsible for the white blood among the Mandan Indians. It may be true that occasionally groups of Europeans came to America and intermarried with the Mandan Indians, but Paul Herrmann doubts that there would have been a sufficient number of Welsh, Irish, or Vikings settle in this land, according to available information, completely to account for the white blood in the Mandans. To quote Herrmann:

. . . and furthermore, only a handful of men, whose biological force cannot have sufficed to Europeanize a whole Indian tribe. But the clear traces of European [white] blood which the Mandan are said to have exhibited in 1750 cannot have been the outcome of a relatively fleeting contact with the white men; they must have sprung from some much more profound intermingling. What great adventure, what tragedy lies behind this strange and now vanishing tribe? We do not know. [^21]

If Herrmann's conclusions are correct, one needs to look elsewhere than to European infiltrations to find the cause of the white Mandan Indians. Probably another quotation from the same author will throw further light on the subject:

. . . Mandan mythology explicitly tells that the first ancestor of this people was a white man who, in the mists of antiquity, came to the country in a canoe. Long before the first missionaries reached the Mandan they are alleged to have known of a gentle, kindly god who was born of a virgin and died a death of expiation; they told of a miracle having close affinities with the feeding of the five thousand; they related the story of the first mother of mankind and her fall, of the ark and of the dove with a green twig in its beak; they believed in a personal devil who sought to win over and subjugate to himself the world of men. . . . [^22]

The author concedes that, following the visit of Leif Ericson to Vineland about 1000 A.D., occasional groups from Europe—especially Vikings—perhaps augmented the white strain, thereby helping to account for blue-eyed blonds among the Mandans. However, the writer is of the opinion that, in its account of the Nephites who survived the last great war about 400 A.D. and joined with the Lamanites, the Book of Mormon gives the true answer regarding the origin of the basic strain of white blood in the Mandan Indians.

It is evident that Mandan mythology, explained by Herrmann, has its basis in the history and traditions of the Nephites, since these people had a thorough knowledge of the history of their ancestors and the gospel doctrines contained in the Old and New Testaments. After the close of the Nephites' records in 421 A.D. and the apostasy of the people from the true gospel of Jesus Christ, it would have been natural for many of the gospel truths in an adulterated form to be carried by tradition from age to age, and so the Mandans possessed in their traditions fragments of divine truths when they first met Europeans. This could easily account for Christian teachings the Mandans had "long before the first missionaries reached" these Indians.

WHITE CATAWBA INDIANS OF SOUTH CAROLINA

In recent years white people have intermarried to a certain extent with the Catawba (Ca-taw'-ba) Indians of South Carolina; however, there are still a number of fullbloods among them. Some of these have dark skins while others are positively white.

S. T. Blue, an outstanding man, is the chief of the tribe. One of his ancestors belonged to the white race, but his wife Louisa is a white, fullblood Indian. Their sons and daughters have black hair and white skins. They are handsome people. I have never seen more beautiful children than Chief Blue's grandchildren. The contrast between their clear, white skins, black hair and dark sparkling eyes intensifies their whiteness and attractiveness.

Practically all of the members of the Catawba tribe belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

LIGHT-COMPLEXIONED CHEROKEE WOMEN

William Bartram, who was among the earliest of the whites to visit the Indians of the southeastern part of the United States, spent considerable time among them. In a book published in 1791, he described the Indians he visited, pointing out that in general their hair was long and black and their complexion ". . . of a reddishbrown or copper color," and yet he observed some among them of lighter complexions. To quote:

The women of the Cherokees are tall, slender, erect and of a delicate frame; their features formed with perfect symmetry, their countenance cheerful and friendly, and they move with a becoming grace and dignity.

The Cherokees are yet taller and more robust than the Muscogulges, and by far the largest race of men I have seen; their complexion brighter and somewhat of the olive cast; especially the adults and some of their young women are nearly as fair and blooming as European women. [^23]

WHITE ZUNI AND HOPI INDIANS OF ARIZONA

In 1879 President Wilford Woodruff spent several months among the Indians in Arizona and New Mexico. In his report he declared that some of these Indians were Nephites, or descendants of the Nephites, observing that some of them were white in color. In speaking of the Zuni Indians, President Woodruff wrote:

I went through the village and, for the first time in my life, I had a view of the white Indians. . . . I met with many who had been baptized and they were very glad to see me. They had two thousand acres of corn, looking well without irrigation. On the day following, we visited their village at their farm called Fish Springs. I was here introduced to Brother Juan Bautista (John the Baptist), the first man baptized in the Zuni nation by A. M. Tenney. His son's wife was the most handsome woman I ever saw of the Indian race; had a beautiful child, nearly white. [^24]

Elder Martin D. Bushman of Snowflake, Arizona, has served several missions laboring with the Indians of Arizona and New Mexico. Two years ago he informed me that he had seen a number of Zuni and Hopi Indians who were light-complexioned and some that were actually white. He described one white Hopi woman who he said was as white as any woman, regardless of race, that he had ever seen. This Indian woman, he stated, has beautiful, clear white skin, fine brown hair, and blue eyes. She is the mother of several children. Some of them are as white as their mother while the others are dark-skinned like their father.

I suggested to Brother Bushman that he investigate the lineage of the white Hopi woman for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not she had any white ancestors. Very shortly before this book came from the press, he visited me at my home and reported that he had investigated her lineage very carefully and had received the positive assurance from her mother and other informed members of the tribe that this white Hopi woman is a fullblood Indian. Elder Bushman is going to photograph that Indian family for me.

The Hopi and Zuni Indians are very intelligent people. According to tests given by the U. S. Indian Agency, the members of these two tribes rate higher intellectually than do Indians of other tribes in the United States, and, it is claimed, even higher than the whites. These Indians show unusual ability in the handicrafts. The Zunis are especially masterful in making silver jewelry. In general appearance, size of stature, and intellectual powers, the Hopi and Zuni resemble the Maya of southern Mexico and Central America more than they do the other Indian tribes who reside in the United States. It is not surprising that President Wilford Woodruff stated that they were descendants of the Nephites.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, it should be kept in mind that the Lord through his ancient prophets promised the Nephites that ". . . thy seed shall not utterly be destroyed" [^25] but following the destruction of the Nephite nation, those who remained ". . . shall be numbered among the Lamanites." [^26] Obviously these promises have been fulfilled in the white Indians who reside among their darker-skinned brethren, as has been pointed out in this chapter. Also, the Lord promised the Nephites that even the Gentiles in the latter days would not ". . . destroy the mixture of thy seed, which are among thy brethren [the Lamanites or Indians]." [^27] In fact, the holy prophets declared that the descendants of the Nephites shall be preserved in the land forever, and that in the latter days ". . . they shall become a righteous branch unto the house of Israel." [^28] This shall come about as a result of the Lord having once again established his Church and kingdom on the earth, and eventually—according to modern revelation—a ". . . knowledge of a Savior [shall come] . . . to the Nephites, and the Jacobites, and the Josephites, and the Zoramites, [or, as has been pointed out—white Indians], through the testimonies of their fathers—" meaning the Book of Mormon. [^29] How could this revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith be fulfilled if none of the seed of the Nephites and their associates has been preserved to our day, as white Indians?

After taking into consideration God's promises to the Nephites of a continuation of their descendants in America forever, and after making due allowance for occasional groups of white people who may have migrated to America after Moroni closed the ancient records, the writer concludes that certainly the principal progenitors of white Indians were the Nephites of Book of Mormon days.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] James Cook, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London, 1784), vol. 2, p. 303.
[^2] Ibid., p. 367.
[^3] G. Dixon, A Voyage Round the World, but more particularly to the Northwest Coast of America Performed in 1785-88 (London, 1789), p. 238.
[^4] George Vancouver, A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and Around the World (London, 1798), vol. 2, p. 262.
[^5] Hubert Howe Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States (New York, 1875), vol. 1, p. 157.
[^6] Francis Poole, Queen Charlotte Islands (London,1872), cited in Idem.
[^7] Bendel, cited in Idem.
[^8] Gilbert Malcolm Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage Life (London, 1868), p. 24.
[^9] Horatio Hale, Ethnography and Philology (Philadelphia,1846), cited in Bancroft, op. cit., p. 157.
[^10] Niblack, cited in Thor Heyerdahl, American Indians of the Pacific (New York, 1952), p. 83.
[^11] Bancroft, op. cit., p. 157.
[^12] A. C. Haddon, The Races of Man and the Distribution (New York, 1924), pp. 33, 128.
[^13] Sproat, cited in Heyerdahl, op. cit., p. 85.
[^14] Bancroft, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 157.
[^15] Letter from Mrs. Ballard Hadman to Milton R. Hunter, July 31, 1956.
[^16] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 175.
[^17] Ibid., p. 176.
[^18] Verandrye, cited in Ibid., p. 177.
[^19] George Catlin, The North American Indians . . . written during eight years travel amongst the wildest tribes of Indians in North America, 1832-1839 (Edinburgh, 1926), cited in Herrmann, op. cit., p. 176.
[^20] Ibid., p. 177.
[^21] Herrmann, op. cit., p. 179.
[^22] Ibid., p. 178.
[^23] William Bartram, Travels through North and South Carolina, Georgia (Philadelphia, 1791), cited in Chapman J. Milling, Red Carolinians (Kingsport, Tennessee, 1940), p. 6.
[^24] Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff—History of His Life and Labors as Recorded in His Daily Journals (Salt Lake City, 1916), p. 523.
[^25] 2 Nephi 3:3.
[^26] Alma 45:14.
[^27] 1 Nephi 13:30.
[^28] 2 Nephi 9:53.
[^29] Ibid., 29:12-13; D. & C. 3:16-18.
