Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Introduction

(Comprising Chapters 1 to 3)

Our Field of Study The Meaning and Value of Faith Religious Faith

Chapter 1

Our Field of Study

Religion is more than subject matter. Feeling as well as reason must enter into a study and evaluation of religion. The Apostle Paul realized the necessity of studying the things of God with the Spirit of God to assist us when he wrote:

1 For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

1 Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. (1 Cor. 2:11, 12)

The Spirit of Our Study

As we study the religion of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, let us do so critically with all our powers of mind at work. Let us also, however, study in a spirit of humility with our hearts tuned to God, that through his inspiration we may know the falseness or truth of the ideas presented to us. A great Jewish commentary on the Old testament offers this advice:

1 Just as water forsakes a high place and travels to a low one, just so do the words of Scripture find a resting place only in a man of humble spirit. [^1]

1 Humility is a great need in the whole of life, and nowhere is it more rewarding than in the study and living of religion. What do we mean by humility? It is an attitude of open-mindedness, a childlike curiosity about things, a search for knowledge and understanding. It also means to feel one's dependence on God, to feel one's spiritual need. [^2] The humble man does not have all the answers. He is not self-sufficient. He feels his need to learn, to improve, to grow, and to be taught and guided by others, and especially by God.

1 Each type of subject matter we study invites a somewhat different attitude of mind. When we look up a word in the dictionary we anticipate a precise, clear-cut definition. Our minds are critical and analytical as we study the meaning of words. Likewise when we study the law or a textbook in one of the sciences, we do so in an objective and rational frame of mind. We expect our subject matter to be accurate, logical, and precise. In contrast, when we read poetry we concern ourselves little or not at all with the exact meaning of words nor with a cold analysis of each sentence. We read poetry with feeling, seeking to catch the mood of the poet. Our interest lies in the poem as a whole, to which we respond in feeling as well as in thought.

2 The basic source material for our study of religion is scripture. The scriptures were not written as theological textbooks nor as dictionaries and commentaries. They were written by religious men who were trying to honor God and to persuade men to believe in him and to do his will Some writers of scripture, like the Psalmists, the Prophets Amos and Isaiah, and the author of the Book of Job were poets. In many of their writings feeling is the dominant tone. All of them are deeply religious in both attitude and intent. [^3]

2 As we read the scriptures, we should do so in the spirit in which they were written. Let us read the Psalms as poetry in the spirit of devotion and adoration. As we read Job let us read with feeling for the deep sense of tragedy and yet trust in God which pervades this great work. As we read any or all scripture let us do so in a spirit of reverence for God, seeking his Holy Spirit to guide us in its interpretation.

2 The truths of religion are learned gradually; they are not memorized quickly and once for all, like the multiplication tables. Such words as faith, love, and God are just words which stand for great realities which they symbolize. Each one must become a growing concept in our experience. Our understanding of God must grow and increase as we mature in life. He may mean more and more to us through the years, yet we refer to him by the same name when we are four, twelve, twenty, or fifty years old.

2 The principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ we speak of as eternal truths. Love always has been, is, and ever will be the great principle of life, the first commandment, and the very heart of religion and life. To God and Christ love is known in its fullness, but not to man. We do not know its full meaning, but likely only a small part. Our love is not pure. It is mixed with self-love. Our love is limited by our lack of understanding and experience in love.

2 There is a marked difference between a principle, such as love, and our understanding of it. Just as the scientist knows that he comprehends only a small part of the universe which he is seeking to understand, so the student of religion should realize that he, too, is as a child before the great truths pertaining to God. Even though the words denoting religion have been with us a long time, their meaning must be sought anew by each of us. And they are so rich in meaning none of us shall ever exhaust their fullness, at feast not in this life.

3 The Gospel of Jesus Christ might be likened unto a cool, ever-flowing mountain spring. It is there before the thirsty hiker finds it. Once there, the hiker lowers himself to drink of it freely and is refreshed. But he does not drink the sprint dry; he may return to it and drink thereof again and again. The Gospel is ever there for our study. When we are sufficiently thirsty and humble, we partake of it and we are refreshed in mind and heart. We never exhaust it. It flows on, as it were, waiting for the humble of spirit to drink of it.

3 In the chapters which follow, we make no pretense of presenting the religion of the Latter-day Saints in its fullness. This we know even before the work is written. The religion Jesus Christ taught is much larger and more beautiful than our understanding of it. Our study must be thought of as being only introductory, as a guide to Further study.

3 Why, then, do we write? Because we have been asked to prepare a course of study on this subject. This we do gladly because we have come to appreciate deeply the Gospel of Jesus Christ as we have learned of it in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

3 This little work may lead some reader to enrich his understanding of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. If it does, it will have fulfilled its purpose. Let us-student, teacher, and writer-be students together as we consider this brief course of study.

Our Field of Study

The religion of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a big and complex subject. For the sake of clarity and simplicity, we are dividing the subject into four parts:

I. The Doctrines of the Church. II. The Nature and Work of the Church. III. Some Basic Characteristics of the Latter-day Saint Way of Life. IV. The Origin and Position of the Church among Other Religions of Mankind.

3 We shall present a brief description of each one of these divisions.

I. The Doctrines of the Church

A systematic study of the doctrines or beliefs of a church is called theology. The word itself is Greek in origin and means the study of God. The heart of theology includes a study of God, the universe, and man. Christian theology includes also the doctrine of Christ and his way fo bringing salvation to the children of men.

4 In this largest division of our course of study, we shall present the basic beliefs of the Latter-day Saints about (1) the nature, character, and work of God, (2) the nature, character, purpose and destiny of man, and (3) the life and mission of Jesus Christ. Out of our study will come also a picture of man's relationship to God, Christ, and to fellow man.

4 The study of theology is a large and somewhat difficult undertaking. Not only are humility and inspiration needed, but also common sense and wisdom. Our purpose in this study will be to present the fundamental doctrines of the Church as simply and clearly as possible. We shall restrain the tendency, common to many of us, to speculate unduly and and become involved in mysteries, "in things which lead not to edification."

4 It is important also in our study of theology to try to see things as a whole, various ideas in relationship to one another. Any idea can stand alone. It is when related ideas meet and live with each other that they must make sense to be true. Out search in this study will be for a whole view of life-for an understanding of God, man, and Christ in their relationship to one another. When a business man considers his work, he does not consider each problem as being separate and apart from other problems, but considers them as parts of the whole. Only thus can he work intelligently and successfully. This is true of the work of the farmer, the doctor, or the housewife. It is equally important as a guide to the student of theology.

4 Theology is by nature rational and quite abstract. Definitions and statements of belief make up its subject matter. Therefore, it can easily become technical, arid, and "bookish." In the Bible and in additional Latter-day Saint scriptures, theology is never divorced from life. The main emphasis in scripture is not theological, but religious, writers persuading men to worship and serve God and to deal justly and with mercy toward fellow men. In our study we wish to be in harmony with the scriptures in this emphasis on functional theology. We wish to see theology as a vital force in everyday life.

4 In summary, our study of theology in the first part of this manual will deal with our fundamental doctrines pertaining to God, Christ, and man. We shall aim at a whole view and we shall study theology not simply in the abstract, but as it may become food and drink to us in our daily lives.

II. The Church

In Part II of this course we shall study the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church is not to be confused with theology or with a meetinghouse or chapel. The Church, like the family, the state, the army, a corporation, is a social institution. It may be defined as a body of believers, organized and authorized to achieve God's purpose in the lives of men. The most distinctive feature of the Church is its religious purpose and the particular powers and methods it has to achieve this divine purpose.

5Religion is more than a private affair. God wills that men shall pursue it together, lending each other moral support and fellowship in the great adventure of religious living. Latter-day Saints know the benefits and the joy of working together in the work of God. After we have studied the doctrines of the Church it will interesting ot study the Church itself, the social vehicle, a means by which we are trying to realize to doctrine in human life.

III. Some Characteristics of the "Mormon" Way of Life

Latter-day Saints are not only a body of believers with a purpose and with beliefs and doctrines; but also they are a people with a history and a culture uniquely their own. From the blend of belief, Church life, and history, emerges what might be called the ethos of "Mormonism," or the Latter-day Saint way of life. In Part III of our course we shall try to depict some of the emphases and ideals of Latter-day Saint living which need to be understood in order to appreciate the life of the Latter-day Saints, both as it is and as it aspires to be, for we live far short of the ideal.

IV. The Origin and Position of the Church Among Other Religions of Mankind

Having studied previously the beliefs, Church organization and practice, and the way of life of the Latter-day Saints, in Part IV we shall tell the story of the origin of the Church. How did it come to be? What place does the Church of Jesus Christ hold among Christian religions and among the religions of mankind? What is the mission of the Church? What lies ahead? What is to be accomplished by God through this people? A discussion of these and like important issues will conclude our study.

---
Notas:
[^1] Talmud (Ta'anit, 7a).
[^2] Goodspeed's translation of the First Beatitude.
[^3] This is repeatedly stated by Book of Mormon authors. See 1 Ne. 6:3-6; 2 Ne. 33; and Jacob 1:2-8.
