Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 6

The Nature of God

In an earlier chapter [^1] Isaiah's words were quoted:

34For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Isa. 55:8, 9)

34Man cannot begin to know all there is to know about his Maker. This we acknowledge freely and shall guard against elaborating the unknown. We shall discuss here and in ensuing chapters a few basic beliefs entertained about God, the Father by the Latter-day Saints-beliefs which are important to the religious and moral life of men.

Monotheism

The heart of the Jewish faith, particularly as taught in Deuteronomy and in the Prophets, such as in the Book of Jonah, is monotheism or belief in one God.

34Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath; there is none else. (Deut. 4:39)

34Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord; And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. (Deut. 6:4, 5)

34One reason for the rejection of Christianity by Jews generally is the infringement which the Christian doctrine of Trinity seems to make upon the pure monotheism of Judaism.

34Latter-day Saints, as indicated in the last chapter, believe in three Gods-the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In that sense we differ from Judaism and also from most Christians, who try to make these Three into One. Latter-day Saints also believe that men may learn, in the long course of eternity, to become perfect "even as your Father in heaven is perfect." The goal of human life is Godward; it is for man to realize his full nature as a child of God. In the endless time which lies ahead, many good and noble children of God may come to understand this and be like their Creator and Father, so they will truly be sons of God, and grow in the direction of his likeness. It might appear to the reader at this point that Latter-day Saints are not monotheistic in belief, but rather polytheistic. But this is not so.

God-The Supreme Intelligence

We are monotheistic in the sense that we believe that God, our Father, is unique, for he is the Supreme Intelligence in the universe, greater than the Son, greater than the Holy Ghost, greater than all other intelligent beings. In a revelation to Abraham, recorded in Latter-day Saint scripture, we read:

35These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. (Abr. 3:19)

35And in a revelation to Moses we read similarly:

35And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless? And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease. Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on earth. And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all. (Moses 1:3-6)

35This passage and the entire chapter which follows, while acknowledging Jesus as the Son of God and co-Creator, with the Father, of the earth and of his continuous and unending creation, places no limitations on God. For "there is no God beside me" and "there is no end to my works."

35We acknowledge God, the Father, to be the Supreme God of the universe. There is no mention in the Bible or in other Latter-day Saint scripture of any Gods above him or beside him. Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost are Gods working under him and with him. Men who attain a God-like character and stature will also share in his glory and work, but he will ever be God in a unique and supreme sense.

35The recognition of God as the Supreme Intelligence and Being satisfies the mind. From all that men can learn about the universe and life, it appears that all things are intimately related in an orderly and law-abiding way. The very universe appears to be one in its organization, orderliness, and the inter-dependence of all of its parts. Nature appears to be unified. It responds to man's thinking as though it were itself the product of a great mind. We believe that this great mind is God, as is so beautifully expressed in revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

36All kingdoms have a law given; And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified. For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things. He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things; and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever. And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons; And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets. And they give light to each other in their times and in their seasons, in their minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their weeks, in their months, in their years-all these are one year with God, but not with man. The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God. Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand? Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power. (D&C 88:36-47)

36Jesus Christ has come to share in the work of God and in the influence and power of his intelligence to such an extent that the light of Christ and the Spirit of God are used interchangeably in some passages of scripture:

36He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehendeth all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth; Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made; As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made; And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand. And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space-The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (D&C 88:6-13)

37We have faith in one Supreme Being. He is our Creator and Eternal Father. His intelligence permeates the universe and sustains it. All human beings are his children and are objects of his care and concern. He is indeed our Ideal, our Guide, our Helper. To him we can give freely of our loyalty and devotion. He is in every way adequate to his purpose and his position.

His Endless Creation

From a vision given to Moses, and revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we gain some idea of the unlimited extent of the creations of God which still continue and which are wrought through the power of the Son. The Lord had shown Moses many lands, called earths, with inhabitants thereon. Moses had inquired as to the Lord's purpose in his vast creation. Here is the answer in part:

37And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many. But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them. And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content. And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: the heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine. And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. For behold, this is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. (Moses 1:32-39) [^2]

37The Latter-day Saint view is theistic. God is not identical with nature (pantheism); nor is he outside of and wholly apart from nature (deism). He is the great Intelligence, a living, personal Being, who is continuously organizing and creating to bring to pass his great purpose-that of developing personalities, that of "bringing to pass the immortality and eternal (God-like) life of men." Jesus Christ is helping him to achieve this great and unselfish purpose in the lives of men. [^3]

Chapter 4.

Note also 2 Ne. 29, especially verse 9.

We shall enlarge upon this purpose in Chapter 9.

---
Notas:
[^1] Religion is a source of faith in the meaning of life as a whole. In daily life and in the specialized sciences, we usually express faith in some particular thing or process. In religion, in contrast, we are mostly concerned with the meaning of man's whole existence, his very life. Is the universe about us indifferent to man's fate or is there an intelligent Being who is working out his benevolent purposes in human life? Most religions are based on the faith that life is not a matter of chance, not the result of the operation of impersonal forces, but the fruit of divine wisdom and planning. For example: In our faith in God and immortality we shall ever walk by faith. That faith may grow from hope into certitude. And the spirit of God or the Holy Ghost can bear witness to our hearts to give us great assurance. But we must still exercise faith in things we have not seen or heard or known in the same tangible and objective way by which we can know the principles of religious living. There is a light and influence going forth from Deity, which inclines the minds and hearts of men to believe and to want to do good.
[^2] Goodspeed's translation of the First Beatitude.
[^3] This is repeatedly stated by Book of Mormon authors. See 1 Ne. 6:3-6; 2 Ne. 33; and Jacob 1:2-8.
