Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 11

Man is Capable of Eternal Progression

Jesus told several parables in which he taught forcefully and beautifully that men should receive the word of God and let it grow in their lives and bear fruit. Notable among them is the parable of the sower. Mark his words:

69A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the wayside; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. And others fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit a hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be? And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand. Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. Those by the wayside are they that hear; then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasure of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. (Luke 8:5-15)

69When the word of God is received by those with an honest and good heart, they bring forth fruit with patience.

69The religious life was not something static in the mind of Jesus, not something to become jellied and be preserved, not a talent to be buried lest it be lost. He wanted religion to bear fruit in life unto perfection. Humility, faith, repentance, and love are experiences in spiritual growth. Life was not to be static and repetitious but continually creative and self-fulfilling.

69Any thoughtful person knows that his life is not what it could and should be, so he searches for truth and strives to live more righteously. The religion of the Latter-day Saints is in harmony with man's desire for spiritual growth and with the Savior's stress upon it. We believe that man's life on earth is purposeful, that he can grow toward the perfection of him who is our Creator and Eternal Father. We call this belief eternal progression. Not only is progression a practical characteristic of man's life on earth, but also it is, in Latter-day Saint faith, a fundamental principle of our religion rooted in our theology.

The Meaning of Eternal Progression

Progression means literally "the act of going forward." The most important thing about progression is the goal toward which we are moving. Men go forward on the field of battle to their destruction. Weeds and tumors grow; crime and epidemics increase. We seek, therefore, movement forward toward a good goal. And the goal we seek gives direction and meaning to our progress.

70Eternal progression has two meanings, one quantitative and the other qualitative, and both are exciting to contemplate. Eternal in a quantitative sense means without beginning or end. We believe that man, in his pre-earth existence, by the use of free agency in association with Deity and his fellow associates, had opportunity to learn and to better himself. His coming to earth was planned by Deity to prove man, to let him walk by faith, knowing good and evil, and to have the privilege and responsibility to choose between them.

70As we look beyond this life to that which is to come, the principle of progression continues to be operative. The gains we make in this life of a moral, intellectual, or spiritual nature, are part of our eternal nature. Our earthly possessions, houses, lands, automobiles, and bank accounts remain behind; our bodies go back to the element of the earth, whence they came; but our eternal spirits live on, retaining all the spiritual gains of mortality. This fact is clearly stated in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

70Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (D&C 130:18, 19)

70Jesus expressed the same thought in his Sermon on the Mount:

70Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through to steal: (Matt. 6:19, 20)

70At death we go to the spirit world. There we shall remember our labors on the earth. For our vain, shallow, and evil living we shall suffer remorse even as we do here. For any progress we may have made in Christian living, we shall rejoice and enjoy peace of mind. No matter what our condition in the spirit world, our conscious existence continues and we shall have opportunity to progress farther. Those who did not have adequate opportunity to hear and understand the Gospel of Christ on earth will hear it there and may exercise faith and repent. The more righteous, who understand and believe it, will follow in the footsteps of the Savior and help teach it to those who understand it less or not at all. [^1]

71In the final state of life, when men will be resurrected and have a full capacity for joy, life will not be static nor come to a spiritual completeness. Heaven is not a dead-end street to a Latter-day Saint, glorious though it might be. Heaven means simply a new and great opportunity to experience joy through self-realization. Man's quest for a fullness of life, as far as we know, will go on forever and may be rewarding and fulfilling all the way. There need be no end to man's progression. Eternal progression means to move forward with gradual improvement forever.

71Eternal means not only everlastingly, but also God-like. This is clearly evident in the words of Jesus: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3) That which gives such rich meaning to the Latter-day Saint doctrine of eternal progression is not only that it may continue forever, but also that it is progression toward such a wonderful goal, the character and life of God.

71God, the Father, is our ideal. He knows the goodness, the richness, and the fullness of life. Our own joy will come as we progress in the realization of God-like qualities which exist in our own minds and hearts. Our need is to grow in justice and impartiality, mercy and love, knowledge and wisdom, and in our ability to help others attain these same divine attributes. As we grow in these attributes and share in our Father's service to man, we shall grow in his likeness and share in his life and work.

71Our eternal goal is not to enjoy a vision of God in a passive, spectator-sense, nor to come to a place of heavenly bliss and peace. Our idea of heaven is not radically different from our experience with life here in its spiritual aspects. Our Eternal Father wishes us to know the richness of life that is his. He wants us to become more intelligent, creative, and loving, even as he, that we might know the meaning of life which is his.

71Jesus came to earth, among other reasons, to reveal to man the character and will of the Father. He himself "increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man." (Luke 2:52) And "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him;" (Heb. 5:8-10) In a revelation to Joseph Smith we read of the Savior's own progress toward a fulness of the glory of God.

72And I, John, bear record that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us. And I, John, saw that he received not the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace; And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first. And I, John, bear record, and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son. And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. (D&C 93:11-17)

72The promise is also made to us that we, too, may enjoy a fulness of the glory of God if we are faithful and walk in the steps of the Savior, living as he would have us live.

72And it shall come to pass, that if you are faithful you shall receive the fulness of the record of John. I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness. For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:18-20)

72Man's potential, glorious, God-like future is further elaborated in another passage in the Doctrine and Covenants. From a vision of life hereafter, received by Joseph Smith and his associate, Sydney Rigdon, we read:

72And again we bear record-for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just-They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given-That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power; And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true. They are they who are the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things-They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God-Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. And they shall overcome all things. Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under his feet. These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever. These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people. These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection. These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just. These are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all. These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn. These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood. These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical. (D&C 76:50-70)

The Way of Progression

We have, in this chapter, declared our faith in the principle, of eternal progression. We have shown how it is in harmony with Jesus emphasis on growth in the spiritual life and also man's need for growth. And we have tried to show the meaning of eternal progression, how it signifies going forward forever, realizing gradually and increasingly a more Godlike and Christ-like life. There remains another important question pertaining to the subject: How does one progress eternally?

73This question cannot be answered in a paragraph or a chapter. The entire Gospel of Jesus Christ is a plan which will lead man from where he is toward his eternal goal of becoming in very deed a true Son of God, sharing in the work of his Father. The reader and student will have to be patient and give us time to introduce the plan as the course develops and as we study the work of Jesus Christ. Here we can only outline three general steps, not the specific principles, of the plan.

I. Faith

As indicated earlier, [^2] religion rests on faith, on such great postulates of faith as the existence of God, that man's life is a meaningful and immortal part of his divine creation, and that the Christian life will bring us the greatest joy here and eternally.

73The first step in eternal progression is faith. We must believe in our goal enough to act upon it-to incline our hearts and minds toward God and to begin to live more as he would have us live. We must believe enough to experiment with his word.

74Faith is a feeling, lying between hope and full assurance-depending on its strength-which enables us to live as though something is true which we have not yet seen nor realized. None of us has seen God, so we walk by faith. None of us has known the joy of full Christian living, so we walk by faith, seeking to realize more of it in our lives.

74Faith is a gift of God. All men, unless they resist his influence, come under the influence of the Father and the Son, who are persuading them to believe, to do right, and to aspire to the good life. Faith, like our talents, must be cultivated to increase and become truly vital. A Book of Mormon prophet spoke convincingly about the cultivation of faith, the first vital step in our progression. (Read quotation on pages 18 and 19.)

II. Knowledge

A well-grounded faith leads to knowledge. Knowledge is a prerequisite to progress in religion even as it is in science, industry, or school. We live in a world of law and order, both in nature and in the moral and spiritual life of man. Jesus said: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32)

74To a Latter-day Saint, the religious life includes knowledge as well as faith. The very purpose of faith is to lead us to a knowledge of God and his laws that we may understand and live in harmony therewith. Great and interesting is the stress in Latter-day Saint scripture on knowledge as part of the plan of man's eternal program:

74The Glory of God is intelligenceÂ�(Doctrine and Covenants 93:36)

74It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance. (D&C 131:6)

III. Obedience

The third basic step in eternal progression is obedience to law. We begin with faith, which leads to knowledge; and, through acceptance and obedience, this knowledge is translated into our very lives. Knowledge in itself does not bring progress, but only knowledge applied to good ends. Belief alone does not bring man to God. James is emphatic and graphic on this point:

74Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? (James 2:19, 20)

74Neither is knowledge alone a sufficient basis of salvation, of eternal progression toward a God-like, joy-bringing life. Jesus knew this as he stressed the importance of living by our knowledge:

75Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and east into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock; And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat that house; and it fell not: for it was rounded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at this doctrine: For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. (Matt. 7:16-29)

75To Latter-day Saints, religion is faith that is leading to a knowledge of God and Christ translated into the feeling and behavior of men in everyday life. We live in a world of law. As we come to learn the laws of life or the laws of God, and conform our lives to them out of genuine conviction, freely and gladly, we are on the highway of progression leading to eternal life. Our point of view is rather well summarized in the following scripture:

75For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift. And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. All kingdoms have a law given; And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified. For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own: judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things. (D&C 88:33-40)

Conclusion

This principle of eternal progression toward the character of God is a cornerstone of Latter-day Saint teaching. It is wholly consistent with our doctrines of man, his free and eternal nature, and with our conception of salvation through the Lord Jesus Christ. It promises that any man's life, under the guidance of Deity and in cooperation with fellow men, may hold forever increasing meaning and satisfaction. This principle is part of the positive, optimistic, and idealistic view we hold of human life. Yet the doctrine is not unrealistic, not a mere fanciful dream, but is grounded in faith, knowledge, and obedience. Eternal progression is growth, and growth in the spiritual life of man, as in nature, comes about gradually and in accordance with law.

Review Chapter 8.

Chapters 2 and 3.

---
Notas:
[^1] Religion is a source of faith in the meaning of life as a whole. In daily life and in the specialized sciences, we usually express faith in some particular thing or process. In religion, in contrast, we are mostly concerned with the meaning of man's whole existence, his very life. Is the universe about us indifferent to man's fate or is there an intelligent Being who is working out his benevolent purposes in human life? Most religions are based on the faith that life is not a matter of chance, not the result of the operation of impersonal forces, but the fruit of divine wisdom and planning. For example: In our faith in God and immortality we shall ever walk by faith. That faith may grow from hope into certitude. And the spirit of God or the Holy Ghost can bear witness to our hearts to give us great assurance. But we must still exercise faith in things we have not seen or heard or known in the same tangible and objective way by which we can know the principles of religious living. There is a light and influence going forth from Deity, which inclines the minds and hearts of men to believe and to want to do good.
[^2] Goodspeed's translation of the First Beatitude.
