Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 31

Priesthood Organization and Functions

In the last chapter we considered general aspects of our doctrine of priesthood-its nature, basis of acquisition, and the spirit in which it functions. We turn now to a consideration of its organization and functioning in the Church. We speak of the priesthood in two meanings of the word: (1) as the authority of God delegated to man and also (2) as the body of men who bear this divine authority. The reader will need to keep both usages of the word in mind.

Two Priesthoods

We speak of two priesthoods in the Church: the Melchizedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. In reality they are two divisions of one priesthood, the authority of God delegated to man. The Melchizedek Priesthood is the higher and governing authority of the Church and the Aaronic Priesthood is an appendage and help to it.

I. The Melchizedek Priesthood

The Melchizedek Priesthood is named for a great high priest in ancient times to whom Abraham paid tithes. [^1] Before that time, according to a revelation received by Joseph Smith, the priesthood was called "the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence for the name of the Supreme Being to avoid the too frequent repetition of His name" the name of the priesthood was changed to the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^2]

220This High Priesthood "holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world." [^3] Men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood preside over all the affairs of the Church. Theirs is the responsibility to govern the Church, to organize it, to establish the policies and practices of the Church.

220It is also essential to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood in order to participate in many of the more spiritual functions of the Church such as ordinations, administrations, and much of the ordinance work of the Church.

221It is a major responsibility of men holding this Higher Priesthood to teach and preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ both to members of the Church and to all men. The missionary work of the Church is under the direction of presiding quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Male members of the Church who go forth as missionaries hold this higher priesthood.

II. The Aaronic Priesthood

The Aaronic Priesthood, as the name indicates, is named for Aaron, brother of Israel's great prophet, Moses. Aaron assisted Moses in the latter's leadership in Israel, according to the Old Testament account. [^4] Aaron and Moses were descendants of Levi, one of the twelve sons of Jacob. When Israel was established as a nation under Moses and was led from Egypt back to Canaan, the responsibility of carrying on the priestly functions was given to the tribe of Levi through Aaron. Later on, as the Israelites conquered and settled in Palestine, the sons of Levi were not given a fixed piece of territory like the other tribes of Israel, but were scattered among all tribes that they might perform the priestly functions for the whole of Israel.

221It has been made known through modern revelations that the Melchizedek Priesthood was taken from the earth with Moses and was not generally held among men from the time of Moses to the coming of Jesus Christ. [^5] The Aaronic Priesthood continued during this period of time and functioned wherein it had a right to function.

221The Aaronic Priesthood is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood. Those who bear this priesthood work under the direction of those who hold the Higher Priesthood and assist them in many functions of the Church.

221Bearers of the Aaronic Priesthood function particularly in the interest of the temporal welfare of the Church, as we shall illustrate below as we consider the various callings within this division of the priesthood.

The Priesthood Quorum

A man who holds either the Melchizedek or the Aaronic Priesthood belongs to a quorum, a group of men, who hold the same office in the priesthood which he holds and who also reside in the same wards or stake or mission in which he resides. The priesthood functions both in the bearer's life as an individual and as a member of his quorum. A man bearing the priesthood in the Church has a responsibility to himself, to the Church, to Christ and the Father, and also to fellow members of the quorum to which he belongs. Throughout the Church, in all of its geographical subdivisions, wherever there are enough men holding the priesthood to make it feasible, they are organized into priesthood quorums. This is, as far as we know, unique to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is interesting and merits our consideration. Why do we have quorums of the priesthood?

I. The Purposes of a Priesthood Quorum

Through revelation the Church was advised to organize bearers of the priesthood into quorums with presiding officers. From this revelation, and from the experience of over a century with quorum functioning, the purposes of a quorum might be designated as threefold.

222Each quorum has the responsibility of safeguarding and improving the personal welfare of each member and his family. The president of the quorum can and should know each member of his quorum-his family, occupation, state of health, circumstances, and happenings of consequence to his well-being. The president has the resources of all the members of the quorum at his command to see that each member is helped in his need, both in his daily need and in the hour of emergency or tragedy, and both in material and spiritual affairs. No man in the priesthood needs to feel that he walks alone. The priesthood quorum is designed to give every man and his family that most important feeling that he belongs to other human beings who need, support, and love him.

223In practice, we do not live up to the ideal as we should. Some men are inactive and do not sense their responsibilities to the group. Others are only semi-active. Still others are quite active, but are too concerned with offer interests to give sufficient attention to quorum responsibilities. However, sufficient brotherhood has been developed in quorums throughout the Church to demonstrate the wisdom and the great potential for good in having servants of God, bearers of his Holy Priesthood, organized in groups which we call quorums. We shall outline the quorums of the priesthood of the Church and indicate the organization, number, and specific priesthood duties of each office in the Church.

II. Quorums in the Aaronic Priesthood

223A deacon's quorum consists of 12 members, including a president and his two counselors. They meet together weekly to study the Gospel, report their duties accomplished, and to plan for the work that lies ahead. They function under the direction of the bishopric of the ward. It is the practice today to ordain boys who are worthy in character and willing to serve to the office of deacon at the age of twelve years. They serve in this capacity usually for two years.

224A teacher's quorum consists of twenty-four members, including the president of the quorum and his two counselors. The quorum functions much as a deacon's quorum does. Boys in the Church who qualify are ordained at the age of fourteen and serve two years in this calling.

224In addition, he receives for the first time in his experience in the priesthood the privilege of blessing the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and also of baptizing converts to the Church. These are two of the most sacred and spiritual ordinances of the Church. The priest also assumes an increased responsibility to learn, teach, and preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

224The priest's quorum consists of forty-eight members, presided over by the bishop of the ward, who is president of the quorum. He appoints members of the quorum to assist him as secretary and committee heads. Boys may be ordained priests at the age of sixteen and usually serve in this capacity until they become nineteen years of age.

224The bishop of each ward, assisted by his counselors, presides over the entire Aaronic Priesthood in his ward and is charged with the responsibility of guiding and developing the moral and spiritual life of the boys in his ward.

III. Quorums in the Melchizedek Priesthood

There are also three quorums in the Melchizedek Priesthood of the Church. However, they represent, not ranks in the priesthood, but special callings of equal authority. A humble elder in the Church, for example, has the same priesthood as the president of the Church, but a different calling. He may participate in the basic rites of the Church and receive revelation in his particular work in the Church even as the president does in his responsibility.

225An elder's quorum consists of ninety-six members, presided over by a president and two counselors. They meet regularly for the purpose of fulfilling the three purposes of a quorum outlined above. They are a body of men, married and single, from all walks of life who come together to fraternize in the work of the Lord.

225The seventy's quorum is unique in its organization. It is presided over by seven presidents who are included in their membership of seventy. Their basic purposes are the same as those of an elder's quorum except for this special emphasis on preparing for missionary service. It is customary for such quorums also to finance a missionary in the field.

225There is a high priest's quorum in each stake in the Church presided over by a president and his two counselors. Unlike the other quorums, no particular number of men belong to a high priests quorum. This quorum usually consists largely of the older and more experienced men of the Church, men who have served faithfully in other callings in the priesthood.

IV. Special Quorums within the Melchizedek Priesthood

225Elders', seventies', and high priests' quorums are general quorums found in the wards and stakes of the Church. There are hundreds of quorums in each of these three types.

225There are in the Church also three quorums that preside over the affairs of the entire Church. Their members are called General Authorities of the Church and their make-up and specific functions differ from those of the quorums described above.

226More will be said in ensuing chapters concerning the government of the Church and the responsibilities of the General Authorities. We mention them here in their capacity as quorums and to indicate that they preside over the priesthood in the Church.

The Right to Exercise the Priesthood

There is a difference between bearing the priesthood and the right to use it. This distinction is well made by a late apostle, John A. Widtsoe.

226Every man holding the priesthood of God may exercise its power in behalf of himself and family. He may seek revelations for his own guidance; he may administer to his own family; teach, rebuke, and bless them, and he may bear witness to the truth of the Gospel and seek to sustain his fellow men. In all this, his priesthood will sustain him.

226But, no man may exercise the power of his priesthood for the Church except by appointment of those who hold the keys of the priesthood-that is, those called to presiding positions. (Program of the Church, pp. 136-137)

226There is an administrative order in the Church which enables the priesthood to function with order, purpose, and effectiveness, which we shall describe in our next chapter.

See Gen. 14:18-20.

D&C 107:1-6.

D&C 107:8.

See Exodus, particularly Chapter 4.

See D&C 84:23-27.

See Lyon, T. Edgar, Introduction to Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price, Chapter 8.

---
Notas:
[^1] To render loving service to the needy, sick and afflicted, and those who mourn. To help people learn to worship God and hold in reverence things sacred and holy. To build faith in God, in Jesus the Christ, and in the program of the Church.
[^2] To train each woman to be more effective and devoted in her roles of wife, mother and home-builder. To teach people the Gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that they will increase in faith and live its teachings. To provide an ideal setting for social life and friendship under the influence of the Gospel and the Church.
[^3] To bring increased learning, culture, and refinement into the lives of its members. To develop the personality and character of the youth through self-expression in all wholesome aspects of life: education, recreation, culture, service, and worship.
[^4] To strengthen the women of the Church in their faith in and discipleship of Christ.
[^5] And-this is meant seriously, not facetiously-to "provoke" their husbands and sons to good works, to do their duties in the priesthood and the Church.
