Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 32

The Organization of the Church

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is unique in the structure and character of its organization. It is varied, diversified, and complex, and it is well integrated and highly centralized. In this chapter we shall first describe its main features and then discuss some of its more significant characteristics.

Ecclesiastical Divisions

Wherever the Church is well established in a region, with a considerable number of Latter-day Saints, it is organized into what we call wards and stakes. Each ward is a church-community, comparable in a sense to a parish in some denominations. Several wards, usually from five to ten, comprise a stake of Zion. This is indicated in simple form as follows:

227

227In January, 1956, there were 1835 wards organized into 224 stakes in the Church. [^1] Each year new wards and stakes are organized as the Church grows steadily in membership through natural increase and through its missionary labors.

227In mission fields where the Church is not yet established in large numbers, we have another ecclesiastical arrangement which is quite similar to the one described above. There the church-community is called a branch. Several branches make up a district, and districts combine to form a mission of the Church, something as follows:

228From the very beginning of our history, the Latter-day Saints have been a missionary people, proclaiming the message of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ in every nation where political conditions permitted. Missionary work is done among both Christians and non-Christians. We have missions throughout most of free-Europe and in North and South America, the Isles of the Pacific, China, and Japan. On January 1, 1956, there were 1635 branches in 45 missions of the Church. As the number of Latter-day Saints increases sufficiently in the branches and districts of the mission fields, they are made into wards and stakes.

228Since the program of the Church in the mission fields is similar to that in the stakes, we shall confine our description of the Church program to the latter to avoid needless repetition.

I. The Ward

The ward is the basic unit, the human community of the Church. Every member of the Church belongs to a ward along with several hundred (often about 600) other members. Like the Jewish synagogue, a Latter-day Saint ward is a religious school, a social and fraternal center, and a place of worship. The typical Church meetinghouse reveals this threefold character of the program, for it contains classrooms, recreational facilities, and a chapel.

228The key leader in a ward is called the bishop. He is nominated for this position by the presidency of the stake under whom he serves and is called, and ordained to the position by the General Authorities of the Church. The bishop is not paid for his services and carries on the heavy responsibilities associated with his office and calling along with the task of earning a living for his family and fulfilling the duties of a father to his own household. Paul's qualifications for a bishop are followed very closely in the Church by those who choose and call them:

229For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not self-willed, not soon angry, nor given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre; But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate; Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. (Titus 1:7-9)

229The Latter-day Saint bishop is a high priest in the Melchizedek Priesthood and is also ordained to the office of a bishop. He is assisted by two counselors, also high priests, of his own choosing, subject to the approval of those who preside over him. These brethren serve until released, usually about five years, and are then called to some other service in the Church.

229The bishop is the shepherd of the flock. He is both a temporal and spiritual leader, charged with the responsibility of the complete welfare of every person who belongs to his church-community. He is called a "common judge in Israel." His work may be thought of in two large categories: (1) To know and keep in touch with his members, and (2) To help them satisfy their practical and spiritual needs.

229Obviously it is impossible for a bishop to keep in constant touch with from 100 to 300 families in his ward. To assist him in this work the Church, through revelation, calls men of the priesthood to be ward teachers to visit the Saints in their homes monthly, as representatives of the bishop-to teach, encourage, discover needs, and to be brotherly and friendly. These visiting teachers report their findings to the bishop, who is guided in a measure by their reports. This system works something as follows:

The Ward Program

The bishopric or organizes the members of his ward along various established lines and procedures in the Church, to help them satisfy their needs as human beings and as disciples of Jesus Christ. The program is too rich and complex to describe in one place. (Here we can outline a few major functions of a ward and leave other features of the program to later chapters.)

I. Priesthood Work

The bishop presides directly over the Aaronic Priesthood in his ward and over all of the functions performed by members holding this priesthood, such as baptisms and the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, ward teaching, and caring for the physical and material needs of families and persons living in his church-community.

230Quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood are not under the immediate direction of the bishop, but come under the direct supervision of the stake and General Authorities. However, these quorums usually meet as groups in his ward and are happy to carry responsibilities assigned to them by the bishop. In fact, as members of the ward, they come individually under his immediate leadership. He calls upon these men to hold responsible positions in his ward.

II. The Auxiliary Program

In the course of our history, various organizations have been established within the Church to meet the needs of our people. They are called auxiliary because they are helps to the priesthood in building the Kingdom of God. We shall list them with a simplified statement of their purposes:

230A. The Relief Society. This is an organization of the women of the Church, presided over by a president and her two counselors, the purposes of which are:

231B. The Sunday School. This is an organization which meets each Sunday morning and is the only auxiliary which includes all age-groups of the Church from the "cradle roll" to the most advanced in age and Church experience. Its purposes are:

231C. The Primary Association. This is a week-day organization serving children under twelve years of age. Its purposes are much like those of the Sunday School, with an added emphasis on sociability, and with opportunity for a variety of practical activities appropriate to a week-day afternoon. The Primary Association is particularly concerned with preparing boys and girls for baptism into the Church at the age of eight, and boys for receiving the priesthood at the age of twelve.

231D. The M. I. A . This stands for Mutual Improvement Association, with divisions for both young men and young women, and a class for adults. The M. I. A. directs the major part of its program to the youth of the Church from the age of twelve years to marriage. Boys and girls meet together, each with their separate as well as combined programs under the leadership of men and women. The purposes of the M. I. A. might be suggested as follows:

231The M. I. A. continues where the Primary leaves off in week-day activities, aiming at the further development of the young members of the Church. Older people are welcome and are needed in the M. I. A. to lend balance and a steadying hand to the program.

III. General Functions

In addition to the priesthood and auxiliary programs, which function in the wards, there are other activities of a more universal character.

232Each Sunday the bishop plans and presides over a sacrament service, in which members of the Church are privileged to partake of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. It is a sacred meeting in which we renew our faith in Christ, worship God, and encourage one another through sermons to live the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The bishop is rarely the preacher. His interest is to accomplish the religious purposes of the meeting, and he calls on members of his ward to provide music and to give talks in this important service.

232Each ward usually has a choir composed of members of the ward, who sing without remuneration.

232The bishop also plans and supervises numerous other activities of the Church, which are carried out on the ward level-welfare projects, building projects, genealogical research, temple work, and civic projects of importance to the Church.

IV. The Stake

Latter-day Saints belong to wards, to Church communities. Several wards make up a stake, which is an administrative unit established to guide and integrate the activities of the wards and the priesthood quorums within its boundaries. Stake officers represent a liaison group between the wards and the General Authorities of the Church. The general officers of a stake are as follows:

232

233The stake presidency, with the advice and assistance of the high council, presides over and directs all the affairs of the wards in the stake. The bishop is, of course, granted much respect and initiative in directing the affairs of his ward.

233The stake authorities in turn are amenable to the General Authorities of the Church, who conduct the affairs of the entire Church. The General Authorities are organized something as follows:

233

* The President , Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and his two counselors. ** Seven at the present time. *** Seven in number. ****Three in number.

233The Church is presided over by the President and Prophet of the Church, even as Moses led the children of Israel. He is both the administrative head of the Church and the prophetic voice for God to his people. He is assisted by two counselors, who with him, form the quorum of the First Presidency of the Church. The First Presidency is the highest governing body of the Church.

233The Twelve Apostles are equal in authority to the First Presidency, but serve under the latter's direction. Called as special witnesses to Jesus Christ, the Apostles, under the leadership of the First Presidency, conduct the affairs of the Church throughout the world. They visit the stakes and missions of the Church continuously and meet in council regularly with the First Presidency to consider the welfare of the Church.

234Assistants to the Twelve have also been called to help in the extensive responsibilities of the Council of the Twelve.

234The First Council of the Seventy is called to serve, particularly in the missionary labors of the Church, under the direction of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve.

234The Patriarch to the Church is also called, along with the Apostles and First Presidency, to be a prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church. His special function is to bless the people of the Church as patriarchs of Old Testament days gave blessings to their posterity.

234The Presiding Bishopric presides over the Aaronic Priesthood work of the Church and also, under the direction of the First Presidency, takes care of the financial affairs of the Church-the collecting of tithes and offerings, the erecting and maintenance of buildings, temples, and all other material problems of the Church.

234While this presentation of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has not been complete, it may have given a general and over-all view. Let us turn to some of the basic qualities which characterize the Church organization as a whole. Some of these are quite unique.

General Characteristics

I. The Church is Governed by the Priesthood

Divine authority, or priesthood, is essential in Church leadership. Men are called and ordained before assuming important positions of leadership in the Church. The President of the Church holds all of the keys, powers, and authority vested in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Other officers in the Church are given authority adequate to the office to which they are called. This authority is to be held and exercised in humility and love for the salvation of man, but it functions also within an orderly system of delegated authority.

234Many women and girls serve in the Church, particularly in the auxiliary organizations. Under the general supervision of the priesthood, they preside over the Relief Society, the Primary, and the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, and also render invaluable service to the Sunday Schools of the Church.

II. Things Are Done with Counsel

A verse in Proverbs reads: "Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of counselors there is safety." (11:14) The organization of the Church is highly centralized in the person of the Prophet and President of the Church. But everyone in responsible positions in the Church, with rare exceptions, serves with two counselors. The President of the Church and of each stake of Zion, the bishop of each ward, the president of each quorum, mission, and auxiliary in the Church serve with two counselors.

235This means that the head of the Church and every organization within it has the help, support, wisdom, fellowship, and inspiration of at least two other persons of his or her own choosing. No one stands alone in Church service among the Latter-day Saints. We work together, in counsel, and enjoy and appreciate this effective and divinely-inspired arrangement.

III. Everyone May Serve in the Church

There is no distinction between laity and clergy in the Latter-day Saint Church. We have no "men of the cloth." Laboring men, doctors, lawyers, business men, senators in the Congress of the United States, and General Authorities of the Church all hold the same priesthood which they exercise in different callings within the Church.

235Just as Jesus chose fishermen, Matthew, the tax collector, and Nathanael, a man without guile, to be among his apostles, the Latter-day Saint Church calls farmers, business men, educators, lawyers, doctors, and engineers to be teachers, priesthood leaders, bishops, stake presidents, and apostles in the Church. And after they are called to positions of responsibility, they remain one of the people, wearing the same clothing, rendering obedience to the same principles, and belonging to the same wards.

235In this sense, the Latter-day Saint Church is a lay church, or a church of priests, where all men are called to serve, and women in large numbers too. In a typical ward of six hundred members, fully one-third-two hundred-will hold some position as teacher, officer, or committee member. People are rotated in office from time to time. Through the years a Latter-day Saint may have a rich and varied experience in leadership and in human relations.

235This lay character of the Church, as it works out in practice, is not without its limitations. Voluntary service is not always done conscientiously. People without adequate training may be ineffectual in the classroom or in responsible positions. We live in a professional age which in itself is a great challenge to any church in which untrained people serve.

235There are many things, however, which we who have grown up in the Church appreciate about its lay character. The great bulk of the work of the Church is voluntary and unpaid; it is done freely and gladly for the joy of service. This is consistent with the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

236Men and women from all walks of life learn the meaning of faith, humility, love, compassion, not from hearing the word only, but from doing. Men learn faith by being put into a position where they must live by faith and likewise humility and love. The Church puts men to work, gives them responsibilities adapted to their ability and need. Latter-day Saints study because they are teachers of others. They pray because their responsibilities are greater than their capacity. They may be called upon any time to pray with, or to bless a neighbor, or to help build a house for a widow. These experiences develop humility and increase love, peace, and good will among men.

236The organization of the Church and its functioning presuppose on the part of its members-faith in God and inspiration from the Holy Ghost. Latter-day Saint teaching on this point is epitomized in a resolution expressed by a young prophet by the the name of Nephi in the Book of Mormon story. He said: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them to accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Ne. 3:7)

236Latter-day Saints know each other. They are not a congregation, but a community enjoying a rich fellowship under the auspices of the Church. There are meaningful things to do in the Church for young and old, boys and girls, and men and women. There is fellowship for all in both recreational and spiritual pursuits.

IV. Our Goal-A Full Life for Man

The organization of the Church encompasses a rich program designed to help satisfy every human need for both this life and for life beyond the grave. The purpose of the Church today is very much the same as described in the Book of Mormon:

236And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. And the Church did meet together oft, to fast, and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls. And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus. And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not, and confessed not, their names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven. And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the working of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done. (Moro. 6:4-9)

Also 236 independent branches or smaller church-communities in the stakes.

---
Notas:
[^1] To render loving service to the needy, sick and afflicted, and those who mourn. To help people learn to worship God and hold in reverence things sacred and holy. To build faith in God, in Jesus the Christ, and in the program of the Church.
