Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 33

Government in the Church

Government-whether in family, state or church-is the right of a person or persons to exercise power, authority, or control over other persons. The exact form which governments take in life is exceedingly variable. Even within the same government, there is constant change.

238In political life there has been throughout history a great struggle for power, with the result that we have known every form of government ranging from the absolute dictatorship of an individual or group to the democratic self-government of the people in a small community. The general trend in recent centuries in Europe and America, and in Asia today, has been toward some form of democratic self-government, with frequent lapses into some type of personal or group dictatorship.

238Government in a religious group is not wholly different from civil forms and problems of government. In a church also someone must assume leadership and exercise control. In various churches, specific forms of government are likely to follow the same basic patterns which we have described as being characteristic of political life. In some churches, the people have no voice in government; in others the complete control rests in the hands of the congregation.

238It is our purpose in this chapter to explain the character of government which obtains in the Latter-day Saint Church. We shall discover that in the Church there is neither absolute control by a few leaders nor by the people as a whole. In other words, the Church is neither a theocracy nor a democracy, but has important features of both. First let us define terms.

A Theocracy

The word theocracy means government of God. Since he does not govern personally upon the earth, a theocracy in fact means government by representatives-by men who speak for him, such as prophets and priests.

238The classic example of a theocracy in history is that of the Hebrew commonwealth before it became a kingdom under Saul, David, and Solomon. Moses was called of God by revelation and appeared before his people as an emissary, one sent of God to lead his people. Moses declared God's laws to the people. When they accepted his leadership, it was because they believed he was sent by Jehovah and spoke his will.

239Before Moses died, "he laid his hands upon" Joshua, who "was full of the spirit of wisdom,Â�and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses." (Deut. 34:9) Theocratic government continued under Joshua.

239In the centuries that followed, government changed under various prophets and military leaders until Israel became a kingdom. Henceforth, except as Israel and Judah gave serious heed to prophetic leadership-which was infrequent-the kingdoms were no longer under theocratic rule, but were monarchies.

A Democracy

A democracy means government by the people. In Abraham Lincoln's famous words, it is a government "of the people, by the people, and for the people." In a pure democracy, such as is possible only in a small community, all decisions are made by the people directly in an assembly. In a larger body, such as the nations of today, we have representative democracy. People are governed by their elected representatives, but the final authority rests in the electing power of the people at large.

239The spirit and basic idea of a theocracy and a democracy differ markedly from one another. In theocracy, men look to God to guide them through his chosen representatives; in a democracy, men look to themselves and formulate principles of government from their own knowledge and experience. In a theocracy, men put their trust in fellow men, in the prophet; in a democracy, men put their trust in fellow men, in the common sense and wisdom of the mass of men.

Government in the Church

I. Theocratic Character

The Latter-day Saint Church is not a democracy because its leaders are not nominated and elected by the people. Our Fifth Article of Faith reads:

239We believe that a man must be called of Cod, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

239The first prophet and head of the Church, Joseph Smith, was called by God, as was Moses of old, to be the leader of the people. The doctrines and basic structure and practices of the Church were received through revelation, not from the voice of the people in legislative assembly. Other men, successors in the prophetic office, have been called by God through the leaders of the Church. In fact, all officers in the Church-general, stake, and ward-are always called by men who preside over them. In this sense the Church is theocratic in structure.

240While the Church is theocratic in some respects, it is not strictly speaking a theocracy in the usual character known to us in history. While we recognize Christ as the head of the Church, and God as the source of our authority and law, still they have delegated to the body of the Church certain responsibilities and privileges which are democratic in character. Let us consider these.

II. Democratic Character

A. No one may hold any office in the Church without the sustaining vote of those over whom he presides. This is called the principle of common consent and came to us through revelation.

240No person is to be ordained to any office in this Church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that Church. (D&C 20:65)

240Officers in the Church, as stated above, are chosen by those in authority over them, but they cannot serve without the sustaining vote of the people. Moreover they are sustained not only at the time of their call to serve, but are presented to the people several times a year in ward, stake, and general conferences, to be re-sustained or not sustained by the people over whom they preside. Thus, while the people do not have the power to nominate, neither do those nominated have the right to serve without the consent of the people. The people have the final check on whether a person my preside over them.

240In the Doctrine and Covenants various offices of the Church are named, together with the persons who are to fill these offices. This revelation is presented to the people as the will of God, through Joseph Smith. Still, the Lord left it up to the people either to accept or reject those whom he had called:

240The above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof, for helps and for governments, for the work of the ministry, and the perfecting of my saints. And a commandment I give unto you, that you should fill all these offices and approve of those names which I have mentioned or else disapprove of them at my general conference. (D&C 124:143, 144)

240This certainly is showing respect for the judgment and freedom of the people and is wholly in keeping with the spirit of democracy.

240B. The basic doctrines and policies of the Church do not become binding upon the people until they are accepted by the people. The Book of Commandments, a collection of revelations and other important documents of the Church, which later developed into our present Doctrine and Covenants, though inspired and revealed by God through his chosen servants, did not become scripture and normative to the Church until it was voted upon by the priesthood, quorum by quorum. [^1] Likewise, the Pearl of Great Price, [^2] our fourth book of scripture, was accepted by the Church before it became scripture. The Manifesto, declaring the resolution of the Church to abandon the practice of plural marriage, was accepted by the vote of the people in conference assembled. [^3]

241C. All officers of the Church are subject to a periodic vote of confidence and to trial for misconduct. The first part of this proposition has already been indicated above. No official is exempt from trial for misconduct. We have in the Church several illustrations where leading authorities, such as apostles, have been excommunicated from the Church while in office. Even the president of the Church is subject to trial.

241And inasmuch as a President of the High Priesthood shall transgress, he shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who shall be assisted by twelve counselors of the High Priesthood; And their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning him. Thus, none shall be exempted from the justice and laws of God, that all things may be done in order and in solemnity before him according to truth and righteousness. (D&C 107:82-84)

241D. The Church believes strongly in the principle of free agency. Force and compulsion, persecution and authoritarianism have no place in the Church of Christ. This is beautifully portrayed in a passage on the exercise of the authority of the priesthood found in the Doctrine and Covenants:

241Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson-That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God. We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. Hence many are called, but few are chosen. No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile-Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. (Doctrine and Covenants 121: 33-44)

242In the Church, in contrast to man's relationship to the state, a man's relationship to authority is voluntary. He has considerable freedom to accept or to reject responsibilities in the Church, to be active or inactive. It is only when his behavior is detrimental to the common good that he is disciplined by the Church. His punishment is restricted to disfellowship or excommunication.

242We believe that all religious societies have a fight to deal with their members for disorderly conduct, according to the rules and regulations of such societies; provided that such dealings be for fellowship and good standing; but we do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the fight of property or life, to take from them this world's goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon them. They can only excommunicate them from their society, and withdraw from them their fellowship. We believe that men should appeal to the civic law for redress of all wrongs and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in time of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded. (D&C 134:10, 11)

242From the beginning, the revelations and teachings of the Church have placed confidence in the membership of the Church. The following passages bear out this fact:

242For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily, I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. (D&C 58:26-28)

242Teach the people true knowledge, and they will govern themselves. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 227)

243Joseph Smith was asked how he governed his people and preserved good order among them. He replied: "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves." [^4]

243E. In the Latter-day Saint Church nearly all men hold the priesthood, and the great majority of women, who are active members, hold positions of responsibility. This means that large numbers of the lay members of the Church are always working together in good fellowship, on a level of mutual respect, and with a feeling of equality toward each other. This wide participation, with no distinction between laity and clergy, cultivates the spirit of democracy in the Church.

243Our General Authorities have been called from all walks of life-business, law, education, agriculture, and public relations. Their earlier training does not separate them from the people, but helps them to share the point of view of the members.

243F. The spirit and teachings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, though they come to man from Him and are inspired of Deity, are also closely related to the fundamental assumptions of any democracy. Democracy assumes the essential dignity and worth of every individual and places man above the state or any other institution, and so does the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Democracy assumes the perfectibility of men and is opposed to slavery and caste, and so does the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, with its emphasis on eternal progression. Democracy assumes the equal right of all men to enjoy "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, or the opportunity to realize these goals; and the Gospel of Jesus Christ teaches the impartiality of God and the brotherhood of man. In a democracy the consent of the governed is essential in all important issues and practices. In the Church of Jesus Christ we also believe in common consent. In a democracy policies are arrived at through persuasion and not by bloodshed; in the Gospel of Jesus Christ man's freedom is also respected. [^5] In short, Jesus' teachings on humility, mercy, love, forgiveness, freedom, and respect for the individual are all in harmony with the assumptions and spirit of democracy.

Summary

The government in the Church is neither a pure theocracy nor a democracy. It is, we believe, a remarkable combination of the two in which men are called and inspired of God, but serve with the consent of the people and in the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Lord has given us leaders to guide us, but he has given us the privilege of accepting or rejecting them, and the responsibility of cooperating with those whom we do accept.

244One finds in the Latter-day Saint Church two attitudes which might on first acquaintance appear paradoxical. Members of the Church are loyal to their leaders. They pray for them continually, sustain them, and do their bidding voluntarily to a remarkable degree, at times even against their own personal wishes and their own judgment. The Church is highly centralized under authoritative leadership.

244On the other hand, there is also a strong individualism in the Church. Each member has had conferred upon him the Holy Ghost. He has as much right and responsibility to know that a prophet is speaking to him for God as that prophet has the right and responsibility to speak to him for God. Man is a free agent holding the priesthood of God, and is a co-worker with the leaders of the Church. The Church belongs to all members, as much to one as to another.

244We do not believe in infallibility in human leadership, not even in those who are called of God. Looking back through the pages of religious history, we find only one person without sin, namely the Savior. Even he had said to one who addressed him as "Good Master," "Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God." (Matt. 19:16, 17) Moses took the honor unto himself. Peter had to be rebuked by the Savior. Paul acknowledged that he was least worthy to be an apostle. Joseph Smith was strongly admonished by revelation to improve his ways.

244Obviously there is a good deal of the human element in human nature. And although men are called of God to speak for him as prophets and revelators, they are still men. They need the counsel and wisdom of one another, and their inspiration needs to be confirmed by the inspiration of those who follow their leadership. The Lord has placed, wisely indeed, the responsibility for his work upon the shoulders of all members of the Church. The leaders have the responsibility of taking initiative, of pointing out the way, of giving direction, of revealing God's will. The people have the obligation to follow righteous instruction, and to know, by the spirit of revelation, that their leaders are inspired of God, and are living worthy of their calling.

244This fusion of theocratic and democratic elements in Church government has served us well. Our Church is quite democratic in spirit and practice without the limitations of politics-of nominating and electing officers. Our Church is theocratic, with leaders speaking for God, but the final test of their right to speak is left with the people, who are privileged to accept or to reject them. There is no good reason why all the values of both systems of government-theocracy and democracy-cannot be enjoyed in the Church. This we have seen realized to a remarkable degree in our own experience in various divisions of the Church.

245The government of the Church is well constructed. When we, the members, carry in our hearts the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and serve one another and all men in love, all goes well in the Church. We must not expect perfection in human relations; but we should strive earnestly to increase in genuine Christian fellowship. The purpose of the Church is to promote such growth. Paul's words to the Ephesians express very well the purpose and character of church government:

245And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in a unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ; From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love. This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ; If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. (Eph. 4:11-23)

See Lyon, T. Edgar, Introduction to Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price, Chapter 3.

Ibid, Chapter 15.

Doctrine and Covenants, pp. 256, 257.

Millennial Star, XIII, p. 339.

These characteristics of democracy are formulated more fully in Myrdal, An American Dilemma, Harper Brothers, 1944, p. 8.

---
Notas:
[^1] To render loving service to the needy, sick and afflicted, and those who mourn. To help people learn to worship God and hold in reverence things sacred and holy. To build faith in God, in Jesus the Christ, and in the program of the Church.
[^2] To train each woman to be more effective and devoted in her roles of wife, mother and home-builder. To teach people the Gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that they will increase in faith and live its teachings. To provide an ideal setting for social life and friendship under the influence of the Gospel and the Church.
[^3] To bring increased learning, culture, and refinement into the lives of its members. To develop the personality and character of the youth through self-expression in all wholesome aspects of life: education, recreation, culture, service, and worship.
[^4] To strengthen the women of the Church in their faith in and discipleship of Christ.
[^5] And-this is meant seriously, not facetiously-to "provoke" their husbands and sons to good works, to do their duties in the priesthood and the Church.
