Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 36

Marriage and Family Life

We read in the creation-story in Genesis, "It is not good that man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. So the Lord created a woman, "and brought her unto the man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh. And they were naked; the man and his wife, and were not ashamed." (Gen. 2:18, 22-25)

263With this ancient account in Genesis, we are in full accord. God created man and woman to fulfill his purposes in the earth. He ordained that they should be one, declaring marriage to be the normal, healthful, and desirable state of man. In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord declares:

263And again, verily I say unto you, that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man. (D&C 49:15)

Reasons for Marriage

Marriage is good because it is one important and essential means through which man can realize the full measure of his creation. It is consistent with God's purpose in human life. Let us indicate briefly the functions of marriage as we understand them.

I. Companionship

"It is not good that the man (or the woman) should be alone." Man is a social being by nature. By himself he is not a complete human being. In the society of others, he develops his own personality, his speech, his ability to think, his moral and spiritual life. Man's greatest need beyond the physical necessities of life is to love and be loved, to be wanted and needed, to feel that he belongs to other human beings. Marriage affords two people the opportunity of knowing a continuous, intimate, and abiding companionship. Together each may feel the strength of two in meeting the vicissitudes that normally occur in human experience.

263Man and woman complement each other. In a good marriage their basic needs, biological, social, moral, and spiritual, may be realized and their personalities in rich measure fulfilled. Men and women know this and marriage, despite its burdens and failures, remains, therefore, the desired state of normal adults.

II. Children

The other great value of marriage is children and family life. In the beginning man and woman were told to "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it." (Gen. 1:28) Man, like the whole of organic creation, was made to be creative and productive, and life is not completely fulfilled in marriage except in child-bearing and in child-rearing.

264Marriage, to Latter-day Saints, includes a third partner in the relationship. Children born to us are also children of God. They belong to him because he created them his spirit-children in a pre-earth existence. [^1] The Creator, our Spiritual Father, designed life on the earth as being good for man, a step in eternal progression. Hence, in becoming parents, we are co-operating, with God in bringing "to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." When we bear children and give them a rich opportunity to learn of God and his will and purpose in their lives, then we are fulfilling his wishes and contributing greatly to his plan. God wants us to have children and to teach them by precept and example Christian faith and ideals.

264Latter-day Saint families are quite large on an average. The birth rate in the stakes of the Church in 1955 was 37.64 per 1000 against a death rate of 5.53 per 1000. [^2] The large size of families is encouraged by our faith that man's life on earth is part of God's creative plan. We have faith in life, in its potential value and goodness for those who will learn and do God's will. We believe in having large families provided:

264It is not our place to judge others who may disagree with this philosophy or in any way to cast reflection on parents with small families. No one knows all the circumstances of another. And everyone has a right to choose his own values as long as he does not jeopardize the equal rights of his fellow men.

Latter-Day Saint Ideals of Marriage

We believe in marriage, and we have teachings and practices which are designed to strengthen marriage and enrich family life. Let us consider some of these, which are either unique or receive great emphasis among Latter-days Saints.

I. Marriage for Time and Eternity

Latter-day Saints practice what is called temple marriage. We recognize civil marriages performed by the justice of the peace, or a minister, or a bishop. But we have another marriage, performed only in the temples of the Church, which we believe to be of greater meaning and worth. This we call temple marriage, or marriage for both time and eternity.

265In civil marriages a man and a woman are married "until death do you part." The couple may have feelings of "eternal" love in their hearts, but the very ceremony itself places a time limit on the duration of their marriage. Elizabeth Barrett Browning, who knew such a rich life of love and companionship with Robert Browning, expressed a hope that their love might endure beyond the grave.

265How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love thee to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight For the ends of Being and ideal Grace, I love thee to the level of everyday's Most quiet need, by sun and candle light. I love thee freely, as men strive for Right; I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise. I love thee with the passion put to use In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith. I love thee with a love I seemed to lose With my lost saints-I love thee with the breath, Smiles, tears, of all my life!-and, if God choose, I shall but love thee better after death.

265Elizabeth Barrett Browning would likely have rejoiced in the Latter-day Saint view of marriage. When we go to our temples to be married in sincerity and worthily, we are promised in the marriage ceremony that we shall be companions, husband and wife, throughout eternity. And this is not all! We are also promised that children who are born to us will belong to us everlastingly. These promises are, of course, contingent upon faithfulness to each other and to the ideals and purposes of the Gospel of Christ.

265The exact nature of marriage in life after death has not been revealed. We are told, however, that those who are married for time and eternity and live worthily shall receive a glory-which means a joy and fulness of life-beyond that attainable by the unmarried. In fact the married are promised the highest degree of glory or blessedness in the celestial kingdom of God.

265In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood (meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage): And if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. (D&C 131:1-4)

266The promise is made that they shall have eternal increase. In some way not revealed to man, those who are married will help God to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, even after death. There shall be no end to their kingdom and no end to their creative living in behalf of others.

266We believe that this temple marriage-ceremony through which man and woman are married for time and eternity, is a sacred and divine ordinance and is to be administered by those who hold the priesthood of God on behalf of those who believe in immortality and who desire in their marriage to live in harmony with Christian ideals.

II. Values of Temple Marriage

We have already indicated the value of temple marriage for the life to come. Faith in and preparation for temple marriage brings some immediate values to one's marriage here and now.

267Marriage is an act of faith. Faith is ever hopeful and idealistic in character. Great ventures in faith are enhanced by the idealism and trust born of religion. Temple marriage can bring the optimum of religious faith and sanctification to the sacred order of marriage.

III. Prayer

Latter-day Saints believe in personal and in family prayer. Children are taught to pray alone, to pray in secret each day and learn personal communion with our Father in heaven.

267We are also encouraged to pray daily as a family. This is difficult to do in this complex age of noise and haste, but it is all the more needed because of these characteristics of modern life. Family prayer is best achieved if it is begun the first night of marriage by the bride and groom and is continued. Thus little children become established in a fine tradition quite naturally and happily. When they are quite young, they take their turn in giving the prayer. Individually, members of a family gain strength through family prayers, and their feeling of unity is increased.

IV. Home Evening

About a half-century ago a fine tradition called "home evening" was begun among Latter-day Saints. A certain night of the week, Monday in our parent's household, was set aside for home evening. Everyone stayed home. Children helped plan the program. Father read from the scriptures, commented on their meaning and the children asked questions. Some evenings there were special treats in the nature of homemade ice cream, hot-cross buns, or some other tasty refreshment. The evening was closed with family prayer.

268Modern life, with its heavy and diversified schedule, plus the intrusion on the privacy of the home by telephone, radio, and television, have all but destroyed leisurely home life. The Church makes repeated efforts to renew this fine tradition of home evening. Sometimes it is called "family hour," which suggests that the occasion may be celebrated equally well at times by going out together as a family.

Chastity

Latter-day Saints believe in chastity. They are taught that intimate relations between men and women are to be reserved exclusively for marriage. This, we know is the will of God. It is one of the Ten Commandments: "Thou shall not commit adultery." The Savior reiterated the command, adding a spiritual and inward meaning to it in his Sermon on the Mount:

268Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit adultery; But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. (Matt. 5:27, 28)

268Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. (Matt. 5:8)

268In a revelation to Joseph Smith, dealing with moral standards, we are admonished again to be chaste:

268Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else. And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out. Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out. But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive; but if he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. (D&C 42:22-26) [^3]

268Reasons for this divine commandment are evident; some are more social and others more personal in character. Every child of God born into the world needs the loving care of a father and mother. The child's purpose in life can best be realized in the atmosphere of a good home. Since children are the fruit of intimate love, thoughtful and socially responsible persons will, for the sake of the children, wish to conceive and bear children only under the ideal conditions of marriage.

269Furthermore, every woman entering upon the creative, responsible, and often painful and difficult experiences of pregnancy and child-birth needs and merits the moral support and loving care of a husband. When we consider the welfare of both mother and child, marriage alone in our society provides a favorable setting for procreation.

269Chastity is just as desirable on personal grounds as it is for social reasons. Intimate love is not merely physical nor biological by nature, but involves the entire personality. It affects man's whole nature. Out of wedlock, a couple cannot be one. It is only in marriage that we promise to love, honor, and cherish one another in the presence of God and man. It is only in marriage that we can prove our complete devotion and loyalty to one another by living, working, and sacrificing together.

269Unchastity breeds distrust, fear, and contempt; it encourages unbridled passion and tends to make of another person a means to one's own selfish desire.

269Chastity develops self-control, trust, an attitude of reverence for personality, and frees the individual from the danger of sacrificing the total welfare of himself and others to a limited and selfish desire.

269There is no double standard of morality in the Church. Both men and women have the same need and responsibility to be chaste and pure of heart.

Summary

We believe marriage is ordained of God for the good of man. A good marriage helps immeasurably to satisfy many of man's basic needs. We believe in children and in having large families if they are healthy and of good heredity. We believe in family prayer and in devoting evenings to family life. We believe in chastity before marriage and in complete loyalty and fidelity to one's companion after marriage. And we believe that if marriage is entered into with these ideals and is sealed by the priesthood of God and in his House, it will last for time and for eternity with unlimited promises of everlasting joy.

Review Chapter 8.

According to report given at the 126th Annual Conference in April, 1956.

Read also Jacob 2 in the Book of Mormon.

---
Notas:
[^1] To render loving service to the needy, sick and afflicted, and those who mourn. To help people learn to worship God and hold in reverence things sacred and holy. To build faith in God, in Jesus the Christ, and in the program of the Church.
[^2] To train each woman to be more effective and devoted in her roles of wife, mother and home-builder. To teach people the Gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that they will increase in faith and live its teachings. To provide an ideal setting for social life and friendship under the influence of the Gospel and the Church.
[^3] To bring increased learning, culture, and refinement into the lives of its members. To develop the personality and character of the youth through self-expression in all wholesome aspects of life: education, recreation, culture, service, and worship.
