Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

Chapter 38

The Church and Economic Life

The spiritual leaders of the Bible have warned mankind against the evil of loving riches more than God, fellow men, and ideals. Amos chastised the inhabitants of Samaria in the name of the Lord because they were "at ease in Zion." In fury he condemned,

278YeÂ�that lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of music, like David; That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. (Amos 6:4-6)

278The idle rich of his day had their hearts set upon riches, won by deceit and oppression, and were not concerned about the suffering and affliction of fellow-Israelites-the orphan, the fatherless, and the poor descendants of Joseph.

278Jesus knew how men are tempted to sacrifice their integrity to gain this world's goods. On numerous occasions he tried to place the economic aspect of life in its proper place.

278For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole earth, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? (Mark 8:36, 37)

278And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. (Luke 12:15)

278Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. (Matt. 6:19-21)

278The Apostle Paul pleaded for contentment and the pursuit of things of the spirit:

278But godliness with contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content, But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses. (1 Tim. 6:6-12)

Latter-Day Saint Economic Philosophy

Hardly had the Church of Jesus Christ been restored, when Joseph Smith received revelations through which the Saints were instructed to place spiritual values above economic values. They were encouraged to be equal in temporal affairs, helping and sustaining one another in their economic life. The following passages from the Doctrine and Covenants illustrate this fact:

279And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me. And again I say unto you, let every man esteem his brother as himself, For what man among you having twelve sons, and is no respector of them and they serve him obediently, and he saith unto the one: Be thou clothed in robes and sit thou here; and to the other: Be thou clothed in rags and sit thou there-and looketh upon his sons and saith I am just: Behold, this I have given you as a parable, and it is even as I am. I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine. (D&C 38:24-27)

279Nevertheless, in your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld. (D&C 70:14)

279That you may be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things. For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things. (Doctrine and Covenants 78: 5-6)

279Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved! Wo unto you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not contrite, and whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not stayed from laying hold upon other men's goods, whose eyes are full of greediness, and who will not labor with your own hands. (D&C 56:16, 17)

279The Book of Mormon is, in teaching and spirit, closely related to the point of view expressed in these passages from the Doctrine and Covenants. Time and time again, writers of this ancient record warned their people against pride based on economic well-being and encouraged generosity toward those in need. [^1]

279And now behold, my brethren, this is the word which I declare unto you, that many of you have begun to search for gold, and for silver, and for all manner of precious ores, in the which this land, which is a land of promise unto you and to your seed, doth abound most plentifully. And the hand of providence hath smiled upon you most pleasingly, that you have obtained many riches; and because some of you have obtained more abundantly than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they. And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that God justifieth you in this thing? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But he condemneth you, and if ye persist in these things his judgments must speedily come unto you. O that he would show you that he can pierce you, and with one glance of his eye he can smite you to the dust! O that he would rid you from this iniquity and abomination. And, O that ye would listen unto the word of his commands, and let not this pride of your hearts destroy your souls! Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good-to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. (Jacob 2:12-19)

280And again Alma commanded that the people of the church should impart of their substance, every one according to that which he had; if he have more abundantly he should impart more abundantly; and of him that had but little, but little should be required; and to him that had not should be given. And thus they should impart of their substance of their own free will and good desires towards God, and to those priests that stood in need, yea, and to every needy, naked soul. And this he said unto them, having been commanded of God; and I they did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants. (Mosiah 18:27-29)

280The entire Book of Mormon story is an illustration to Latter-day Saints of the evil of placing economic interests above human and spiritual concerns. The Book relates again and again how righteous living brought prosperity, which in turn, developed pride, which brought on strife and conflict, which led to war, destruction, and poverty.

280As early as 1831, when the Church was in its second year, an effort was made to establish an economic order which would enable the Saints to place spiritual and human values above material interests. It was called the Law of Consecration, or a System of Stewardships.

The Law of Consecration

This new socio-economic order was to operate somewhat as follows: Its basic assumption was that the earth is the Lord's and men are but stewards of his property. Upon accepting the law, a man consecrated by deed everything he possessed to the Lord, that is, to his representative, the bishop of the Church. The bishop in turn deeded back to him property and goods sufficient to fill his needs, depending on the size of his family, his wants, needs, and circumstances. At harvesttime he was to keep what was needed and turn the surplus over to the bishop to give to the needy and afflicted and also for the common good, such as public buildings, and welfare. Otherwise business operations were to proceed under a free enterprise system. [^2]

281The basic philosophy of the Law of Consecration was to make men more united and more equal in temporal things that they might be one in spiritual things. At the outset men gave all they possessed and received in return according to their need and the common lot of other men. The giving of surplus to the Church was to prevent the accumulation of wealth and to keep people equal, and organized to help one another in their hour of need. This was long before social security or any other similar government program was in practice.

281The Law of Consecration established in Jackson County, Missouri did not function long, roughly from 1831 to 1834. The causes of failure were several: Members of the Church were persecuted and driven out of the state of Missouri; land was cheap and rewarding to the enterprising pioneer; the brethren who administered the program lacked experience in economic planning and administration. Finally, this ideal order was too much for their human nature. Our people were not capable of the high idealism which the plan presupposes.

281Political, economic, and human factors combined to make the plan unworkable at the time, but Latter-day Saints still take pride in the spiritual idealism which motivated the effort to live it. And the ideal of having economic interests serve spiritual ends has remained with us from that time until now.

Tithing

In 1838, the Law of Consecration, which had necessarily become inoperative as the Saints had been driven out of Jackson County, Missouri, to Far West in the same state, was replaced by the ancient law of tithing. [^3] Henceforth members of the Church were asked to give one-tenth of all their increase annually. This principle has been operative in the Church ever since, except for a brief period when the United Order was functioning in some settlements of the West.

281Tithing is not a tax, but a voluntary contribution paid in private by the member of the Church to his bishop. Except for the bishop, no one in the ward knows whether a person is a full, part, or non-tithe payer. Tithe paying is an affair between a wage earner and the Lord, with the bishop there as a father and counselor to represent the Lord.

282Tithing is interpreted as one-tenth of a man's income. To a farmer or business man this means, of course, one-tenth of his net income, not of his gross income. A person on salary, or a wage earner, who uses all of his income for personal and family living, pays ten per cent of his salary or wages.

282Every wage earner, rich or poor, is asked to pay tithing, ten per cent of his income. Tithing, in other words, is not a graduated-income offering, but is to be paid by everyone on the same percentage basis. Even the poor and the widow give one-tenth of their meager income; but, if needed, they receive support from the Church. Boys and girls who earn money cutting lawns, and baby-sitting and in other ways are encouraged to remember the Lord and to give to him and his cause. The tithing, paid to the ward bishop, goes into the general funds of the Church, which are administered by the Presiding Bishop of the Church under the direction of the First Presidency. Some of the funds are returned to the wards and stakes for building maintenance and construction; others remain at Church headquarters to be spent on general expenses of the Church, such as hospitals, education, missionary service, and temple work.

282To the non-members of the Church, and to some members as well, tithing appears often as a large demand upon a person's income, particularly in addition to income tax. Viewed from the point of economic self-interest, this is true. But from another point of view, tithe-paying is a privilege and not a burden. "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof." Faith in him, and a love for the good earth and its bounteous gifts to man, make it easy to return one-tenth to him and his work. Faith in the Church and the worthy causes which it fosters in one's own and family life, and in the lives of others, encourages tithe-paying. Then, too, we like the voluntary character of this principle. Tithing keeps the collection plate out of Church, thereby not detracting from worship. Tithing distributes wealth indirectly among Church members, being used to provide like services to all. Tithing has made the Church strong financially. The Latter-day Saint Church is well-housed, has a fine educational and recreational program, is out of debt, and takes care of those in need. The payment of tithing develops faith, unselfishness, and loyalty in the tithe payer. It helps him to love God more than mammon.

Other Offerings

The Latter-day Saint has many opportunities to give. Once a month, usually on the first Sunday, he fasts for two meals, if he is well, and gives his saving to the Church for the care of the worthy poor. In the winter of 1855-56 grasshoppers, a drouth, and large numbers of immigrants combined to create a critical shortage of food in Utah for the early pioneers. The emergency was met through the establishment of a fast-day as described by one of the leaders of that day, George A. Smith.

283In all these times of scarcity measures were taken to supply those who were unable to furnish themselves. A fast day was proclaimed for the Church on the first Thursday of each month, and the food saved in that way distributed among the poor; and thousands of persons who had an abundance of bread put their families on rations, in order to save the same for those who could not otherwise obtain it. And so wise and liberal were the regulations during these periods of scarcity, incident upon settling the territory, that no one perished or even suffered materially for want of food, and all were remarkably healthy. (Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 109-110)

283The program has continued to this day.

283Latter-day Saints contribute to the Welfare Program, to ward buildings and budget funds, and to the support of missionaries in the field. No one is happy in the Church who does not have the spirit of giving because opportunities to give of one's means, time, and of oneself constantly confront the Latter-day Saint.

Other Economic Enterprises

In the past century, as the necessity arose, the Church has been extremely flexible in venturing forth in various economic and social enterprises designed for both the material and spiritual blessing of its membership. Since most of these lie in the past, we shall mention them briefly here.

I. The City of Zion

In 1833, Joseph Smith communicated to his people in Missouri a plan for a city of Zion. This plan called for the establishment of communities one mile square with public buildings in the center and farms and shops outside the cities. Everyone, farmer as well as city-folk, would live in the small city and enjoy the comforts and social values of community life. And those living in the cities would have large lots, live in single dwellings, enjoy wide streets, gardens, flowers, and fruit trees.

283This early community plan was designed to avoid the evils of both isolated rural life and those of the big city. There would be no loneliness and lack of community spirit on the one hand, and no slums, invitation to crime, and the cold impersonal character of big city life on the other.

283 Mormon colonization throughout the West followed, in large measure, this original plan for Independence, Missouri. As a result, Latter-day Saints were pioneers in community life as well as in conquering the desert. Latter-day Saints have, in their tradition, a strong sense of community, something which is disappearing too rapidly in the anonymity of city life and through the influx of mass-media of communication, such as the automobile, radio, and television.

II. The United Order

In 1874 Brigham Young introduced a modified form of the Law of Consecration, which is known as the United Order. In quite a number of communities people pooled their resources and had all economic assets in common. This enterprise lasted for a few years, decades in some communities, but was given up in favor of the free-enterprise system.

III. Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution

At a time when merchants in the pioneer territory of Utah were taking undue economic advantage of the Saints with monopolistic prices, the Church established a cooperative mercantile institution called Zion s Cooperative Mercantile Institution. A central store served as a wholesale purchasing and distributing center. In each ward in Salt Lake City, and in each sizable settlement throughout the territory, co-ops were established, owned by the people, which served as retail outlets and which brought merchandise at a reasonable price to the settlers. This system functioned well for decades in some communities, but was finally given up as the need diminished and as people failed to make the exceptional effort which cooperation requires.

284Other things have been tried. The Church has established businesses at a time when private capital was not available. Some of these still continue as Church-owned enterprises. An illustration is the manufacture of sugar from sugar beets. The Church brought the first machinery for the production of beet sugar from France and still owns the controlling interest in the Utah-Idaho Sugar Manufacturing Co.

The Welfare Plan

The present economic enterprise of the Latter-day Saints of a church-wide character, which affects every member of the Church and requires a great output of planning, labor, and means, is called the Church Welfare Program. It was begun in 1936 under the inspired leadership of President Heber J. Grant. At the time, our people, like others in the United States and throughout much of the world, were weathering a severe depression. Our people were decreasing in some of the pioneer virtues of independence, self-reliance, and cooperation. In their place there began to develop a feeling of dependency on the government for support and a consequent loss of initiative and self-effort.

284After careful study and prayer, a plan was presented to the Church which has enjoyed continuous growth and expansion since. Some of the methods used in the plan have been experimental and have been discarded or improved, but the basic philosophy and purposes of the plan have remained essentially the same. The underlying goals of the plan might be stated as follows:

A. The development of independence and self-reliance in each member of the Church, teaching and helping each person to take better care of himself and his family.

B. The development of the spirit of brotherhood and cooperation among fellow-givers, teaching men to work together for those in need.

C. The production of the necessities of life for the blessing of the poor, the needy and distressed.

D. The building and maintaining of a functioning organization-which is in truth the whole Church itself-that is in a position to meet any emergency which may arise to one or all of its members.

285In these purposes we see a wedding of the material and spiritual needs of men, which is so characteristic of both Latter-day Saint doctrine and practice.

285A brief outline of the functioning of the Welfare Plan, by which these purposes are implemented, is something as follows: A general committee decides approximately how many people in the Church will need material goods and what those needs will be for the coming year Then these necessities of life are allocated among the members of the Church to produce and place in storehouses to be distributed among the worthy needy or distressed of the Church upon the recommendation of the bishop. The organizational set-up is somewhat as follows (in a simplified form):

285General Committee

Region Region Region

Stake Stake Stake Stake

Ward Ward Ward Ward

Priesthood Quorum Relief Society

285A certain allotment is given to each region to produce. A region consists of a number of stakes. The region in turn divides its allotment among its stakes to produce. Stakes own farms or factories in which they seek to meet their production quotas. The wards in each stake are called upon to produce their share of the stake-production quota. The bishops of the wards call upon the priesthood quorums and the Relief Society to produce labor, crops, and goods to meet ward-quotas.

286The aim of the whole program is to have the Saints produce what is needed for those in distress. As much as possible, money is eliminated from the operation. Those who receive help are encouraged and given opportunity to earn their support if they are able. Each family, quorum, ward, stake, and region, respectively, is encouraged to be as independent and self-reliant as possible, calling upon larger units in the program to help as needed.

Summary

The Church Welfare Plan is a large program requiring a great deal of voluntary labor and cooperation given in the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is a practical expression of being "my brother's keeper."

286The Church is interested in the economic welfare of its people. It has a program through which it takes care of the needy of the Church.

286The Church places spiritual welfare above economic welfare, and invites its members to give voluntarily and generously to the work of the Church. A Latter-day Saint gives freely to the Church.

286The Church is in a strong economic position at the present time, able to undertake a large building, educational, welfare, and charity program.

The Church has never been opposed to wealth, if it is obtained honestly and used for the good of others. Note Jacob 2:16-19.

The reader will note that this plan is neither communistic nor socialistic as these systems are known in history, but something different from both.

Note Gen. 14:20; Mal. 3:8-10; D&C 119.

---
Notas:
[^1] Some people worship God in meditation and prayer. They have been likened unto a vessel, an empty vessel, one which may be filled by the Spirit of God. The classic example of this type of religious life is that of the mystic, found in the great religious tradition. He is not at home in this world of multiplicity and change, and longs to find his rest in God. Therefore, he flees the world of thought and sense and finds unity of life in his oneness with God.
[^2] To train each woman to be more effective and devoted in her roles of wife, mother and home-builder. To teach people the Gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that they will increase in faith and live its teachings. To provide an ideal setting for social life and friendship under the influence of the Gospel and the Church.
[^3] To bring increased learning, culture, and refinement into the lives of its members. To develop the personality and character of the youth through self-expression in all wholesome aspects of life: education, recreation, culture, service, and worship.
