Lowell L. Bennion, Introduction to the Gospel ( 1959)

The Origin and Position of the Church Among Other Religions of Mankind

(Comprising Chapters 41 and 42)

The Restoration of The Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ

The Position of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Among the Religions of Mankind

Chapter 41

The Restoration of the Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ

Christian denominations have had various origins, each highly complex, involving political, social, and personal, as well as religious factors. In order to understand more fully the origin of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, it may be helpful to review briefly the beginnings of some other religious groups in Christendom.

Church Beginnings

301The Greek Orthodox Church, which broke officially and finally with the Roman Church in 1054, also claims continuous authority through its bishops and patriarchs back to apostolic times. The Episcopal Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic Church in the sixteenth century, like the Greek Catholic Church, also claims to be a true Christian church through an unbroken relationship to the bishops of the early Christian Church.

301The Latter-day Saints have no ties with these churches, which claim continuity through history with the Pristine Gospel and Church as taught by Jesus and his apostles. In fact, we believe that no Christian Church has retained continuity of authority and doctrine from apostolic times to the present.

301Martin Luther, for example, was incensed over the gross materialism and the immoral practices pertaining to the sale of indulgences of the mother-church of which he was a priest. In the beginning, Luther had no quarrel with Catholic doctrine. The doctrinal and ecclesiastical changes in Lutheranism came after the Catholic Church had rejected his efforts to reform the moral life of the church. Certainly Christianity has known none more courageous in their fight for the right than such reformers as Wyclif, Huss, and Martin Luther. We honor them for their courage and their accomplishment in bringing increased freedom of thought and a sense of personal responsibility into the lives of Christians.

302 John Wesley, chief founder of Methodism, is another remarkable reformer in Christian history. While he and his brother Charles, sons and grandsons of pastors, were students at Oxford University in England, they were appalled at the lack of genuine religious devotion among their fellow students as well as in the Church of England generally. To correct this deficiency they organized a club wherein they cultivated earnestly prayer, Bible-reading, and participation in holy communion. They were called, many things by their more worldly colleagues, but the word "Methodist" emerged as their final name.

302Latter-day Saints have tremendous respect for the founders of many Protestant faiths and recognize the values which they introduced into Christianity. However, we also recognize their limitations, chief of which is that they were trying to remodel an old house instead of clearing ground and building anew.

302The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is not a Protestant faith. It did not originate in an effort to reform or remodel an existing Christian faith. Correctly speaking, the Church cannot be classified in either of the two best-known divisions of Christendom, Catholicism or Protestantism.

302The Latter-day Saint Church does not have a dominant doctrine or a single, all-pervading emphasis. The Church cannot be characterized by any one doctrinal interest.

The Origin of the Latter-Day Saint Church

As already indicated in a recent chapter, [^1] the Latter-day Saint movement had its beginning in a boy's search for truth. Joseph Smith, who was born on December 23, 1805, in Sharon, Vermont, moved with his fathers family to Manchester, New York. In this community he came in contact with vigorous and confusing debate among the three dominant denominations of the community, Methodism, Presbyterianism, and the Baptist Church.

303Joseph himself belonged to none of these religions. In his fifteenth year, he was too young to pass critical judgment on them. His was neither the interest of a scholar nor the zeal of a reformer. He simply wished to know which church was the true church of Christ, for it was clear to his unsophisticated view of life that contending and opposite viewpoints could not all be inspired of God.

303One day, while reading this passage from James 1:5. "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him," the realization came to him that he was in that very position. With child-like simplicity, he decided to ask God for help. Thus, he went directly to the source of religion, of life and truth, by-passing scholars, authorities, and even the ancient record of revelation, the Bible itself. He turned to his Maker even as Moses, Amos, Jeremiah, and Jesus had done before him. No one has told the story of the answer he received as well as he himself did in 1838, so we shall let him relate his experience in his own words:

303Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of the country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here!" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, and some for the Baptist. For, notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased; yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued-priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions. I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely, my mother, Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia. During this time of great excitement my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult was so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others. In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it? While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally. After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction-not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being-just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other-This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right-and which I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (Pearl of Great Price p. 46, verses 5-19)

The Restoration

Joseph Smith was not the first to learn that Christian churches departed from the spirit, purpose, and teachings of the Pristine Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ. This was recognized by many men before him, such as Luther and Wesley. Joseph Smith was not the first person in Christian history who essayed to restore to the Gospel and Church its pristine character. Alexander Campbell, and others, were making an earnest effort to do so, even earlier than he.

305The Prophet Joseph's originality consisted in his direct approach to God on the subject. He went to him with a believing heart and with an open, intelligent mind uncluttered with preconceived ideas or with personal prejudice about religion. His was simply the desire to know, and he believed God would tell him.

305His simple prayer was answered with a revelation as remarkable as any recorded in holy writ. And herein lies the very heart and spirit of our religion. Jesus Christ spoke to the youthful seeker after wisdom and made known to him the need for the restoration of his Gospel and his Church. The idea of restoration came from Deity, though it was in response to a need to know on the part of man.

305In this religious experience, which Latter-day Saints call the first vision, Joseph learned that God lives, that Jesus is in his image, a separate and distinct person, and that revelation from Deity is as genuine and objectively real as it was once thought to have been in the lives of Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the Apostle Paul.

306Step by step, from 1820 to 1844, the year of his death, the Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ were restored from Deity through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, who was called of God to do this work. When his work was finished, he had been the means, in the hands of God, of bringing to mankind the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, of bringing us back to the fundamental plan of life which God had prepared for man even before the latter came to earth to live. Here we shall indicate a few of the important steps in this restoration.

The Book of Mormon Made Known

After the boy Joseph received the vision of the Father and Son, he naturally wished to share the good news with others. His own father and mother believed him, but the first minister to whom he related this momentous experience treated it with contempt, telling him that revelation and visions had ceased with the ancient apostles. The next few years were trying ones for Joseph as he relates in his own story:

306I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects-all united to persecute me. It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself. However, it was nevertheless a fact that l had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had beth seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of the light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (Pearl of Great Price, p. 49, verses 22-25)

307Nearly three and one-half years after this vision, Joseph was engaged in earnest prayer one evening upon his retirement to bed, asking for forgiveness of his youthful follies and for reassurance of his acceptance unto God, when he received another heavenly manifestation, which he describes in some detail and in straightforward simple language:

307While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me. He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be beth good and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;Â�(Pearl of Great Price, p. 50, verses 30-34)

307This heavenly messenger, Moroni, had lived upon the American Continent, the last survivor of a cultured and civilized people. He had buried the records of his people early in the Fifth Century A.D. These had been inscribed over a period of many centuries on plates of gold by Moroni and his forebears.

307 Moroni told Joseph Smith about his people and also of Joseph's forthcoming mission of bringing forth their record which he would be able to translate "by the gift and power of God." Moroni also explained to him the necessity of the restoration of the Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ and that if he, Joseph, remained worthy and faithful, he would be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about this restoration of all things. Moroni also quoted Old Testament passages and showed how these would also find fulfilment in the restoration.

308Joseph was approaching eighteen years of age when he received these instructions from Moroni. He was required to wait four years, during which time he matured and proved himself and was instructed annually by Moroni, before he received the ancient record in September of 1827. By the spring of 1830 Joseph had completed and published this record, which is known today as the Book of Mormon. [^2]

308In the process of studying and translating this record, Joseph Smith and his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, came upon many teachings which caused them to wonder and to question their own religious concepts. One of these questions had to do with the doctrine of baptism for the remission of sins. The Book of Mormon was so explicit and different in its teaching on this subject from the teachings to which they were accustomed that they were determined to find out the truth concerning baptism.

The Restoration of the Priesthood

By this time Joseph knew where to go to receive instruction on religious questions. His prayers had been answered before in accordance with his need and his righteous desire. On May 15, 1829, he and Oliver Cowdery went into the woods to pray. The answer to their prayer we shall give in Joseph's own words:

308We still continued the work of translation, when, in the ensuing month (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying: Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me. Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me-after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands, on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood-for so we were commanded. The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys to the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the fifteenth of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized. Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, as soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy, when, standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of this Church, and many other things connected with the Church, and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. (Pearl of Great Price, p. 56, verses 68-73)

309A short time afterwards, in the same year of 1829, Peter, James, and John appeared and gave to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. [^3] With this priesthood came all the authority necessary to represent the Father and Son on the earth and to re-establish the Church of Jesus Christ with all of its gifts, powers, and blessings for mankind.

The Organization of the Church

On April 6, 1830, in the house of Peter Whitmer, Sr., one of the men who had believed Joseph's story about the restoration of the priesthood and the translation of the Book of Mormon record, the Church was officially organized according to a commandment received of God and in compliance with the laws of New York. Six men, who had been previously baptized were present. [^4] In a democratic and Christian spirit, they acknowledged their willingness to sustain Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as their leaders and teachers and also to assume the responsibilities of discipleship in the Church of Christ. The men were baptized again and confirmed members of the Church, received the Holy Ghost, and administered the sacrament of the Lords Supper to one another. Great rejoicing and the outpouring of the influence of the Holy Ghost were present on this occasion. The re-establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith was now an accomplished fact. These young men, under the leadership of the youthful prophet, set about to proclaim the good news to the world. The Book of Mormon was being published that same month. It contained many teachings of the Gospel as they were given by the Savior himself and by prophets who had lived on the American Continent. Other revelations could be received of God as needed to establish fully the true Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ.

Summary

In this chapter we have briefly retold the origin of the Latter-day Saint movement. We have noted that it has no ties with those Christian Churches that claim continuity through the ages with the Pristine Church. Neither is it a protest against a mother-church. Our Church began in a boy's desire to find the true Gospel and Church of Christ. In his quest he turned directly to God for an answer. The answer he received was as simple and direct as was his question. He was told to join no existing Christian Church, for none had the Gospel in its pristine purity or was endowed with the authority of God.

310It is no wonder that such a bold assertion, though told in the language of a youth, was met with astonishment and ridicule by those whose faith it naturally discredited. It is no wonder either that Joseph Smith's story is heard with wonder and skepticism in our own sophisticated day, when people look askance at the miraculous, at heavenly visions, revelations, angels, and divine gifts of the spirit. This is not surprising. To us who have grown up in the Church, having heard the story from our earliest recollections of life, it seems natural and reasonable; to the adult who hears the story for the first time in his maturity, it cannot help but elicit wonder, astonishment, and often skepticism.

310On the one hand, it is astonishing. To our knowledge, no such story had been told since the New Testament times of Jesus, Peter, and Paul. On the other hand, the restoration of the Gospel and Church of Jesus Christ, as told by the Prophet Joseph Smith, is as natural and reasonable as it is remarkable. What could be more natural than a boy's search for truth? What is more reasonable to those who believe in a living God, Creator of men, than to approach him in prayer? What is more natural than for a loving Father to make known his will to an earnest, believing son?

310We shall turn, in our next chapter, to an explanation of the need for this restoration which took place through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Chapter 35.

For a description of its content, review Chapter 16.

Review Chapters 31 and 32 for a more detailed discussion on priesthood. See also D&C 128.

Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Jr., David Whitmer, Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith.

---
Notas:
[^1] Some churches claim to be the true church of Jesus Christ by tracing their authority directly and continuously back to Christ through his apostles. This is the position of the Roman Catholic Church, which claims its authority through apostolic succession in a direct line from Christ to Peter through successive bishops and popes at Rome.
[^2] To train each woman to be more effective and devoted in her roles of wife, mother and home-builder. To teach people the Gospel of Jesus Christ in such a way that they will increase in faith and live its teachings. To provide an ideal setting for social life and friendship under the influence of the Gospel and the Church.
[^3] To bring increased learning, culture, and refinement into the lives of its members. To develop the personality and character of the youth through self-expression in all wholesome aspects of life: education, recreation, culture, service, and worship.
[^4] To strengthen the women of the Church in their faith in and discipleship of Christ.
