Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Introduction

Prophets Speak to You Personally

In congregations throughout the world and in many languages, Latter-day Saints sing with great enthusiasm, "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days." (Hymns, 1985, no. 19.) While William Fowler originally wrote this hymn in honor of the first prophet of this latter-day dispensation of times, it is now traditionally sung in recognition of the living prophet—the man whom millions sustain as the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The world, in general, is unaware that God has placed a living prophet on the earth today. On the other hand, there are many Latter-day Saints who, though they profess their gratitude for a living prophet in song and testimony, often take lightly the words of counsel proferred by that prophet.

I recall hearing the story of two missionaries who engaged a non-Mormon in a conversation about religion. The discussion led to the topic of prophets, and the two missionaries fervently testified that God had called a living prophet in our day.

"Do you mean to tell me," inquired the man, "that there is a prophet of God on the earth today?"

"Yes, sir!" they replied.

"How does he communicate God's will?" asked the inquirer, who was now very interested.

"Well," one of the missionaries responded, "he speaks at conference, and he writes regular articles in our Church magazines."

With budding curiosity, the man asked, "What did this prophet say most recently?"

There was a moment of uncomfortable silence as each missionary looked hopefully at the other for an answer to the, man's question. Finally, they slowly shrugged their shoulders in embarrassment. In subdued voices, they admitted their ignorance. "We haven't read his articles lately," one said. "You see, we've been so busy . . ."

How can one who professes to believe in a living prophet be "too busy" to listen to or read his words? Is the prophet just an administrative head of the Church, or does he really speak the mind and will of God?

How important is the Lord's prophet to you personally? Beyond the fact that he holds the keys of priesthood authority that authorize the saving covenants and ordinances of the gospel that will affect your eternal life, what difference does, or should, a living prophet make in your day-to-day life?

Elder Boyd K. Packer has reminded us that prophets give "quiet counsel on ordinary things which, if followed, will protect us." ("The Gospel—The Foundation for Our Career," Ensign, May 1982, p. 85.) Listening to and following the counsel given by the Lord's prophets does make a difference!

Having a personal testimony that God has called prophets to lead us in our day is important. It is vital that every man, woman, and child on this earth come to that knowledge and that they be able to discern between true prophets, who bear the mantle of authority from God, and the pretenders, who falsely profess to have such authority. One of the purposes of this volume is to help seekers after truth come to this understanding.

Salvation Depends on Following God's Prophets

With the death of each prophet, or President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there is some speculation by the uninformed or the misinformed regarding the order of succession and governance in the Church. In recent years, the question has even been raised about who should govern or preside in the Church should the designated leader be disabled.

In addition, there have always been false prophets and self-proclaimed would-be leaders who have raised their voices in opposition to the Lord's servants and sought to establish their own claim to presiding authority. Some have received a great deal of notoriety while others are hardly known beyond the local pastures in which they have preyed upon the flock. Nevertheless, each lamb or sheep led astray is a tragic loss to the Lord and His church.

One's eternal salvation depends upon the ability to recognize and know the true servants of God—those who are authorized to preach His gospel and administer the sacred and saving ordinances thereof. During His mortal ministry, the Savior proclaimed, "He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward." (Matt. 10:41.) One must be certain that the prophet he or she is following is a true prophet of God, appointed by Him to the ministry.

The Lord Appoints His Prophets

In these latter days, the Lord declared: "If my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of my servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily I say unto you, they shall not be moved out of their place. But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of these men whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest." (D&C 124:45-46; italics added.)

We are reminded of the Lord's proclamation to the apostles who served with him during his earthly sojourn: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you." (John 15:16; italics added.)

Men do not seek office in the Church. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., reminded us that "Church-men do not seek Church office. The best evidence that a man is unfit for Church office is the fact that he wants it." (In Conference Report, Apr. 1940, p. 72.)

We May Know Principles but Not Necessarily Specifics

Clearly God calls His servants. But how does one recognize the true servant of God, the rightful leader of His church? One of the purposes of this volume is to identify those principles that govern the selection of those whom the Lord calls and appoints to lead His people. Regarding this matter, President Spencer W. Kimball observed: "The pattern divine allows for no errors, no conflicts, no ambitions, no ulterior motives. The Lord has reserved for himself the calling of his leaders over his Church. It is a study of great interest and importance." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 28.)

Although general principles of the divine pattern of succession will be outlined in this volume, the reader is cautioned against drawing wrong conclusions or assuming to know specifics that have not been revealed. For example, one of the main principles outlined in this volume is that the senior apostle is the presiding officer in the Church. While at any given time we may know the order of apostolic seniority, it does not follow that the particular man next in seniority will someday lead the Church. The Lord regulates this matter. President Spencer W. Kimball said that the Lord "permits to come to the first place only the one who is destined to take that leadership. Death and life become the controlling factors." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 29.)

Who will be the next prophet and President of the Church? Generally only the Lord knows. With a few notable exceptions, when He has revealed that knowledge to trusted individuals, the Lord has kept that information to Himself. Thus, we do not presume to know the names of the men foreordained to rise to the position of senior apostle and to receive the mantle of leadership with its accompanying keys of the priesthood.

President Harold B. Lee cautioned against speculation: "Those who try to guess ahead of time as to who is going to be the next President of the Church are just gambling as they might be on a horse race, because only the Lord has the time table. . . . The Lord only knows, and for us to speculate or to presume is not pleasing in the sight of the Lord." ("Admonitions for the Priesthood of God," Ensign, Jan. 1973, p. 107.)

Perhaps the bottom-line statement regarding how the Lord selects the prophet and President of the Church is found in the following statement from President Lee: "To those who ask the question: How is the President of the Church chosen or elected? the correct and simple answer should be a quotation of the fifth Article of Faith: 'We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.'" ("The Day in Which We Live," Improvement Era, June 1970, p. 28.)
