Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 2

Line upon Line: Keys of the Priesthood Restored

The Certainty of a Prophet's Vision

When fourteen-year-old Joseph Smith emerged from the sacred grove that spring morning in 1820, where he had stood in the presence of Deity, he was no doubt filled with wonder and amazement at his singular experience. He had seen what few mortal men have witnessed: God the eternal Father and His holy Son Jesus Christ had appeared to him, and he had heard their voices.

There was absolute conviction in his soul of the reality of their existence: "I had beheld a vision," said the young prophet. "I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me." (JS-H 1:24-25.)

Joseph Smith recorded only a few of the instructions he received from these holy beings on that occasion, indicating that he was told "many other things" that he did not record for public eyes. (JS-H 1:20.) Other prophets have similarly limited their sharing of sacred writings and experiences. (See John 21:25; 1 Ne. 14:28; 2 Ne. 4:25; 3 Ne. 26:11, 18; Ether 13:13.)

To our knowledge, Joseph Smith did not receive any keys of priesthood authority on the occasion of this great theophany. These were yet to be restored according to the time-table of the Lord. First there had to be a period of preparation for the budding prophet.

The Prophet's Mission Begins to Unfold

For three and one-half years, the youthful Joseph Smith was left without further direct instructions from heaven regarding his mission. He continued to mature physically, emotionally, intellectually, and spiritually. Yet he was subject to what he called the "weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature." He admitted to being "guilty of levity, and sometimes [of having] associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as [he] had been." (JS-H 1:28.)

Feeling condemned for his "weakness and imperfections," Joseph sought for further guidance from God regarding his standing and his mission. On the evening of September 21, 1823, he approached the Lord in prayer with "full confidence" that he would receive an answer. In response, he was given a marvelous manifestation. An angel whose "whole person was glorious beyond description and [whose] countenance [was] truly like lightning" appeared and spent a good part of the night instructing Joseph. (JS-H 1:29-47.)

This messenger sent from the presence of God said his name was Moroni. He told the Prophet of a sacred record containing the "fulness of the everlasting Gospel" (v. 34) and an account of the ministry of the resurrected Savior to the ancient inhabitants of the western hemisphere. Moroni himself had been one of the prophets who had ministered to these ancient people, and he was the one who had buried the record for safekeeping prior to his death sometime after A.D. 421. The angel Moroni informed Joseph that in due time he was to be entrusted with this record and the means whereby he could translated it. The young man was strictly counseled that his whole purpose in obtaining the record, which was recorded on gold plates, should be to "glorify God" and to build His kingdom. (V. 46.)

The angel appeared to Joseph Smith on three occasions on that momentous night. In each instance, this messenger from God gave the young prophet the same instructions, adding some additional prophecies and cautions on the second and third visit. Obviously the message needed to be indelibly imprinted on the impressionable mind of the youthful prophet. Joseph was warned that Satan would try to tempt him to use the gold plates for his personal gain and not for God's purposes.

How quickly this warning would become reality. The following day, Joseph went to the location where the plates were buried, a place that was later to become known by millions worldwide as the Hill Cumorah. He knew the place the instant he arrived because he had seen it clearly in vision the night before. Removing the earth and a large stone that kept the plates hidden from mortal view, Joseph eagerly reached for the plates but was prevented from obtaining them by some unseen but very real power from God.

The heavenly messenger Moroni once more stood by the prophet's side and chastized him for worldly thoughts, which had evidently crossed his mind as he viewed the gold plates before him. There followed a vision wherein the budding prophet was shown the prince of darkness and an innumerable group of his evil followers. These wicked ones would fiercely oppose the coming forth of this additional testament of Jesus Christ.

The Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, reported that this vision of the forces of evil impressed her son "in such a striking manner, that the impression was always vivid in his memory until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this circumstance, not long prior to his death [in 1844], he remarked, that ever afterwards he was willing to keep the commandments of God." (History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, ed. Preston Nibley [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958], p. 81.)

Tutored by Heavenly Messengers

According to the Lord's timetable, the time was not right for Joseph to bring the plates forth from the earth and commence to translate them. He was instructed to return to that same place in one year, where the angel Moroni would meet him, and to continue that pattern until the time came for obtaining the plates. These annual visits continued for four years, from 1823 through 1827. Joseph said that each time he went to the Hill Cumorah he was met by Moroni "and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days." (JS-H 1:54.)

Apparently, a description of the civilization of the ancient inhabitants of the Americas was included in the instructions that Joseph Smith received. The Prophet's mother wrote that the family gathered frequently to be instructed by her young son. "During our evening conversations," she said, "Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them." (History of Joseph Smith, p. 83.)

The young Prophet was likely granted seeric glimpses of the people and circumstances, which he afterward described to his family. In addition to seeing seericly, Joseph was actually visited and instructed by some of these ancient inhabitants. As already mentioned, Joseph's annual tutor Moroni had been one of the prophets who had served among these people. Mormon, Nephi, "and others of the ancient Prophets who formerly lived on this Continent...came to him and communicated to him certain principles pertaining to the Gospel of the Son of God." (Journal of Discourses, 17:374; see also 15:185.) In a later recounting of his experiences, the Prophet Joseph Smith said that he "received many visits from the angels of God" prior to receiving the plates from "the angel of the Lord." (History of the Church, 4:537; italics added.)

Although Moroni is mentioned as having "the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim" (D&C 27:5)—the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated-we have no evidence that any of the angels or heavenly messengers who visited the young prophet during the years of 1823 to 1827 gave him any keys of priesthood authority. Elder George Q. Cannon said:

If you will read the history of the Church from the beginning, you will find that Joseph was visited by various angelic beings, but not one of them professed to give him the keys until John the Baptist came to him. Moroni, who held the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim, visited Joseph; he had doubtless, also, visits from Nephi and it may be from Alma and others, but though they came and had authority, holding the authority of the Priesthood, we have no account of their ordaining him, neither did Joseph ever profess, because of the ministration of these angels, to have authority to administer in any of the ordinances of the Kingdom of God. (Journal of Discourses, 13:47.)

Keys of the Priesthood Restored

Though called as a prophet of God and given a specific work to do in translating the ancient record that Moroni had delivered into his hands, not until 1829 did Joseph Smith receive priesthood authority. Elder Cannon summarized Joseph's circumstances as follows: "When Joseph Smith desired baptism, though angels had visited him and had ministered unto him, though he had heard the voice of God and Jesus Christ, though he had been called to be a prophet, he had not the right and the authority to go forth and administer the ordinances of baptism, neither had any living soul, to do it legitimately. It was necessary that he should be ordained; it was necessary that those keys should be restored." (Journal of Discourses, 13:48.)

The restoration of priesthood keys authorizing baptism had been promised by Moroni on the night of September 22, 1823. On that occasion the heavenly messenger had declared, "When they [the gold plates] are interpreted [translated], the Lord will give the holy priesthood to some, and they shall begin to proclaim the gospel and baptize by water, and after that they shall have power to give the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands." (History, 1832, Joseph Smith Letterbook 1, Church Archives, p. 6.)

The keys of the priesthood would be restored in stages. First would come the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood, authorizing baptism by water, and "after that" would come the restoration of the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, authorizing the baptism of the Spirit-the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

While translating the plates, Joseph Smith and his scribe Oliver Cowdery pondered passages in the text that spoke of baptism. Recognizing their need for this saving ordinance, they concluded to take the matter to the Lord in prayer. On May 15, 1829, while they were in the act of calling upon God, "a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light" and, laying his hands upon the two men, ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood, conferring upon them the keys of this order of the priesthood. The messenger identified himself as the resurrected John the Baptist and said that this priesthood held the keys "of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins," but did not have "the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." This power was promised to be given them at a later time. (JS-H 1:68-73; see also D&C 13:1; 27:7-8.)

Speaking of the significance of this sacred occasion, Elder George Q. Cannon said:

John had the right to baptize when he was upon the earth; he held the keys of that Priesthood. He baptized Jesus by virtue of the Priesthood which he held; and those keys had not been taken from him. At the time when Joseph Smith was ordained, there was no man on the face of the earth that held the keys of the Priesthood and the authority to ordain him. If there had been a man in...any other church extant upon the face of the earth, who had the keys of the Priesthood, Joseph Smith would not have been ordained by an angel, because the keys would have been here and been bestowed by the man who held them. (Journal of Discourses, 13:47.)

Those priesthood keys, now restored, had long been absent from the earth. The death of John the Baptist at the hands of the wicked Herod had not brought baptism to an end. Jesus had given this authority to His apostles, who continued to authorize the administration of this saving ordinance in addition to other ordinances of the higher priesthood among the faithful who joined the Church of Jesus Christ. However, with the death of the early apostles, and after the removal of the Apostle John from among the people in general, the early Church fell into a state of apostasy, and none were authorized to continue in the authority of the priesthood.

The Higher Priesthood Restored

When John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, he informed them that he was acting "under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on [Joseph and Oliver]." (JS-H 1:72.) The two men did not have to wait long for the fulfillment of this promise.

Sometime between May 15 and May 29, 1829, Christ's three chief apostles appeared to Joseph and Oliver near the banks of the Susquehanna River (in which they had been baptized the previous month) and conferred upon them the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. (See D&C 128:20; see also Larry C. Porter, "Dating the Restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood," Ensign, June 1979, pp. 4-10.)

The Lord later spoke of this restoration of priesthood keys: "Peter, and James, and John...I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry and of the same things which I revealed unto them; unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." (D&C 27:12-13.)

Brigham Young noted the significance of Joseph Smith's ordination by Christ's chief apostles: "Joseph Smith was a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator before he had power to build up the kingdom of God, or take the first step towards it. When did he obtain that power? Not until the angel[s] had ordained him to be an Apostle." (Journal of Discourses, 6:320; see also 18:239-40 and Orson Pratt, 12:252.)

Speaking of the nature of this higher priesthood that had been conferred upon him, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world to the latest posterity on the earth; and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven. (Teachings of Joseph Smith, pp. 166-67.)

The significance of this priesthood to mankind is further illustrated in these words from the Lord: "This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest." (D&C 84:19-20.)

Additional Keys Restored

Although the keys of the priesthood authorizing baptism and the laying on of hands had now been restored, other keys were yet to be granted in the gradual unfolding of the Lord's kingdom in the latter days. The Lord, in His wisdom, reveals "line upon line" those keys and doctrines that He wants mankind to possess. (See 2 Ne. 28:30; D&C 98:12; A of F 1:9.)

Almost one year later, on April 6, 1830, the Church was officially organized, with Joseph Smith being sustained as the "first elder" and Oliver Cowdery as the "second elder." (D&C 20:1-3.) As the Church grew over the next few years, various offices would be added to meet the needs of its expanding organization. Each office would grow out of the priesthood, with different administrative responsibilities, but not adding anything to the priesthood itself.

There were, however, additional keys of authority to be restored. Anciently, Peter had promised that before the second coming of Jesus Christ, there would be a "restitution of all things." (Acts 3:21.) In his day, the chief apostle of the Lord had been with the Savior and two of his fellow apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration when keys of authority were given. (See Matt. 17.) On that occasion, these three apostles received the keys of the kingdom from the prophets Moses and Elijah. (See Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73], 1:400; Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 158.)

Those same keys needed to be restored to the earth in the latter days. On April 3, 1836, a modern-day Mount of Transfiguration experience occurred in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio. On that occasion, the two presiding elders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery—were visited by the resurrected Redeemer and several other heavenly messengers. (See D&C 110.)

Moses appeared and, in a repeat of an act he had performed about eighteen hundred years earlier, he restored "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.) Moses had originally received those keys on the slopes of Sinai, "when he was called and sent to lead Israel from Egypt to the promised land which the Lord had given to their father Abraham. He gathered Israel, and while he was not privileged to place them in possession of the [promised] land, nevertheless the keys were in his hands for the gathering. He came to Peter, James, and John on the mount at the transfiguration and there bestowed upon them the same keys for the gathering of Israel in the days in which they lived." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 3:257.)

The next heavenly messenger to appear in the Kirtland Temple was Elias. Elder James E. Talmage explained that the name Elias means a "forerunner, or one sent of God to prepare the way for greater developments in the gospel plan." (Jesus the Christ, 25th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1956], p. 375.)

While the title of Elias has been applied to a number of ancient prophets, the Elias who appeared on this occasion has been identified by President Joseph Fielding Smith as the Angel Gabriel, or Noah. (See Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols., comp. Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957-66], 3:138-41.) He committed to Joseph and Oliver the keys of "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham," stating that in them and their posterity "all generations after [them] should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.) The Lord referred to the keys Elias possessed as "the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." (D&C 27:6.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said:

Now what was the gospel of Abraham [restored by Elias]? Obviously it was the commission, the mission, the endowment and power, the message of salvation, given to Abraham....It was a divine promise that both in the world his seed should continue "as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them...."

Thus the gospel of Abraham was one of celestial marriage;...it was a gospel commission to provide a lineage for the elect portion of the [premortal] spirits.... This power and commission is what Elias restored. (Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 219-20; see also Hoyt W. Brewster, Jr., Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988] p. 139.)

The final heavenly messenger to appear on that sacred occasion was the prophet Elijah. (See D&C 110:13-16.) He came in fulfillment of the prophecy of the Old Testament prophet Malachi who promised that Elijah would come to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers." (Mal. 4:5-6; see also 3 Ne. 25:5-6; D&C 2:1; JS-H 1:38-39.) Joseph Smith stated that the word turnshould actually be rendered as seal. (Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 323.)

To turn or seal one's heart to the fathers is to seek after the records of one's ancestors, and then to vicariously perform the saving ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ in their behalf. In this saving work, this work of redemption, families are linked together in covenant sealings that bind them together eternally.

The priesthood keys that Elijah restored were the sealing powers that validate all priesthood ordinances. "That sealing power puts the stamp of approval upon every ordinance that is done in this Church and more particularly those that are performed in the temples of the Lord," declared President Joseph Fielding Smith. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:129.) This priesthood authority and power allows the ordinances to be "administered in righteousness." (Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 172.)

Acting under the direction of Jesus Christ, the prophet Elijah had given the same keys, the sealing power of the priesthood, to the Savior's three chief apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration in an earlier dispensation. (See Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:107-12.) (The account we presently have in the King James Bible uses the name of "Elias," which is the Aramaic version of the Hebrew "Elijah.") There may well have been other heavenly messengers present on that occasion, including John the Baptist, who was an "Elias," but no other messenger held the keys that were to be delivered by the prophet Elijah. (See McConkie, Commentary, 1:400-403.)

Other heavenly messengers appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith during his period of preparation and presidency. For example, we know that an angel named Raphael visited the Prophet. (See D&C 128:21.) Michael, or Adam, intervened in Joseph's behalf when the devil sought to deceive the Prophet on one sacred occasion. (See D&C 128:20; see also Brewster, Encyclopedia, pp. 16-17.) In addition, "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time" visited Joseph Smith, "giving line upon line, precept upon precept." (D&C 128:21.)

Thus, line upon line, the Lord instructed the Prophet Joseph Smith and conferred upon him the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. While Joseph was the "first elder" of the Church, he shared these keys for a time with the "second elder," Oliver Cowdery. These two men initially stood as joint witnesses at the head of the dispensation of the fullness of times when the gospel with all its saving ordinances, covenants, and principles was restored to the earth to prepare mankind for the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.
