Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 3

The Order of Succession in Joseph Smith's Day

The Prophet and the President

Joseph Smith was called of God to be His prophet. (See D&C 1:17; 3:9; 18:8.) No mortal man gave Joseph this calling. His appointment as God's prophet, holding the keys of the kingdom, stood independent of his later calling to preside over the Church. Brigham Young gave the following explanation:

Does a man's being a Prophet in this Church prove that he shall be the President of it? I answer, no! A man may be a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and it may have nothing to do with his being the President of the Church. Suffice it to say, that Joseph was the President of the Church, as long as he lived: the people chose to have it so. He always filled that responsible station, by the voice of the people. Can you find any revelation appointing him the President of the Church? The keys of the Priesthood were committed to Joseph, to build up the Kingdom of God on the earth, and were not to be taken from him in time or in eternity; but when he was called to preside over the Church, it was by the voice of the people, though he held the keys of the Priesthood, Independent of their voice. (Journal of Discourses, 1:133; italics added.)

This distinction is made whenever the members of the Church sustain the General Authorities. For example, at the April 1991 general conference, the members sustained "Ezra Taft Benson as prophet, seer, and revelator and President" of the Church, then shortly after, they sustained "the Counselors [in the First Presidency] and the Twelve Apostles as prophets, seers, and revelators." ("The Sustaining of Church Officers," Ensign, May 1991, p. 6.) Though the office of prophet and President stand independent of one another, since the days of Joseph Smith, each man called to be President and sustained by the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has also been a prophet. It is inconceivable that the Saints would reject as the administrative leader of the Church the man who holds the keys of priesthood authority.

Oliver Cowdery as Second Elder

Oliver Cowdery entered the Prophet Joseph Smith's life on April 5, 1829. He had been prompted by the Spirit to visit the Prophet and to inquire about the Book of Mormon, which he had heard so much about. Two days later, Oliver commenced work as Joseph's scribe, a time he would later refer to as "days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven." (JS-H 1:71, note.)

Oliver's work with Joseph Smith on the Book of Mormon led to an outpouring of marvelous spiritual experiences. He was the recipient of a number of revelations found in the Doctrine and Covenants, and his name is second only to Joseph Smith in being mentioned the most times in that compilation of revelatory writ. The Lord chose him to serve as one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and along with the other witnesses, he was given the charge to seek out the twelve men to be called to the first apostolic quorum of this dispensation. (See D&C 18:9, 26-37.)

Oliver was present when the keys of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored and was a corecipient of those keys with the Prophet Joseph Smith. (See D&C 13:1; 27:8, 12-13; 128:20.) When the Church of Jesus Christ was restored to earth in this dispensation on April 6, 1830, Joseph and Oliver were sustained as the teachers and spiritual advisers of the members of the Church.

Oliver was the "second elder" of the Church. (D&C 20: 1-3.) Thus, in the beginning, he stood by Joseph Smith's side as his successor, holding the same keys that the Prophet held, but he was subservient to the "first elder" of the Church. (See, for example, D&C 20:1-5. Note that the terms "first elder" and "second elder" were added to the original revelation in 1835 when it was published as part of the Doctrine and Covenants. Prior to this time the wording was simply "elder." However, from the onset Oliver's position was clearly secondary to Joseph's.)

Joseph Smith Held the Keys

On several occasions the Lord revealed that Joseph Smith held the keys of the kingdom and that no other man or woman had this authority. For example, in September of 1830, the Lord reminded Oliver Cowdery that "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses." (D&C 28:2.)

This revelation came as a result of Oliver's having been wrongly influenced by a man claiming to receive revelation regarding the building of Zion. The Lord not only reminded Oliver of Joseph's singular right to receive revelation for the Church, but He also reprimanded him. Oliver was told not to "command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church." (D&C 28:6.)

In this same revelation the Lord said that Joseph would retain the keys until the Lord appointed another to take his place. (See v. 7.) This statement was essentially repeated in a revelation given in December of 1830. The Lord said Joseph would retain the keys if he remained faithful "and if not, another will I plant in his stead." (D&C 35:18.)

In February of 1831, the Lord made a slight modification in the procedures governing succession. While Jesus Christ would always select the man to lead His church on earth and serve as His prophet, He gave to Joseph Smith some significant authority in the matter. The Savior declared that, if the power be taken from Joseph Smith (ostensibly through transgression), "he [Joseph] shall not have power except to appoint another in his stead." (D&C 43:4.)

While at first thought this may seem strange—giving a fallen prophet the power to appoint (ordain) his successor—it really was a safeguard against false prophets. Under these guidelines, if a man claimed that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet and that the Lord had selected him to take the Prophet's place, one would merely have to ask the claimant if he had been ordained to this calling by Joseph Smith. If he had not, then the claim could be quickly dismissed. Because the Lord knows the end from the beginning, this procedure was not likely ever intended to be used. But it did provide a stopgap to any pretenders to authority.

By September of 1831 there were some who sought to discredit or to criticize the Prophet "without cause." (D&C 64:6.) In response to this, the Lord declared: "The keys of the mysteries of the kingdom shall not be taken from my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., through the means I have appointed, while he liveth, inasmuch as he obeyeth mine ordinances." (D&C 64:5.)

Almost two years after this revelation, Joseph received the assurance that he would not fall and that "the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come." (D&C 90:3.) Commenting on this latest revelation, President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

Here we have the assurance that the Prophet would endure to the end, and that he had proved himself worthy to stand at the head of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. The keys are now committed into his hands, and he will stand at the head of this dispensation in the grand council when it shall be held, and they will be in his possession eternally. At the head of this dispensation he will preside under Adam who holds the keys of all dispensations pertaining to this earth, and Adam holds them under the direction of Jesus Christ, the Holy One of Israel, who has all power and authority under His Father. (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Council of the Twelve Apostles, 1953], 1:388.)

Joseph Smith's standing as God's prophet was assured. He would preside as the living prophet while on earth, and after he passed through the veil of death, he would continue to preside as the prophet of this last dispensation. However, the keys to conduct the affairs of the kingdom of God on earth would remain; for prior to his death, Joseph would confer these keys upon another mortal prophet who would preside over the Church on earth.

The Presidency of the High Priesthood

Although a revelation given in November of 1831 had mentioned "the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood" (D&C 68:15), it was not until January 25, 1832, that Joseph Smith was sustained as the President of the High (Melchizedek) Priesthood in a conference of the Church (see Brewster, Encyclopedia, p. 437). In a later revelation regarding this office, the Lord declared: "Wherefore, it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called President of the High Priesthood of the Church. Or, in other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church." (D&C 107:65-66.)

On March 8, 1832, the Prophet selected Jesse Gause and Sidney Rigdon to serve as his counselors in the presidency of the High Priesthood. In an unpublished revelation given that same month, the Lord said: "Unto the office of the presidency of the high priesthood I have given authority to preside with assistance of his councilors over all concerns of the church." (Kirtland Revelation Book, Joseph Smith Collection, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, pp. 10-11.) In a revelation given in March of 1832, the Lord declared that "the keys of the kingdom ... belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood." (D&C 81:2.)

Jesse Gause, however, "failed to continue in a manner consistent with this appointment, [and] the call was subsequently transferred to Frederick G. Williams." (D&C 81: heading; see also Brewster, Encyclopedia, pp. 203-4.) On March 8, 1833, the Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Verily I say unto thy brethren, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, their sins are forgiven them also, and they are accounted as equal with thee in holding the keys of this last kingdom." (D&C 90:6.)

Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams—the three presiding high priests—formed "a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." (D&C 107:22.) This presidency was "to preside in council, and set in order all the affairs of this church and kingdom." (D&C 90:16.) While the President obviously presided over all affairs, the counselors in the presidency had authority to act in behalf of the President in his absence or as assigned by him.

David Whitmer Is Designated as Joseph's Successor

Among the most prominent participants of the early period in Church history was David Whitmer. He was one of the six original members of the Church, as well as one of the three privileged to see the angel Moroni, behold the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated (among other ancient artifacts), and hear the voice of God bearing personal testimony to the truthfulness of the ancient record of holy writ.

David surfaced in the order of succession in July of 1834. In the spring of that year, a body of some two hundred Latter-day Saints known as Zion's Camp commenced a thousandmile journey from Ohio to Missouri. The purpose of this expedition was to "redeem" Zion, or to assist the persecuted Saints in Missouri in obtaining redress for all the wrongs they had suffered. (See D&C 101:55-60; 103:29-40.)

Upon arriving in Missouri, the Prophet Joseph, who was commander-in-chief of the expedition, was informed by the Lord that in consequence of transgression, the time for Zion's redemption was not yet at hand. (See D&C 105.) A conference was called the first week of July in Missouri, and during the course of its proceedings, the following took place:

While the conference was in session, Joseph Smith presiding, he arose and said that the time had come when he must appoint his successor in office. Some have supposed that it would be Oliver Cowdery; but, said he, Oliver has lost that privilege in consequence of transgression. The Lord has made it known to me that David Whitmer is the man. David was then called forward, and Joseph and his counsellors laid hands upon him, and ordained him to his station, to succeed him. Joseph then gave David a charge, in the hearing of the whole assembly. Joseph then seemed to rejoice that that work was done, and said, now brethren, if anything should befall me, the work of God will roll on with more power than it has hitherto done. Then brethren, you will have a man who can lead you as well as I can. He will be Prophet, Seer, Revelator, and Translator before God. (Ensign of Liberty 1, no. 3 [December 1847]: 43-44; see also History of the Church, 3:32.)

Evidently Joseph had not discussed this with his newly designated successor, for David was later to say, "I did not know what he was going to do until he laid his hands upon me and ordained me." (An Address to All Believers in Christ [Richmond, Virginia: David Whitmer, 1887], p. 55.)

In addition to being designated as Joseph Smith's successor, David also became the "President of Zion" (presiding officer of that stake of the Church in Missouri) and was given John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps as his counselors. The Prophet also organized a high council to serve with this newly called presidency.

Unfortunately, though David remained faithful in his testimony of the Book of Mormon, he did not remain faithful to the Church. As a result, on February 4, 1838, a general assembly of the Saints in Far West, Missouri, withdrew the hand of fellowship from him and rejected him as their presiding officer. The high council at Far West excommunicated him on April 13, 1838, which action was upheld by the Prophet. (See History of the Church, 3:32, note.) Among the charges levied against David Whitmer was that he wrongly claimed to be the "President of the Church of Christ" in Missouri. (History of the Church, 3:18-19.) Apparently David mistakenly considered his position as a local stake president in Missouri on a par with Joseph Smith's presiding position. This may have been the result of the First Presidency's acting as the stake presidency in Kirtland, Ohio, in addition to their presiding over the entire Church.

David claimed that the council had no jurisdiction over him. He did not understand that his calling as a president over the Church in Missouri was not equal with Joseph Smith's presiding authority over the entire Church. Furthermore, at the time of his excommunication, David appeared not to have understood the changed nature of his appointment as Joseph Smith's designated successor as a result of an appointment that came to Oliver Cowdery in December of 1834.

Assistant President of the Church

As previously noted, Oliver Cowdery's standing as the second elder of the Church initially placed him next to the Prophet Joseph as the presiding officer of the Church. He stood by Joseph's side every time keys of priesthood authority were restored to the earth by heavenly messengers sent from the presence of God.

On the evening of December 5, 1834, Joseph was in a meeting with his two counselors in the presidency as well as Oliver Cowdery, "conversing upon the welfare of the Church." During the course of that meeting, the Prophet laid his hands upon Oliver's head and "ordained him an assistant-president, saying these words: 'In the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified for the sins of the world, I lay my hands upon thee and ordain thee an assistant-president to the High and Holy Priesthood, in the Church of the Latter-day Saints.'" (History of the Church, 2:176.)

Oliver explained that this ordination took place in fulfillment of the promise "made by the Angel [John the Baptist] while in company with President Smith, at the time they received the office of the lesser priesthood." (Historian's Book A1, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, p. 17. He learned that "the office of Assistant President is to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President." (Manuscript History of the Church, Book A-1, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 5 Dec. 1834; see also Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:211-213.)

There was no question in the minds of Joseph's counselors that Oliver took precedence over each of them. His signature preceded those of the counselors on official Church documents. Furthermore, in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, Oliver was officially designated as the "second elder" in the Church, although prior to this time he had already been recognized as second to Joseph Smith and named as an apostle and an elder in the Church.

Others had been designated as assistant presidents of the Church, acting essentially in the role of a counselor, but none held the priesthood keys bestowed upon Oliver Cowdery. In this sense, his office was more as an Associate President. (See Robert Glen Mouritsen, "The Office of Associate President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith said the following regarding Oliver Cowdery's importance in the hierarchy of the Church: "Oliver Cowdery was called to be what? The 'Second Elder' of the Church, the 'Second President' of the Church. We leave him out in our list of Presidents of the Church . . . but he was an Assistant President. Oliver Cowdery's standing in the beginning was as the 'Second Elder' of the Church, holding the keys jointly with the Prophet Joseph Smith." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:212.)

The Apostolic Office

A development that took place shortly after Oliver Cowdery's ordination as the Associate President of the Church was the establishment of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Although a revelation given in June of 1829 had charged Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer—two of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon—to "search out the Twelve" (D&C 18:37), the apostles were not selected until February of 1835.

The Lord had designated Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as apostles (see D&C 20:2-3), and David Whitmer and Martin Harris also appeared to have received that special calling. The Lord told Oliver and David that they were called "with that same calling with which [the Apostle Paul] was called." (D&C 18:9.) Brigham Young declared that "Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer were the first Apostles of this dispensation." (Journal of Discourses, 6:320.) And Heber C. Kimball noted: "Peter comes along with James and John and ordains Joseph to be an Apostle, and then Joseph ordains Oliver, and David Whitmer, and Martin Harris; and then they were ordered to select twelve more and ordain them." (Journal of Discourses, 6:29.)

One of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Martin Harris, was not mentioned in the 1829 revelation as one charged with searching out the Twelve. At that particular time, he was "out of favor with the Lord" and for that reason his name might have been omitted from the revelation. However, it appears that all three of the men known as the Three Witnesses were to receive the responsibility of selecting the Twelve who were to be special witnesses to the Lord Jesus Christ. (History of the Church, 2:186-87, note.)

On February 8, 1835, Joseph Smith related to Brigham and Joseph Young a vision he had received. During the course of their conversation, the Prophet informed Brigham Young that he was to become one of the "twelve Special Witnesses" who were to be called "to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nation." (History of the Church, 2:181, note.) Six days later, a general meeting was convened in Kirtland, where, following prayer and a blessing by the presidency of the Church, the Three Witnesses selected the twelve men to serve in the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation.

The twelve men selected were Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. M'Lellin, John F. Boynton, Orson Pratt, William Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, and Parley P. Pratt. The first three of these men—Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball—were called forward and ordained under the hands of the Three Witnesses, with the blessing being confirmed by the First Presidency. (See History of the Church, 2:187-188, note.)

The following day, February 15, six more were ordained: Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. M'Lellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith. It is of interest to note that in a letter Oliver Cowdery later sent to Brigham Young, Oliver indicated that Phineas Young had initially been selected as one of the Twelve rather than William Smith. However, Joseph Smith allegedly prevailed upon the Three Witnesses to select his brother William in the place of Phineas. (See Journal History, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, February 27, 1848.) Parley P. Pratt was ordained to the apostleship on February 21, Thomas B. Marsh on April 25, and Orson Pratt on April 26, 1835. (See Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979], p. 152.)

The Prophet Joseph later arranged the order of seniority among the Twelve according to their ages, with the eldest being senior and the youngest being junior. This resulted in Lyman E. Johnson's going from the first position to the last. The following chart illustrates the order of seniority of the apostles according to three criteria:

Order Order Order of

Name of Apostle Called Ordained Seniority

Lyman E. Johnson 1 1 12

Brigham Young 2 2 3

Heber C. Kimball 3 3 4

Orson Hyde 4 4 5

David W. Patten 5 5 2

Luke S. Johnson 6 6 8

William E. M'Lellin 7 7 6

John F. Boynton 8 8 11

Orson Pratt 9 12 10

William Smith 10 9 9

Thomas B. Marsh 11 11 1

Parley P. Pratt 12 10 7

Within three years from the time of their ordination, four of these men lost their apostleship through apostasy and ex-communication: John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and William E. M'Lellin. By October of 1838, Thomas B. Marsh had apostatized, and David W. Patten was martyred. Thus, by any measurement of seniority, Brigham Young ascended to the senior position among the Twelve Apostles.

The Initial Limitations on the Ministry of the Twelve

Initially the ministry of the Twelve Apostles was limited, and their full authority to stand next to the First Presidency came "line upon line." On February 27, 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave the following instructions regarding the duties of the Twelve:

They are the Twelve Apostles, who are called to the office of the Traveling High Council, who are to preside over the churches of the Saints, among the Gentiles, where there is no presidency established; and they are to travel and preach among the Gentiles until the Lord shall command them to go to the Jews. They are to hold the keys of this ministry, to unlock the door of the Kingdom of heaven unto all nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature. This is the power, authority, and virtue of their apostleship. (Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 88, manuscript, Church Archives; italics added.)

At the time the Twelve Apostles were organized, they were a "traveling high council" that did not have authority to preside in areas where a stake presidency and a "standing high council" existed. Two stakes were then extant, one in Kirtland and one in Missouri. On May 2, 1835, the Prophet Joseph said the following regarding this limitation: "The Twelve will have no right to go into Zion, or any of its stakes, and there undertake to regulate the affairs thereof, where there is a standing high council; but it is their duty to go abroad and regulate all matters relative to the different branches of the Church." (History of the Church, 2:220; see also Minutes of a Grand Council at Kirtland, Ohio, 2 May 1835, manuscript, included in Patriarchal Blessing Book 2, Church Archives.)

The Role of the Standing High Council

The Prophet Joseph Smith also placed limitations on the role of the "standing high council": "No standing High Council has authority to go into the churches abroad, and regulate the matters thereof, for this belongs to the Twelve." (History of the Church, 2:220.) The 1835 revelation designating the presiding quorums of the Church that were to be "equal in authority" also identified the "standing high councils, at the stakes of Zion" as forming "a quorum equal in authority in the affairs of the church, in all their decisions, to the quorum of the presidency, or to the traveling high council." (D&C 107:36-37.)

There is reason to believe that in these formative years of Church government, the standing high councils were an important part of the succession issue. In July of 1834, the Prophet organized a high council in Clay County, Missouri, under the presidency of David Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer. Four of those called to serve on that council (William E. M'Lellin, Thomas B. Marsh, Orson Pratt, and Parley P. Pratt) were called the following year into the original group of men who comprised the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Joseph Smith made the following observations regarding the organization of this high council:

I gave the Council such instructions in relation to their high calling, as would enable them to proceed to minister in their office agreeable to the pattern heretofore given; read the revelation on the subject; and told them that If I should now be taken away, I had accomplished the great work the Lord had laid before me, and that which I had desired of the Lord; and that I had done my duty in organizing the High Council, through which council the will of the Lord might be known on all important occasions, in the building up of Zion, and establishing truth in the earth. (History of the Church, 2:124; italics added.)

Thus, in the developing days of Church government, the standing high councils stood in the line of succession. They were initially made "equal in authority" (D&C 107:36-37) to the Quorum of the Twelve (the traveling high council) and the Quorum of the Seventy at a time when the apostles had limited jurisdiction in the Church.

Emma Smith would later cite this revelation in contending that William Marks, the president of the Nauvoo Stake (and high council), should have succeeded her husband as the presiding officer of the Church. (See Journal of James M. Monroe, 24 April 1845, Yale University; cited in D. Michael Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis of 1844," Brigham Young University Studies 16 (Winter 1976): 187-233, p. 214.) Marks himself did not pursue the presidency of the Church based on this revelation. He did, however, become an active participant in several schismatic groups that formed following the death of Joseph Smith.

Note that there has not been unanimity of feeling regarding the administrative authority of the standing high council. The historian Elder B. H. Roberts believed that such a council was limited in jurisdiction:

The high council is a judicial and not a presiding or executive council, as is proven by the following:

"The high council was appointed by revelation for the purpose of settling important difficulties which might arise in the church, which could not be settled by the church or the bishop's council to the satisfaction of the parties" (D&C 102:2).

Hence the "equality" here referred to [D&C 107:36-37] must have reference to judicial not to administrative affairs in the Church. . . . The standing high council in a stake of Zion is a local council, limited in its operations to the particular district of [or] country comprising the stake. (Succession in the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Publishing Co., 1900], p. 92.)

The Quorum of the Twelve Is Given an Expanded Ministry

Circumstances changed following the 1835 revelation, and "line upon line," the Quorum of the Twelve was given more authority and responsibility. Through their dedication to their ministry, the Twelve Apostles grew in stature and importance to the Church. Their highly successful missionary efforts in England were particularly impressive.

On August 16, 1841, the Prophet announced "that the time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations." (History of the Church, 4:403; italics added.) Thus a significant step in the developing stature and authority of the Quorum of the Twelve was taken.

Not only did the Twelve assume more responsibility ecclesiastically, but they also became more involved in business and civic affairs. The apostles were called to assist the Prophet in handling the finances of the Church. Eleven of these men each served for a time on the Nauvoo City Council during the years of 1841-44. On January 28, 1842, Joseph received a revelation calling the Twelve to "take in hand the editorial department of the Times and Seasons [the official Church publication], according to that manifestation which shall be given unto them by the power of [the] Holy Spirit." (History of the Church, 4:503.)

The Twelve had begun to function in a significant measure next to the First Presidency. However, there were still keys of authority that had not been bestowed upon them and would not until just shortly before the Prophet's death.

Hyrum Smith Called as Associate President

One more important development in the presiding councils of the Church took place in January of 1841 that impacted the issue of succession. As previously mentioned, Oliver Cowdery had been the assistant or associate president of the Church, standing next to the Prophet Joseph in holding the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. Unfortunately, Oliver lost his keys and calling through apostasy and was excommunicated on April 11, 1838. Almost three years later Hyrum Smith was called by revelation to succeed Oliver as the second elder of the Church.

At the time of his call as the associate president, Hyrum was serving as second counselor in the First Presidency. The Lord revealed that Hyrum should be released from this calling and "take the office of Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right." (D&C 124:91.) Hyrum's father, Joseph Smith, Sr., had been the Patriarch to the Church from 1833 until his death in 1840. The son was now to assume the patriarchal mantle of the father.

In addition to calling him as the Patriarch to the Church, the Lord also called Hyrum to "act in concert" with his prophet-brother, Joseph, "who shall show unto him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same blessing, and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery." (D&C 124:95.) Thus, Hyrum Smith was called to hold the keys jointly with Joseph Smith, which placed him second only to the Prophet in the succession order of the Church.

President Joseph Fielding Smith made the following observation regarding Hyrum's station in the Church: "With many members of the Church Hyrum Smith was just the Patriarch. Hyrum Smith received a double portion. He received the office of Patriarch which belonged to his father and came to him by right, and also received the keys to be 'Second President' and precede the counselors [in the First Presidency] as Oliver Cowdery had done. So he would have remained as President of the Church had he not died a martyr." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:221; italics added.)

Until his death at the hands of assassins in Carthage, Illinois, on June 27, 1844, Hyrum stood next to the Prophet as a president of the Church, although it was understood that he was always second to Joseph. The Twelve recognized this position. Following the martyrdoms of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young declared: "If Hyrum had lived he would not have stood between Joseph and the Twelve but he would have stood for Joseph.—Did Joseph ordain any man to take his place? He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum, but, Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph did." (Times and Seasons 5:683.)

The Twelve Receive the Fullness of the Keys of the Kingdom

Although designated by revelation (D&C 107:23-24; 112:30-32) and by the Prophet Joseph as the presiding body that stood next to the Presidency of the Church, the Twelve Apostles did not receive all of the keys of the kingdom until shortly before the martyrdoms of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The Lord, who knows all things, and who thus knew of the impending deaths of His noble servants, inspired the Prophet Joseph Smith to confer every key of authority that he and Hyrum held upon the Twelve Apostles in the winter of 1843-44. A sampling of testimonies regarding this significant action follows.

Testimony of Wilford Woodruff: Joseph Smith "organized the quorum of the Twelve, a few months before his death, to prepare them for the endowment[.] And when they received their endowment, and actually received the keys of the kingdom of God, . . . [Joseph] exclaimed, 'upon your shoulders the kingdom rests, and you must round up your shoulders, and bear it; for I have had to do it until now. But now the responsibility rests upon you. It mattereth not what becomes of me.'" (Times and Seasons 5:698.)

Testimony of Brigham Young: "Joseph told the Twelve, the year before he died, 'there is not one key or power to be bestowed on this church to lead the people into the celestial gate but I have given you, showed you, and talked it over to you; the kingdom is set up, and you have the perfect pattern, and you can go and build up the kingdom, and go in at the celestial gate, taking your train with you.'" (Millennial Star 10:115.)

Testimony of Parley P. Pratt: "This great and good man [Joseph Smith] was led, before his death, to call the Twelve together, from time to time, and to instruct them in all things pertaining to the kingdom, ordinances, and government of God. He often observed that he was laying the foundation, but it would remain for the Twelve to complete the building. Said he: 'I know not why; but for some reason I am constrained to hasten my preparations, and to confer upon the Twelve all the ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the priesthood, and so set before them a pattern in all things pertaining to the sanctuary and the endowment therein.'

"Having done this, he rejoiced exceedingly; for, said he, the Lord is about to lay the burden on your shoulders and let me rest awhile; and if they kill me, continued he, the kingdom of God will roll on, as I have now finished the work which was laid upon me, by committing to you all things for the building up of the kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown me from heaven." (Millennial Star 5:151.)

Testimony of Orson Hyde: "Brother Joseph said some time before he was murdered, 'If I am taken away, upon you, the Twelve, will rest the responsibility of leading this people, and do not be bluffed off by any man. Go forward in the path of your duty though you walk into death. If you will be bold and maintain your ground the great God will sustain you.'" (Times and Seasons 5:650.)

Testimony of Heber C. Kimball: "Joseph has passed behind the vail and he pulled off his shoes, and some one else puts them on, until he passes the vail to Bro. Joseph. President [Brigham] Young is our president, and our head, and he puts the shoes on first. If Brother Hyrum had remained here, he would have put them on. Hyrum is gone with Joseph and is still his counsellor. The Twelve have received the keys of the kingdom and as long as there is one of them left, he will hold them in preference to any one else." (Times and Seasons 5:664.)

Thus, by the time the blood of two of the noblest men on earth was shed on that tragic afternoon of June 27, 1844, the Lord had already set in place the proper order of succession in His church. With the deaths of President Joseph Smith and his associate in the presidency, Hyrum Smith, the Twelve Apostles with Brigham Young at their head became the rightful ones to lead the Church and kingdom of God on earth.
