Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 4

False Claims to Succession after the Prophet's Martyrdom

Sidney Rigdon

Sidney Rigdon was a formidable figure in the early days of the Church. He was a powerful preacher, and, like Aaron was for Moses (see Ex. 4:14-16), Sidney was called by revelation to be a spokesman for Joseph Smith (see D&C 100:9).

As mentioned in the previous chapter, Sidney Rigdon was called as a counselor in the presidency of the High Priesthood in 1832 and served as a first counselor in the First Presidency from 1833 until the death of the Prophet in 1844. However, during this period his faith seemed to ebb and flow according to the circumstances in which he found himself. On one occasion the Prophet Joseph said of his counselor: "Brother Sidney is a man whom I love, but he is not capable of that pure and steadfast love for those who are his benefactors that should characterize a President of the Church of Christ." (History of the Church, 1:443.)

"He was a man of admitted ability as an orator, but lacked discretion," noted B. H. Roberts. Sidney was

a man of fervid imagination, but of inferior judgment; ambitious of place and honor, but without that steadiness of purpose and other qualities of soul which in time secure them. In the early years of The Church he suffered much for the cause of God, but he also complained much; especially was this the case in respect to the hardships he endured in Missouri; and subsequently of his poverty and illness at Nauvoo. This habit of complaining doubtless did much to deprive him of the Spirit of the Lord; for at times it bordered upon blasphemy. More than once he was heard to say that Jesus Christ was a fool in suffering as compared with himself! (Succession in the Presidency, p. 8.)

Sidney was not able to totally bend his will to that of the Lord. In August 1843, Joseph accused Sidney of acts of betrayal and withdrew the hand of fellowship from him. (See History of the Church, 5:532.) By October 1843, Joseph said that he had "thrown [Sidney] off his shoulders" and attempted to have him released from the First Presidency. The Prophet indicated that Rigdon had been of little value to him as a counselor since the expulsion from Missouri. However, the conference voted to retain Sidney for yet another year. (See History of the Church, 6:47-49.)

The errant first counselor moved to Pittsburgh and was residing there at the time of the Prophet's martrydom. In residing outside of Nauvoo, he had ignored a revelation from the Lord wherein he was admonished to "locate his family in the neighborhood" where the Prophet Joseph was residing and to "not remove his family unto the eastern lands," away from Nauvoo. (D&C 124:105-10.)

Upon hearing that Joseph Smith had been martyred on June 27, 1844, Rigdon hurried to Nauvoo, arriving there on August 3. Upon his arrival, he made no effort to confer with the members of the Twelve who were in town—Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, Willard Richards, and George A. Smith. Instead, he met with William Marks, the local stake president, and began agitating on the issue of succession. He claimed to have received a vision on the day the Prophet was martyred in which he was told that "there must be a guardian appointed to build the church up to Joseph," and claimed that he was the one sent to do that work. (History of the Church, 7:224.) He postulated that no man could take Joseph's position as president.

Sidney attempted to get William Marks to call a special conference of the Church for August 6 to discuss the issue of appointing a guardian. He claimed that this needed to be done quickly, for if the people in Nauvoo did not want his leadership, "there was a people numbering thousands and tens of thousands who would receive him" beyond the borders of Nauvoo. (History of the Church, 7:225.) There was some opposition to holding a meeting before others of the apostles returned to Nauvoo, and the meeting was providentially postponed until August 8, by which time Brigham Young and a majority of the Twelve had arrived in town.

On the afternoon of August 7, the Twelve called a meeting that included the high council and the high priests. Sidney Rigdon was invited to participate in the meeting and to relay his purported revelation about his appointment as the guardian to the Church. In the course of his comments, he said: "It was shown to me that this church must be built up to Joseph, and that all the blessings we receive must come through him. I have been ordained a spokesman to Joseph, and I must . . . see that the church is governed in a proper manner. Joseph sustains the same relationship to this church as he has always done. No man can be the successor of Joseph." (History of the Church, 7:229.)

Brigham Young responded, "I do not care who leads the church, . . . but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject." President Young went on to declare: "Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come. How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, 'I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.'" (History of the Church, 7:230.)

On the morning of August 8, the Saints in Nauvoo assembled in a special meeting to consider the issue of choosing "a guardian, or President and Trustee." (History of the Church, 7:231.) Sidney Rigdon spoke for one and a half hours on the issue, trying to persuade the Saints to support him. The meeting was adjourned and reconvened in the afternoon, under the direction of seven members of the Twelve: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith. John Taylor was confined to his home, recovering from the wounds he received in the attack that took the lives of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Four other apostles had not yet arrived in Nauvoo.

Brigham Young arose to speak and noted that for the first time in his life and in the lives of the assembled Saints, they were without a prophet at their head. However, he quickly observed that the apostles held "the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world." (History of the Church, 7:232.) The spirit of inspiration rested upon the President of the Twelve, and the Lord manifested in a marvelous way to many present that here was indeed the man chosen to lead the people at this time. A transformation seemed to come upon him, and many saw and heard not Brigham Young, but their beloved Prophet Joseph.

One witness of this miraculous outpouring of the Spirit, George Q. Cannon, said:

If Joseph had risen from the dead, and again spoken in their hearing, the effect could not have been more startling than it was to many present at that meeting; it was the voice of Joseph himself; and not only was it the voice of Joseph which was heard, but it seemed in the eyes of the people as if it was the very person of Joseph which stood before them. A more wonderful and miraculous event than was wrought that day in the presence of that congregation we never heard of. The Lord gave his people a testimony that left no room for doubt, as to who was the man he had chosen to lead them. (In Edward W. Tullidge, The Life of Brigham Young or, Utah and Her Founders [New York: n.p., 1877], p. 115; see also Roberts, Succession in the Presidency, p. 7.)

President Young issued this warning to those who would seek to lead the people astray: "All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper." He again reminded the Saints that "there is power with the Apostles," for they "are appointed by the finger of God" and "stand next to Joseph, and [now] are as the First Presidency of the Church." A little later, he stated, "We have a head, and that head is the Apostleship." (History of the Church, 7:232-33, 235.)

Referring to Elder Rigdon's claims, President Young asked in a vein of humor: "Do you want the church properly organized, or do you want a spokesman to be chief cook and bottle-washer? Elder Rigdon claims to be spokesman to the Prophet. Very well, he was; but can he now act in that office? If he wants now to be a spokesman to the Prophet, he must go to the other side of the veil, for the Prophet is there." (History of the Church, 7:234.)

Brigham Young's claims were consistent with the stated position of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who earlier had said: "Where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." (Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 106.) The death of the President of the Church automatically released the counselors in the presidency. From June 27, 1844, Sidney Rigdon held no position in the Church.

At Elder Rigdon's request, rather than voting on his request for guardianship, a vote was first taken to see if the Saints wanted to uphold and sustain the Twelve as their leaders. The vote was unanimous, and thus the question of Sidney Rigdon becoming a guardian for the Church became a moot issue. President Young affirmed his feelings of fellowship for the former counselor in the First Presidency and said, "We want such men as Brother Rigdon" to help build the kingdom. (History of the Church, 7:240.)

Publicly, Sidney Rigdon appeared to abide by the voice of the Saints to support the Twelve Apostles. Yet secretly, noted B. H. Roberts, Sidney began holding meetings with

men of questionable integrity in The Church, telling them that it was revealed to him before leaving Pittsburg that The Church would reject him; but, nevertheless, he was the proper person to lead The Church—to be its "Guardian;" for to that position he had been called of God, and held the keys of authority higher than any conferred upon the Prophet Joseph—the keys of David which, according to his representations, gave him the power to open and no man could shut; to shut and no man could open; and the power to organize the armies for the destruction of the Gentiles. In fact his fervid imagination pictured himself a great military chieftain, by whose prowess all the enemies of God were to be subdued. He secretly ordained men to be prophets, priests and kings to the Gentiles. He also chose and appointed military officers to take command of the armies that were to be raised ere long to fight the battles of the great God. (Succession in the Presidency, p. 16.)

The Twelve became aware of Sidney's clandestine activities, and he was called to give an accounting to them. At first he tried to deny his actions, but finally defiantly admitted his actions and challenged the authority of the Twelve, claiming he stood above them. Because of his refusal to repent, a Church disciplinary council was held for Sidney Rigdon on September 8, and he was excommunicated from the Church. (See History of the Church, 7:266-69.)

John Taylor noted:

After his excommunication he made an attempt at organizing a church, choosing twelve apostles, etc., but his efforts amounted to but little. He soon retired from Nauvoo to Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, which he established as his headquarters. He sent missionaries to many branches of The Church to represent his claims to the Presidency, but they succeeded in getting only slight support, and that for the most part from among those weak in the faith. His church, never strong either in numbers or prominent men, soon crumbled into decay; Sidney Rigdon himself sank out of sight and in 1876 he died in obscurity in Alleghany County, state of New York. (In Succession in the Presidency, pp. 17-18.)

Elder B. H. Roberts commented on Sidney's demise: "The fate of Sidney Rigdon and the fate of the organization which he founded prove the prophetic character of the words of Brigham Young: 'All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper.'" (Succession in the Presidency, p. 18.)

James J. Strang

In 1832, a young man imbued with grandiose ideas of personal fame and glory wrote the following in his diary: "I am 19 years old and am yet no more than a common farmer. It is too bad. I ought to have been a member of Assembly or a Brigadier General before this time if I am ever to rival Cesar [sic] or Napoleon which I have sworn to do." (O. W. Riegel, Crown of Glory [New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935], p. 12.) This entry in the personal diary of James Jesse Strang gives some insight to the driving force behind the man who twelve years later became a claimant to the mantle of the martyred prophet, Joseph Smith.

He was introduced to the gospel by several of his brothers-in-law and journeyed to Nauvoo where he was baptized on February 25, 1844, just four months before the martyrdom. The Prophet Joseph performed the baptism. One week later Hyrum Smith conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the new convert and ordained him to the office of an elder.

One biographer suggested that "Joseph Smith saw useful material in the well-informed, ambitious, and fluent attorney, for . . . [James Strang] became at once an active and trusted member of the Mormon ministry. His special field of labor was Wisconsin, and he soon applied for authority to there 'plant a stake of Zion.'" (Charles K. Backus, The King of Beaver Island [Los Angeles: Westernlore Press, 1955], pp. 19-20.)

While in Wisconsin, Strang claimed to have been visited by an angel on the day that the Prophet was martyred. He said that the heavenly messenger "stretched forth his hand unto him and touched his head, and put oil upon him." This newcomer to Mormonism claimed that he was to be "the supreme ruler of the Saints on earth." (Crown of Glory, p. 31.) Although Strang later wrote down the five hundred and seven words he alleged that the angel said to him, it is of interest to not that not one of those words mentioned the slain prophet of the Church.

Strang's most significant claim to the leadership of the Church was based on a letter he purportedly received from the Prophet Joseph, dated June 18, 1844. In that letter Joseph is alleged to have related a vision he had in which James J. Strang was appointed as Joseph's successor to lead the Saints, for "to him shall the gathering of the people be." Strang also claimed that the vision instructed him to establish a stake and build a house of the Lord in Wisconsin in a city to be known as Voree. The letter closed with these words: "If evil befall me thou shalt lead the flock to pleasant pastures. God sustain thee." (Restoration Reporter 1, no. 1 (Dec. 1970): 3; original letter in the Coe Collection at Yale University.)

There are a number of questionable facets about this alleged letter from the Prophet. Only the signature of the letter appeared to be in Joseph Smith's handwriting. In addition, the letter was initially kept secret from the public, and the only one claiming to know of its existence was Strang's brother-in-law, Aaron Smith, who coincidentally was mentioned in the letter as one to be called as a counselor to Strang. The postmark on the letter also had some questionable aspects. Furthermore, the register that would have shown what letters came from Nauvoo to the local post office mysteriously disappeared before it could be proven whether or not the letter had passed through the post office. (See Crown of Glory, pp. 32-35.)

Rather than take his claim of authority to the center of the Church in Nauvoo, Strang went to Florence, Michigan, where on August 5 he read the letter to an assembled group of members and requested their sustaining vote in his behalf. When asked if he had been ordained as Joseph's successor, Strang replied that he had not and that it was not necessary. Significantly, he did not mention his alleged "anointing" by the angel on June 27. It was only several months later that he made this claim known, after being informed that a revelation from the Lord outlined the necessity of one's being properly ordained. (See D&C 42:11.)

Strang angrily stalked out of the Florence conference when his authority was challenged. "It is not my understanding," he said, "that Elders exercise discipline over the First President." His claims had an unsettling influence on those in attendance, for the following resolution was passed: "Those of the elders who were satisfied with the evidence of his calling, might proclaim it, taking upon themselves the responsibility in case it should prove an error, and those who were not satisfied should say nothing on the subject till further directions." (Crown of Glory, pp. 36-37.)

Elder Crandall Dunn, the presiding elder in Florence, excommunicated Strang from the Church and sent a report to the Twelve Apostles at Nauvoo. The Twelve, in turn, as the presiding officers of the Church, excommunicated Strang and his fellow claimant to authority, Aaron Smith, in August of 1844.

Strang sought to strengthen his assertion to authority by duplicating some of the events that occurred in Joseph Smith's life. In September of 1845, Strang laid claim to having been visited by an angel who told him of some buried plates that had been reserved for him to discover and translate. Four of his followers, including Aaron Smith, purportedly uncovered the plates and signed an affidavit testifying to that effect.

One biographer wrote the following regarding Strang's attempt to duplicate the Prophet Joseph Smith's bringing forth of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated: "As Joseph found in the Ontario hills a golden volume in which the chronicles of the Book of Mormon were preserved in cabalistic characters, translatable only by the crystalline Urim and Thummim, so James discovered in the sloping banks of the White River a long-buried and miraculously preserved record of the downfall of a great Israelitish tribe which inhabited this continent centuries ago, and whose patriarch, in lamenting the annihilation of his people, foretold the coming in future ages of a 'mighty prophet,' who 'should bring forth the record.'" (King of Beaver Island, p. 23.)

Four years after his "discovery" of the plates at White River in Walworth County, Wisconsin, Strang claimed to have received "the 18-plates of Laban," a direct reference to the brass plates mentioned in the Book of Mormon. His translation of these plates, together with several of his contemporary revelations, formed his publication of The Book of the Law of the Lord. In imitation of the Latter-day Saint's publication of the Doctrine and Covenants, Strang had seven witnesses sign their names to a testimonial page at the front of his latest publication.

Strang was innovative, and his charismatic personality attracted a number of followers to his false fold. Centuries before, the Savior had warned of "false prophets [who] shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, even the elect." (Mark 13:22.)

Among those who followed James Strang at some point during his abortive ministry were some of the "elect," such as William Smith and John E. Page of the Quorum of the Twelve; former apostle William E. M'Lellin, who was excommunicated in 1838; and William Marks, Nauvoo Stake president. In addition, Strang's followers included such prominent rogues as John C. Bennett, whom the historian Bancroft described as having ability and brains, "but no soul." (In B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. [Provo, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930], 2:47.) Bennett, who had been excommunicated in 1842, endeared himself to Strang by referring to the latter as "the Imperial Primate over all Israel" and claimed for himself the position of "General-in-Chief." (Crown of Glory, p. 75.) All of these men eventually had a falling out with Strang, and some ended up in the movement that ultimately became the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.

Strang led his followers to establish the "cornerstone of Zion" on Beaver Island, one of twelve in a cluster in Lake Michigan. He renamed the harbor city after himself, calling it St. James, and was recklessly hostile to any who did not accept him as their prophet-leader. He had himself crowned as king of the island and began to amass great political power in the area. But he also had many detractors, some of them quite acrid in their feelings toward him. James J. Strang was shot by an assailant on June 16, 1856, and died on July 9. His church essentially fell into disarray, although one might find a few followers of his teachings even in our day.

Perhaps a good summary of Strang's claim to authority is found in the following note written to this pretended leader by two of the Twelve Apostles whom Strang had challenged to a debate on the issue of authority: "Sir—After Lucifer was cut off and thrust down to hell, we have no knowledge that God condescended to investigate the subject or right of authority with him. Your case has been disposed of by the authorities of The Church. Being satisfied with our own power and calling, we have no disposition to ask from whence yours came. Respectfully, Orson Hyde, John Taylor." (Succession in the Presidency, p. 36, note.)

Alpheus Cutler

Although he was a minor character in the drama that ensued on the issue of succession, Alpheus Cutler was one of those who claimed to have been secretly ordained as Joseph Smith's successor. Cutler played an active role in the Church during its formative years, serving on high councils and other special committees, including the Council of Fifty. (The Council of Fifty, which included non-Mormons, was organized to relieve the First Presidency and the Twelve of temporal responsibilities, especially in political and economic planning.)

His actions following the martyrdom indicate that he initially supported the Twelve Apostles. He received his endowments in the Nauvoo Temple in December 1845 and was called to serve as a captain of one of the pioneer companies heading west. Although he started on the journey, he later withdrew from the main body of the Saints and established a colony of followers in Iowa. He was excommunicated from the Church on April 20, 1851, and formed his own apostate organization, "The True Church of Jesus Christ," on September 19, 1853. (See Brewster, Encyclopedia, p. 118.)

His claims to authority were described in an official history of his church:

Joseph Smith, sometime prior to his death, organized a Quorum of Seven, all of whom were ordained under his hand to the prophetic office; with all the rights, keys, powers, privileges, and blessings belonging to that condition. The only difference in the ordination of the seven, was in the case of Alpheus Cutler, whose right to act as prophet, seer, and revelator was to be in force upon the whole world from that very hour. Under this ordination, he claimed an undisputed right to organize and build up the kingdom the same as Joseph Smith had done. (Chancey Whiting, Sr., quoted in Rupert J. Fletcher and Daisy Whiting Fletcher, Alpheus Cutler and the Church of Jesus Christ [Independence, Missouri: The Church of Jesus Christ, 1974], p. 53.)

Alpheus Cutler was sustained by his followers as "our head or chief Councilor," and another man was appointed as the president of the organization. His organization reached a peak of 183 members by 1859, but gradually declined to a handful of followers. (Diary of William W. Blair, 1863-64, 13 March 1863, RLDS Archives; cited in Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis," p. 198.)

William Smith

Another of the claimants to the presiding position of the Church was Joseph Smith's younger brother William. He was one of the original apostles chosen in February of 1835. However, his headstrong attitude often put him at odds with the Prophet and his brethren among the Twleve. He was aware of his weaknesses, and in December of 1835, following a public disagreement with Joseph and Hyrum, he suggested that it might be best to be released from his apostolic calling.

William said:

It would be better for [the apostles] to appoint one, in the office, that would be better able to fill [the office], and by doing this they would . . . leave me where I was before I was chosen; then I would not be in a situation to bring so much disgrace upon the cause, when I fall into temptation; and perhaps, by this I might obtain salvation. You know my passions and the danger of falling from so high a station; and thus by withdrawing from the office of the Apostleship, while there is salvation for me, and remaining a member of the Church—I feel afraid, if I don't do this, it will be worse for me some other day. (History of the Church, 2:339.)

In responding to his brother's request, the Prophet referred to William's "passions" as "that wicked spirit." (History of the Church, 2:342.) In Joseph's response to his brother's request to be released from his calling among the Twleve, much can be learned about serving faithfully:

You desire to remain in the Church, but forsake your Apostleship. This is the stratagem of the evil one; when he has gained one advantage, he lays a plan for another. But by maintaining your Apostleship, in rising up and making one tremendous effort, you may overcome your passions and please God. And by forsaking your Apostleship, is not to be willing to make that sacrifice that God requires at your hands, and is to incur His displeasure; and without pleasing God, we do not think it will be any better for you. When a man falls one step, he must regain that step again, or fall another; he has still more to gain, or eventually all is lost. (History of the Church, 2:342-43.)

William retained his office, but his "passions" got him in continuing difficulties, and in 1839 he was dropped from the Quorum of the Twelve for a three-week period.

He received the keys of the kingdom along with his brethren of the Twelve under the hands of Joseph Smith prior to the martyrdom of his brothers, the Prophet and the Patriarch. He sustained the right of the Twelve to lead the Church following the deaths of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. In a published statement on May 15, 1845, he said: "My advice to all, without respect of persons, is the same now that it was then. Support and uphold the proper authorities of the church—when I say authorities, I mean the whole, and not a part; the Twelve, and not one, two, six, eight, ten or eleven, but the whole Twelve; follow me as I follow Christ, God being our judge." (In Times and Seasons 6:904.)

Being the eldest surviving son of the Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., William was ordained the Patriarch to the Church on May 24, 1845, which office he held in addition to his apostolic calling. Because of a misprint in a Church publication that announced his calling as Patriarch "over" the Church, William claimed precedence over the Twelve. Although he reaffirmed his support of the Twelve in July of that same year, his rebellious spirit led the Saints to fail to sustain him either as an apostle or as the Patriarch on October 6, 1845. He published a pamphlet against the Twelve and was excommunicated on October 19, 1845.

William apparently did not have the ability to attract much of a following to his own claims to authority, and he became affiliated with several splinter groups over the next few years. In 1846 he joined Strang's organization as a patriarch but left a year later amid much bitterness. He unsuccessfully attempted to gather a group of Saints at Palestine Grove, Illinois, in 1848 and finally effected a new organization at Covington, Kentucky, in 1850 based on the doctrine of lineal descent. William served as "president pro tem," with former quorum member Lyman Wight as one of his counselors. Jason Briggs, one of the key figures in the later organization of the Reorganized Church, served as a member of William's council of apostles. This organization did not last, and William later became nominally affiliated with the Reorganized movement. (See Russell Rich, Those Who Would Be Leaders [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1967], pp. 40-42.)

Lyman Wight

Lyman Wight was ordained an apostle by Joseph Smith on April 8, 1841. During the trying days of Missouri, Lyman had proven himself a faithful defender of the faith and of its prophet-leader, who nicknamed him the "wild ram of the mountains." Following the death of the Prophet Joseph, Elder Wight found it difficult to bend his will to that of the entire Twelve.

Evidently as a member of Joseph's Council of Fifty, Elder Wight had been commissioned by Joseph Smith to establish a colony in Texas. The Texas mission became Wight's singular focus, and he rebelled against his associates in the Twelve, claiming that the Council of Fifty had a higher authority than the apostles. He argued that the Saints should go to Texas and establish themselves in that area of the country rather than go west as Brigham Young counseled. In 1845 he led a small colony to Texas. He was excommunicated by the Twelve on December 3, 1848, and the following year became a counselor to William Smith in the latter's organization. Wight espoused the idea of lineal succession and promoted Joseph Smith III as the rightful successor to his illustrious father.

In spite of this, however, Wight claimed personal authority by secret ordination from the Prophet Joseph. In July 1855, Wight wrote that he had been ordained to the office of "Benamey" in 1834 in the presence of an angel. He further claimed that Joseph had given him a lifelong mission in 1844: "The revolation of the Lord was given by the angel of the seventh dispensation and was to continue during my life it was given by the highest authority that then was and I can not see any use or benefit it could be to alter it especially as their is no power on earth that can do it. . . . my mission was to continue dureing my life and as Joseph never found fault with me and no other man has authority to do so I think my case will lay over till the Lord takes me to himself." (Letterbook of Lyman Wight, Research Library and Archives, RLDS Church, p. 25; cited in Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis," p. 197.)

Wight did not claim presiding authority over the Church, for at various times he supported different individuals or groups. However, he did claim that "no other man" had authority over him; he was independent of all others. His followers quickly dispersed following his death in 1858.

John E. Page

Elder John E. Page was the first man to be ordained as a replacement for one of the original apostles called in 1835. He received his ordination on December 19, 1838, being ordained under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. Unfortunately, he did not remain true. Like others who ultimately fell away from the Church, Elder Page displayed an independence that made it difficult for him to humble himself before proper authority.

In 1836 he was called on a mission to Canada but initially declined because he said he didn't have the means. Joseph Smith took the coat off his own back and gave it to the reluctant missionary, promising him success and the the Lord's blessings. In 1840 he was called to go on a mission to Palestine with fellow apostle Orson Hyde, but he failed to do so.

In April 1843, he organized a branch in Cincinnati with a constitution requiring the branch president to be elected every four years. Several months later Elders Heber C. Kimball and Orson Pratt reorganized the branch and its policies according to accepted Church procedures. Upon their departure from the area, Elder Page immediately reinstated his previous policies and changed the branch leadership. This action was overturned by Elders Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith, who visited the branch shortly thereafter.

Although he had initially publicly endorsed the right of the Twelve Apostles to lead the Church following the death of the Prophet, his rebellious spirit led him to break with the Twelve. He took out an advertisement in a newspaper, which Andrew Jensen noted suggested that he "was out of employment and would preach for anybody that would sustain his family." (LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. [Salt Lake City: Western Epics, 1971], 1:93.)

John E. Page was disfellowshipped from the Quorum of the Twelve on February 9, 1846. He then joined with the Strang movement, offering his services "to let loos[e] my small artillery in a war of words against false principles." (Crown of Glory, p. 68.) On his way to Wisconsin to join with Strang, Page met a company of Saints coming from Canada. He claimed authority to lead them to Wisconsin. A few were deceived, but the majority continued on to Nauvoo to join the main body of the Saints under the direction of the Twelve Apostles. He was excommunicated on June 26, 1846. (See Melvin R. Brooks, LDS Reference Encyclopedia, 2 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960-65], 1:359.) One biographer noted that John E. Page's "apostolic title, 'The Sun Dial,' was curiously appropriate, for like a sun dial, he marked only the sunny hours." (Crown of Glory, p. 68.)

David Whitmer

Of all the false claimants to presiding authority following Joseph Smith's death, David Whitmer was the one who really had some historical basis on which to base his claim. As noted in the previous chapter, David had at one time been designated by the Prophet himself as his successor. However, this designation was later changed: First, by Oliver Cowdery's subsequent and superseding ordination as the Associate President of the Church, which placed the Prophet's former scribe in the role of successor to the President. And second, David Whitmer's excommunication in 1838, which not only deprived him of Church membership but of his priesthood authority as well.

Following his excommunication, David Whitmer remained in Missouri for the next fifty years of his life. Three years after the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the excommunicated and former apostle William E. M'Lellin induced David to join a movement he had organized. On February 10, 1847, David Whitmer was sustained as the president of this new church, which was called "The Church of Christ."

A schism arose between Whitmer and M'Lellin, partly because the designated president refused to move from his home in Richmond, Missouri, to Kirtland, Ohio, which M'Lellin wanted as the headquarters for his church. David broke from the church, confessing, as Richard L. Anderson said, "that he had been emotionally moved instead of divinely directed" to join with M'Lellin. He appeared to be embarrassed about this brief association. ("David Whitmer, the Independent Missouri Businessman," Improvement Era, April 1969, p. 76; William E. Berrett, The Restored Church, 11th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1963], p. 209.)

In a letter dated July 28, 1847, Oliver Cowdery, David's fellow witness of the Book of Mormon, wrote to his friend regarding keys of priesthood authority. "Now whether the Lord will call us again publicly or not to work in his great cause, is not known to me," declared Oliver. "We may not live to see the day," he continued, "but we have the authority. AND DO HOLD THE KEYS. It is important, should we not be permitted to act in that authority, that we confer them upon some man or men, whom God may appoint, that this priesthood be not taken again from the earth." (Ensign of Liberty 1, no. 6 [May 1848]: 92.)

Evidently neither Oliver nor David understood that keys of priesthood authority do not remain with one who has been excommunicated from the Church by those who are in authority. Or perhaps they did not feel that their excommunications were completely valid. They also did not seem to understand, at least at that time, that these keys had been bestowed upon the Twelve Apostles. Shortly after he wrote this letter, Oliver evidently gained an understanding of these principles because he was rebaptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on November 12, 1848, and affirmed his support of the Twelve Apostles as the legal and rightful holders of the keys of priesthood authority.

Both publicly and privately Oliver Cowdery declared that "the 'Twelve' were the only men that could lead the Church after the death of Joseph, and that every man that wished to do right would follow the main channel of the stream." When later questioned about the contents of his letter to David Whitmer, Oliver replied: "When I wrote that letter I did not know of the revelation which says, that the keys and power conferred upon me, were taken from me and placed upon the head of Hyrum Smith [see D&C 124:91-95], and it was that revelation which changed my views on this subject." He went on to say that he was not seeking position in the Church but merely to once again become a member thereof and that he had no "pretensions to authority." (Junius F. Wells, "Oliver Cowdery," Improvement Era, March 1911, pp. 393-94.)

Unfortunately, David Whitmer did not follow the same path of return as Oliver Cowdery. In 1876 he ordained a nephew to "organize a new church according to the original pattern." Not much came of this or of another feeble effort to organize a church several years before his death. (Quinn, "The Mormon Succession Crisis," p. 209; Berrett, The Restored Church, p. 209.)

In April 1887, David Whitmer published a booklet entitled "An Address to All Believers in Christ by a Witness to the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon." The title, of course, bore continued witness of his firm belief in the divine manifestation that had been his, but the contents exhibited his differences with the divine Church of which he had been an original member. While never denying his testimony of the Book of Mormon, David died in 1888 outside the Church that held the priesthood authority necessary to provide him the ordinances of salvation.

William Marks

Although he did not hold apostolic keys, William Marks was in a position of power and prominence at the time of the martrydoms of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Marks was the president of the Nauvoo Stake and, as pointed out earlier, was the one to whom Sidney Rigdon first went in his aborted attempt to become the guardian for the Church. While he was sympathetic to Rigdon's cause, William Marks initially sustained the Twelve Apostles in their rightful role as the ones who should lead the Church following the August 1844 meeting in Nauvoo.

By October he was found to be in rebellion against the leadership of the Twelve and was rejected as the Nauvoo Stake president, with only two members voting to sustain him. He repented for a time and published the following statement on December 9, 1844: "After mature and candid deliberation, I am fully and satisfactorily convinced that Mr. Sidney Rigdon's claims to the presidency of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, are not founded in truth. I have been deceived by his specious pretences and now feel to warn every one over whom I have any influence to beware of him and his pretended visions and revelations. The Twelve are the proper persons to lead the church." (Times and Seasons 5:742.)

The former stake president of Nauvoo did not remain true to the Twelve and was excommunicated in 1845. He joined the Strangite movement and presided over one of this group's conferences, held on April 6, 1846, in which James J. Strang was sustained as their prophet. During a three-year period with Strang's church, Marks served as president of the high priests quorum, bishop, apostle, and as a member of the First Presidency.

He became disaffected with Strang and in 1852 joined a movement established by Charles B. Thompson, who had followed the Strangites for a time before breaking to establish his own organization. Thompson claimed to be "Baneemy, patriarch of Zion." (Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Experience [New York: Alfred Knopf, 1979], p. 90.) Marks was called by Thompson to find a suitable gathering place for the Saints. The wanderlust hit Marks again, and he left Thompson's group. Then in 1855 he joined an organization established by John E. Page.

In 1859, this former rock of Nauvoo, now turned rolling stone, joined the movement that became the Reorganized Church. He was allowed into this organization on the basis of his original baptism in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Church from which he had been excommunicated fifteen years earlier.

In April of 1860, Marks helped "ordain" Joseph Smith III as the president and prophet of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. He became first counselor in the First Presidency of this organization and served in that capacity until his death in 1872.

The Reorganized Movement

Of all the splinter groups that broke from the the leadership of the Twelve Apostles, only one has sustained any substantial following over the years. The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints had its beginnings in 1852 when Jason W. Briggs and Zenas (sometimes spelled Zenos) H. Gurley formed the "New Organization" from several branches of Strang's church. Joseph Fielding Smith estimated that this new group included about 100 members, "most of whom were converts made for Mr. Strang." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:252.)

Jason Briggs had joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1841 and remained in the Church under the leadership of the Twelve Apostles until 1846. He did not follow the main body of the Saints to the West, remaining behind where he eventually joined James J. Strang's movement. He served as a missionary for Strang in 1848. He renounced Strang in 1850 and accepted William Smith's claims, becoming an apostle in this new church.

Briggs claimed to have received a revelation in 1851 wherein he was convinced that William Smith was wrong in his claims and that "in the Lord's own due time He would call upon the seed of Joseph Smith to preside over the high priesthood of the Church." (Samuel H. Carpenter, "Facts about Differences That Persist between the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" [The Hague, Holland: Netherlands Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1959], p. 7.)

Zenas Gurley joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1838 and held the office of seventy at the time of the martyrdom. He supported the Twelve Apostles until the time of the exodus from Nauvoo. He left the Church and joined with James J. Strang, filling a mission for this self-proclaimed prophet. In 1852 Gurley claimed to have received a revelation designating Joseph Smith III as the one who should rightfully lead the Saints.

Both Briggs and Gurley became two of the seven apostles chosen in 1853 to lead this new organization, with Briggs presiding as the senior officer, where he remained until 1860. The revelation to choose the apostles and a provisional president originated with H. H. Deam, who was one of the seven chosen to fill the presiding positions in the new organization. The presidency of the new organization was offered to the son of Joseph and Emma Smith, Joseph Smith III, but the youth initially declined the offer. Deam claimed that because the Prophet's son had "neglected to comply with the will of God," he "had forfeited the right, and that it was our privilege and duty to go forward and fully organize." ("Facts about Differences," p. 13.) Deam and John Cunningham, another of the seven apostles, were expelled from the quorum for promoting this idea.

In 1860, twenty-eight-year-old Joseph Smith III accepted the presidency of what is now known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. He was ordained as "President of the high priesthood and president of the church" under the hands of four men: William Marks, Zenas Gurley, Samuel Powers, and W. W. Blair. (The Restored Church, p. 210.) Regarding the authority of these four men to perform this ordination, one should consider the word of the Lord revealed in 1831: "It shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church." (D&C 42:11.)

Neither Samuel Powers nor W. W. Blair ever held priesthood or membership in the Church established by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith during his lifetime, which church is "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (D&C 1:30.) As previously indicated, William Marks and Zenas Gurley both initially sustained the Twelve Apostles as the rightful leaders of the Church and kingdom of God on earth, but both later fell away and followed several offshoot organizations. Whence did their authority come? For a thorough discussion on this matter, one might study Origin of the Reorganized Church and the Question of Succession by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith.

It is of interest to note that Briggs left the Reorganization in 1886, repudiating the fundamental doctrines of the church he had helped organize. He was joined in his departure by the family of his fellow founder, Zenas Gurley.

The Reorganized Church was based essentially on the doctrine of lineal succession, or the right of presidency passing from father to son. From 1860 until the early 1990s, the Reorganites have followed this line of succession. Three of Joseph Smith III's sons followed their father in the presidency (Frederick M. Smith, Israel A. Smith, and W. Wallace Smith). One grandson, Wallace B. Smith, came to the presidency in 1978. However, this last president has no sons to follow him in office. Thus, the basic principle upon which the Reorganization was founded can no longer be followed.

In addition to the right of presidency through lineal succession, the Reorganized movement has taken issue with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on other issues like plural marriage, plurality of gods, baptism for the dead, temple ordinances, the literal gathering of the Saints, and granting of the priesthood to women. "Thus," says one source, "the Reorganization came to occupy a stance between standard Protestantism and Utah Mormonism. It retained a belief in a reopened canon, but its doctrinal position edged closer to a socially conscious, conservative sort of Protestantism." (The Mormon Experience, pp. 92-93.) As changes have continued in the Reorganized Church, it has continued to move further from the roots from which it claims its authority.

Conclusion

Only a few of the more prominent movements or individuals who have claimed authority to lead the Saints of God have been dealt with in this chapter. From the dissident movement of Wycam Clark's Pure Church of Christ, organized in 1831, up to the present day, there have been many who have severed themselves from the True Tree established by the Lord with its priesthood roots. Some of these hundreds of offshoots have been little known, while others have gained some degree of notoriety through their actions or doctrines.

Brigham Young's pronouncement of August 8, 1844, remains in effect: "All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper." (History of the Church, 7:232.)
