Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 5

A Historical Overview of Succession

Brigham Young as the Senior Apostle

As soon as Joseph Smith's spirit took flight from his mortal body, the authority to lead the Church passed to the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young as their president. There was no lapse of authority in the interim following the martyrdoms of Joseph and Hyrum Smith on June 27, 1844, and the conference of August 8 where the Twelve were officially sustained in their presiding position over the Church. God knew who His next prophet was even though many in and out of the Church may have been unclear on the issue.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie gave the following testimony of the transition of authority following the martyrdom: "When Joseph Smith—sent to a martyr's death by evil and murderous men—gasps his last breath, Brigham Young, being the next senior officer in the earthly kingdom, automatically becomes its presiding officer. The next breath drawn by Brother Brigham is the breath of power filling the lungs of the Lord's previously anointed servant. There is not so long a time as the twinkling of an eye when the Church is without a presiding officer." ("The Keys of the Kingdom," Ensign, May 1983, p. 23; italics added.)

Brigham Young and his fellow apostles led the Church as a quorum for a time and did not immediately proceed to reorganize the First Presidency. In an editorial in the Church's official publication, the Times and Seasons, dated September 2, 1844, the leaders responded to the question of who would succeed Joseph as President of the Church:

Great excitement prevails throughout the world to know "who shall be the successor of Joseph Smith?"

In reply, we say, be patient, be patient a little, till the proper time comes, and we will tell you all. "Great wheels move slow." At present, we can say that a special conference of the church was held in Nauvoo on the 8th [of August], and it was carried without a dissenting voice, that the "Twelve" should preside over the whole church, and when any alteration in the presidency shall be required, seasonable notice will be given; and the elders abroad, will best exhibit their wisdom to all men, by remaining silent on those things they are ignorant of. (5:632.)

Perhaps the Church needed time to make the adjustment from following the Prophet of the Restoration to following his successor. Maybe a waiting period wherein twelve men led the Church helped to foil any plans of further assassinations of Church leaders. Whatever the reasons may have been for not immediately reorganizing the presidency of the Church, it is evident that the Lord placed His stamp of approval on this interim of apostolic presidency.

The title of "President of the Church" was attached to Brigham Young several years before the First Presidency was officially reorganized. In a letter dated December 5, 1844, Brigham Young signed himself as "Prest of the Church of L.D.S." He was "publicly sustained to that position on 7 April 1845, and by 1846 rank-and-file Mormons were referring to Brigham Young as President of the Church." ("The Mormon Succession Crisis," pp. 216, 218.)

On November 15, 1847, the issue of organizing a separate First Presidency was discussed by the Quorum of the Twelve. There was no question about President Young's presiding position, but evidently some among the Twelve wondered whether a separate quorum of three presiding high priests (the First Presidency) was necessary. Brigham Young apparently felt that continuing to have the Twelve preside over the Church required that a majority of them remain at Church headquarters rather than be out in the nations of the world. A First Presidency of three would solve this dilemma.

A number of meetings were held to discuss the matter, culminating with a five-hour meeting on December 5, 1847. President Young said he had "been stirred up to do this by the spirit of the Lord," and the apostles voted to sustain his desire to form a separate First Presidency. In a later private meeting of the apostles, the voice of the Lord ratified the action by declaring: "Let my servant Brigham step forth and receive the full power of the presiding Priesthood in my Church and kingdom." (Journal of Discourses, 8:234.)

At a December 27, 1847 Church conference, a constituent body of the Church sustained a separate First Presidency, with Brigham Young as President and fellow apostles Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors. Apparently President Young believed the presidency to be an extension of the Quorum of the Twelve. In 1865, almost eighteen years after the First Presidency had been reorganized, Brigham Young declared that "the Twelve have dictated, guided and directed the destinies of this great people" since Joseph Smith's martyrdom. (Journal of Discourses, 11:115.)

President Young added additional counselors in the First Presidency during his administration. Joseph F. Smith was set apart as a counselor to the First Presidency on July 1, 1866. Lorenzo Snow, Brigham Young, Jr., Albert Carrington, John W. Young, and George Q. Cannon were all sustained as additional counselors to Brigham Young on April 8, 1873, and as assistant counselors on May 9, 1874.

During his presidency, Brigham Young also ordained men to the apostolic office independent of the Council of the Twelve. Jedediah M. Grant was ordained an apostle on April 7, 1854, and called to serve as second counselor in the First Presidency. Ten-year-old John W. Young was ordained an apostle by his father on February 22, 1855, and was later called to serve in the First Presidency, where he was the first counselor at the time of President Young's death. He was sustained as a counselor to the Twelve Apostles on October 6, 1877, and released on October 6, 1891. Daniel H. Wells was ordained an apostle on January 4, 1857, and set apart as the second counselor in the First Presidency. He, like John Young, was sustained as a counselor to the Twelve Apostles on October 6, 1877, and served in that capacity until his death in 1891. President Young also ordained two other sons to the apostolic office: Joseph A. Young and Brigham Young, Jr., were both ordained apostles on February 4, 1864. Brigham Young's namesake was ultimately called to serve in the Quorum of the Twelve along with one other apostle ordained outside the quorum—Joseph F. Smith, who was ordained an apostle on July 1, 1866. The significant relationship of apostolic seniority of these two men will be discussed later in this chapter. (See Deseret News 1987 Church Almanac [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1988], pp. 44-49.)

John Taylor as the Senior Apostle

At the death of Brigham Young on August 29, 1877, the First Presidency was dissolved, and the leadership of the Church devolved upon the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. At the first general conference of the Church following the death of Brigham Young, his two former counselors were both sustained as counselors to the Twelve Apostles, but, as noted above, neither one was ever set apart as a member of that governing body.

John Taylor was the senior apostle and was sustained as the President of the Twelve Apostles at the October conference in 1877. Regarding his position, President Taylor said: "I occupied the senior position in the quorum, and occupying that position, which was thoroughly understood by the Quorum of the Twelve, on the death of President Young, as the Twelve assumed the presidency, and I was their president, it placed me in a position of president of the Church." (In John A. Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939], p. 249; italics added.)

Note that at the time of his being sustained as the senior apostle, three other Apostles were still living and functioning as members of the quorum who had previously been recognized as being senior to John Taylor. Two of these apostles, Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt, were original members of the Twelve selected by the Three Witnesses in 1835. The other, Wilford Woodruff, was called to the apostleship at the same time as Elder Taylor in 1838. (See D&C 118:6.)

Why were none of these men sustained as the presiding officer at the time of Brigham Young's death? An investigation of the facts reveals an important principle of seniority and succession.

When the first twelve men were called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1835, there appeared to be little concern about who was senior. In a conference of May 2, 1835, Joseph Smith placed the twelve in a rotating presidency according to age. The Prophet instructed that "it would be the duty of the Twelve, when in council, to take their seats together according to age, the oldest to be seated at the head, and preside in the first council, the next oldest in the second, and so on until the youngest had presided; and then begin at the oldest again." (History of the Church, 2:219-20.) Age was the determining factor of seniority.

Because he was the older of the two, Wilford Woodruff was given initial seniority over John Taylor after each had been ordained to fill vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. Although they were called on the same day in July of 1838. John Taylor was ordained on December 19, 1838, and Wilford Woodruff on April 26, 1839. For over twenty-two years, Elder Woodruff was seated senior to Elder Taylor.

At the October conference in 1861, Brigham Young directed the clerk of the conference to change the order of seniority involving the two men. He indicated that an apostle's seniority should be based in accordance with the date of his ordination. He indicated that "he spoke of it now because the time would come when a dispute might arise about it." (History of Brigham Young, manuscript, October 1861, p. 437.)

John Taylor gave the following explanation:

Through some inadvertence, or perhaps mixed up with the idea of seniority of age taking the precedence, Wilford Woodruff's name was placed on the records of the time, and for many years after, before that of John Taylor. This matter was investigated some time afterwards by President Young and his council, sanctioned also by the Twelve, whether John Taylor held the precedency and stood in gradation prior to Brother Wilford Woodruff, and it was voted on and decided that his name be placed before Wilford Woodruff's, although Wilford Woodruff was the older man. The reason assigned for this change was that although both were called at the same time, John Taylor was ordained into the Twelve prior to Wilford Woodruff; and another prominent reason would be that as John Taylor assisted in the ordination of Elder Wilford Woodruff, he therefore must precede him in the Council. (Succession in the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: n.p., 1881], p. 16.)

Thus the principle of date and order of ordination as an apostle became a guiding principle in seniority. But what about Elders Hyde and Pratt? Both were ordained prior to John Taylor.

In October of 1838, Orson Hyde got caught up in some of the criticism leveled at the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Church. Being "overcome by the spirit of darkness" (Smith, Essentials in Church History, p. 289), he signed an affidavit supporting false and inflammatory accusations against the Church by apostate Thomas B. Marsh. Elder Hyde was dropped from the Quorum of the Twelve on May 4, 1839, but repented and returned to activity in the Church the following month. On June 27, he was reinstated in the quorum where he took his original place of seniority. When Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards were sustained as the First Presidency on December 27, 1847, Orson Hyde was sustained as the President of the Twelve Apostles. He served in this position until 1875, at which time Brigham Young placed John Taylor ahead of Elder Hyde.

Because of a gross misunderstanding, believing the false accusations of an apostate rather than the words of the Prophet of God, both Orson Pratt and his wife were excommunicated from the Church on August 20, 1842. (See Ivan J. Barrett, Joseph Smith and the Restoration [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1973], pp. 523-24.) Within six months Orson had resolved his differences and recognized the falseness of the accusations made against Joseph Smith. In repentant humility, the Pratts sought readmission to the Church, and both were rebaptized by the Prophet Joseph on January 20, 1843. Elder Pratt was restored to his apostolic office and, like Elder Hyde before him, took his original seat of seniority, where he remained until June of 1875, when John Taylor was rightfully placed ahead of him in seniority.

Some years later, Elder Taylor discussed his feelings about the matter of seniority involving Elders Hyde and Pratt:

Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt had both of them been disfellowshipped and dropped from their quorum, and when they returned, without any particular investigation or arrangement, they took the position in the quorum which they had formerly occupied, and as there was no objection raised, or investigation had on this subject, things continued in this position for a number of years. Some ten or twelve years ago, Brother George A. Smith drew my attention to this matter. I think it was soon after he was appointed as counselor to the first presidency; and he asked me if I had noticed the impropriety of the arrangement. He stated that these brethren having been dropped from the quorum could not assume the position that they before had in the quorum; but that all those who remained in the quorum when they had left it must necessarily take the precedence of them in the quorum. He stated, at the same time, that these questions might become very serious ones, in case of change of circumstances arising from death or otherwise; remarking also, that I stood before them in the quorum. I told him I was aware of that, and of the correctness of the position assumed by him, and had been for years, but that I did not choose to agitate or bring up a question of that kind. Furthermore, I stated that, personally, I cared nothing about the matter, and, moreover, I entertained a very high esteem for both the parties named; while, at the same time, I could not help but see, with him, that complications might hereafter arise, unless the matter were adjusted. Some time after, in Sanpete, in June, 1875, President Young brought up the subject of seniority, and stated that John Taylor was the man that stood next to him; and that where he was not, John Taylor presided. He also made the statement that Brother Hyde and Brother Pratt were not in their right positions in the quorum. (Gospel Kingdom, sel. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964], pp. 191-92.)

In this manner an important development in the principles governing succession had been established. The "Senior Apostle [is the one] holding the oldest ordination without interruption." (Journal of Discourses, 19:234.) Continuous service in the Quorum of the Twelve was just as essential as the date of one's ordination. Elders Hyde and Pratt lost their seniority as a result of an interruption in their service in that quorum.

John Taylor presided over the Church as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles from the death of Brigham Young until October 10, 1880, when the First Presidency was reorganized. Elder Taylor was sustained as the President of the Church with two fellow quorum members, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, as his counselors.

Why was there a three-year interim between the death of Brigham Young and the reorganization of the First Presidency? At the time the Twelve were sustained to lead the Church, on October 8, 1877, Elder George Q. Cannon explained:

Well . . . says one, Why cannot you organize a First Presidency now, if the Twelve have this authority? Do you want to know the reason, brethren and sisters, why we do not take such a step? I suspect you would like to know why a man and his two Counselors are not singled out, called and set apart by the voice of the people at this Conference, as the First Presidency of the Church? The reason is simply this: the Lord has not revealed it to us; he has not commanded us to do this, and until he does require this at our hands, we shall not do it. . . . When the voice of God comes, when it shall be the counsel of our Heavenly Father that a First Presidency shall be again organized, the Quorum of the Twelve will be organized in its fullness as before. Therefore you can wait, as well as we, for the voice of the Lord. (Journal of Discourses, 19:236-37.)

That unmistakable voice came some three years later, and on October 10, 1880, the First Presidency was reorganized.

Wilford Woodruff as Senior Apostle

On July 25, 1887, the spirit of President John Taylor left his earthly tabernacle to begin his labors on the other side of the veil that separates mortals from those of the unseen world of spirits and resurrected beings. The mantle of the presiding officer of the Church was passed to the next senior apostle, Wilford Woodruff. As previously explained, Elder Woodruff was ordained as one of the Twelve on April 26, 1839, and was widely known for his faithful service in his sacred office.

At the October conference of 1887, continuing the pattern followed at the deaths of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was sustained as the governing council of the Church, with Wilford Woodruff as President. In expressing himself about his position as the presiding officer of the Church, President Woodruff said: "President John Taylor's death places the chief responsibility and care of the Church of Latter-day Saints upon my shoulders, in connection with the Twelve, which now become the presiding authority of the Church. . . . It is a position I have never looked for, but in the providence of God this new responsibility is thrown upon me. . . . I never expected to outlive President Taylor, but God has ordained otherwise." (In Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964], p. 560.)

On April 7, 1889, the First Presidency was again established as a separate quorum of three presiding high priests, with Wilford Woodruff as President and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. This presidency served until President Woodruff's death on September 2, 1898.

Lorenzo Snow as the Senior Apostle

Lorenzo Snow was eighty-four years of age when he became the senior apostle of the Church and kingdom of God on earth. The day following the funeral of President Woodruff, the Twelve met in council in the the Salt Lake Temple. In great humility, recognizing the limitations of his age, Lorenzo Snow offered to vacate his position as the senior apostle in deference to any others of the quorum whom the members of the council might choose to be their leader. The response of the Twelve was to immediately sustain him as their rightful leader—as President of the Twelve.

Several days later, on September 13, the members of the Quorum of the Twelve sustained Lorenzo Snow as the President of the Church, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors in the First Presidency. This was the first time there had not been a long delay between the death of the previous prophet and the reorganization of the First Presidency.

There are several reasons why this occurred. First, almost six years before his death, Wilford Woodruff had instructed Lorenzo Snow on this matter. He said, "It was not the will of the Lord that in the future there should be a lengthy period elapse between the death of the president and the re-organization of the First Presidency." (Smith, Essentials in Church History, p. 501; see also Elders Journal 4:110-11.)

Most importantly, Lorenzo Snow had been instructed by the Savior himself on this matter. President Snow had earnestly prayed in the Salt Lake Temple for the life of Wilford Woodruff to be extended beyond his own. "Nevertheless," the humble man petitioned, "Thy will be done. I have not sought this responsibility but if it be Thy will, I now present myself before Thee for Thy guidance and instruction." His prayerful pleadings were answered by a personal visit from the resurrected Lord, who instructed him regarding the re-organization of the presidency. (Thomas C. Romney, The Life of Lorenzo Snow [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955], p. 445.)

Joseph F. Smith as Senior Apostle

Joseph F. Smith's rise to the position of senior apostle had an interesting history. Following a meeting of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve on July 1, 1866, Brigham Young announced to the Brethren that he felt impressed by the Spirit to ordain the twenty-seven-year-old son of the martyred Patriarch Hyrum Smith as an apostle and to call him as an additional counselor to the First Presidency.

At the time of his call, there was no vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. Not until October 8, 1867, was Joseph F. Smith set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, filling the vacancy created by the dropping of Amasa Lyman from the quorum.

One year later, Brigham Young, Jr., was called to fill a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve created by the call of Apostle George A. Smith to serve in the First Presidency in the place of Heber C. Kimball, who had passed away the previous summer. The thirty-year-old son of the President of the Church had been ordained an apostle by his father four years earlier on February 4, 1864.

At the October conference in 1868, Brigham Young, Jr., was sustained as the junior member of the Quorum of the Twelve, right behind Joseph F. Smith. However, at the following conference in April of 1869, his name was placed ahead of Joseph F. Smith's. This probably was done on the basis of the earlier ordination as an apostle that Brigham, Jr., had received. This order of apostolic seniority prevailed until 1900, although during much of this time seniority was not an issue because Joseph F. Smith was serving as a counselor in the First Presidency.

At a meeting of the First Presidency held on March 31, 1900, President Lorenzo Snow noted that since the death of Elder Franklin D. Richards the previous December, the apostle who was next to him in seniority was his first counselor, George Q. Cannon. He told President Cannon that he could step down from the First Presidency to preside over the Twelve if he desired to do so, but his counselor declined. President Snow also noted that Joseph F. Smith should be senior to Brigham Young, Jr., and this matter was brought up in a meeting of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve on April 5, 1900.

Joseph F. Smith described the important decision regarding apostolic seniority that was reached on that occasion:

It was unanimously decided that the acceptance of a member into the council or quorum of the Twelve fixed his rank or position in the Apostleship. That the Apostles took precedence from the date they entered the quorum. Thus today, President Snow is the senior Apostle. President George Q. Cannon next, myself next, Brigham Young [Jr.] next, Francis M. Lyman next, and so on to the last one received into the quorum. In the case of the death of President Snow, President Cannon surviving him, would succeed to the Presidency, and so on according to seniority in the Apostleship of the Twelve; that ordination to the Apostleship under the hands of any Apostle other than to fill a vacancy in the quorum, and authorized by the General Authorities of the Church did not count in precedence; that if the First Presidency were dissolved by the death of the President, his counselors having been ordained Apostles in the Quorum of the Twelve would resume their places in the quorum, according to the seniority of their ordinations into that quorum. This important ruling settles a long unsettled point, and is most timely. (In Joseph Fielding Smith, The Life of Joseph F. Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1969], pp. 310-11; italics added.)

The timeliness of this decision is reflected in the fact that President Cannon passed away one year and one week after this decision had been reached (April 12, 1901), which placed Joseph F. Smith as the next senior apostle to the President of the Church. On October 6, 1901, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as the first counselor in the First Presidency, with Rudger Clawson as second counselor to President Snow. Four days later, Lorenzo Snow died, and Joseph F. Smith became the senior apostle, one position ahead of Brigham Young, Jr.

On October 17, 1901, one week after the death of President Snow, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as the sixth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was the first one to come to this position after having served as a counselor in the First Presidency, but, as was the case with each of his predecessors, he was the recognized senior apostle on earth.

Note also the circumstances of Joseph F. Smith's being set apart to his presiding position as President of the Church. The patriarch of the Church, John Smith, was invited by President Smith to stand in the circle with the members of the Twelve Apostles and be mouth in pronouncing the blessing given to Joseph F. Smith on that special occasion. While the patriarch did not hold the apostolic keys, one must understand that this setting apart was not a conferral of keys; for, as previously pointed out, President Joseph F. Smith already possessed the keys of the priesthood in their fulness by virtue of his apostolic office. This setting apart was simply the conferral of a priesthood blessing, which the patriarch, by virtue of his holding the Melchizedek Priesthood and having been invited by the senior apostle to do so, had a right to bestow.

One other interesting aspect of the reorganization of the First Presidency under President Smith was his choice of counselors. Since the days of Brigham Young, the President's counselors had held the apostolic office (although several of President Young's counselors were ordained as apostles but not set apart as members of the Quorum of the Twelve.)

Joseph F. Smith reached beyond the Quorum of the Twelve in selecting his first counselor: John R. Winder, the second counselor in the presiding bishopric, was chosen to serve as first counselor in the First Presidency. President Smith did not follow the pattern of Brigham Young in conferring the apostolic office upon President Winder. One is reminded that the only office specified by the scriptures as being a requisite for serving in the First Presidency is that of high priest. (See D&C 107:22.) President Smith did take his other counselor from the Quorum of the Twelve: fellow apostle Anthon H. Lund was selected as the second counselor in the First Presidency.

President Joseph F. Smith presided over the Church as the senior apostle until his death on November 19, 1918.

Heber J. Grant as Senior Apostle

Heber J. Grant was ordained an apostle on October 16, 1882, when he was only twenty-five years of age. Thirty-four years later, on November 23, 1916, he was sustained as President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles following the death of the man who stood ahead of him in seniority, President Francis M. Lyman.

Heber J. Grant served as President of the Twelve for almost two years before the passing of President Joseph F. Smith. President Grant related the following regarding his last conversation with his predecessor. "The last words uttered by President Joseph F. Smith were to the effect, when he shook hands with me—he died that night—'The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you; you have got a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom He wants to lead His Church, and never makes any mistakes. The Lord bless you.'" ("President Grant's Opening Conference Message," Improvement Era, May 1941, p. 267.)

Four days after the death of President Smith, Heber J. Grant was sustained as the President of the Church, with Anthon H. Lund as his first counselor in the First Presidency and Charles W. Penrose as second counselor. Both of these men held the apostolic office and had served in the previous First Presidency under President Joseph F. Smith.

President Grant's first experience in filling a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve was a spiritual highlight that convinced him that the Lord was the one who ultimately selected those who would hold the apostolic office. For almost two months following his being sustained as President of the Church, Heber J. Grant prayed and pondered about who should fill the vacancy that existed in the Twelve. His mind continuously reflected on the name of Richard W. Young, who was not only a dear friend of President Grant, but who seemed eminently qualified by talent, experience, and spiritual depth to serve as one of the Lord's special witnesses. Richard Young was a retired general of the army, a lawyer, a successful businessman, a stake president, and the grandson of the late Brigham Young.

On January 7, 1919, after conferring with his counselors, President Grant wrote the name of Richard W. Young on a slip of paper, which he put in his pocket as he prepared to go to the temple to meet with the First Presidency and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. At the appointed time in the meeting, he reached in his pocket and retrieved the piece of paper with his friend's name on it. However, rather than presenting the name of Richard W. Young as the one to fill the vacancy among the Twelve, he presented the name of a man he hardly knew: Melvin J. Ballard. At the time Elder Ballard was serving as president of the Northwestern States Mission. (See Francis M. Gibbons, Heber J. Grant [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979], p. 175.)

Years later, as he reflected on that singular experience, President Grant testified: "I have felt the inspiration of the Living God directing me in my labors. From the day that I chose a comparative stranger to be one of the Apostles, instead of my lifelong and dearest living friend, I have known as I know that I live, that I am entitled to the light and the inspiration and the guidance of God in directing His work here upon this earth; and I know, as I know that I live, that it is God's work, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of the world." (In Conference Report, April 1941, p. 6.)

One significant development regarding the presiding officer over the Quorum of the Twelve occurred during Heber J. Grant's administration. Because Anthon H. Lund, who was second in apostolic seniority to President Grant, was serving in the First Presidency, Rudger Clawson, third in apostolic seniority, was sustained as "Acting President" of the Quorum of the Twelve in June 1919. In April 1920, in addition to being sustained as first counselor in the First Presidency, President Lund was also sustained as President of the Quorum of the Twelve, with Rudger Clawson as Acting President. This action affirmed President Grant's belief that the apostle who stood next in seniority to the President of the Church should be called the "President of the Twelve," even though other duties may preclude his actually administering the affairs of the Quorum of the Twelve.

Several interesting moves involving seniority and position in the Twelve occurred during President Grant's administration. The first one involved J. Reuben Clark, Jr., the U.S. ambassador to Mexico, who was called to serve as second counselor in the First Presidency on April 6, 1933. President Clark had not been a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Following the death of Anthony W. Ivins, first counselor in the First Presidency, President Clark was called to serve as first counselor, with David O. McKay as second counselor. They were sustained to their positions in October 1934. However, the name of J. Reuben Clark, Jr., was also presented as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles along with Alonzo A. Hinckley, making a total of thirteen names presented from that quorum. Although he served in the First Presidency until his death in 1961, this move established J. Reuben Clark's seniority among the ordained apostles in the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve.

The other interesting move regarding the apostolic office involved Sylvester Q. Cannon, who served as Presiding Bishop of the Church from 1925 until 1938. He was released from the bishopric at the April conference in 1938 and sustained as an "Associate to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles." Elder Cannon was ordained to the apostolic office on April 14, 1938. He was sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve on October 6, 1939, following the death of Elder Melvin J. Ballard.

George Albert Smith as Senior Apostle

President Heber J. Grant passed away on May 14, 1945, and one week later George Albert Smith was sustained as the President of the Church. President Smith had served as President of the Quorum of the Twelve and been the next senior apostle to President Grant since July 1, 1943.

George Albert Smith was ordained an apostle on October 8, 1903, at the age of thirty-three. Because of ill health, he was unable to serve actively in the Quorum of the Twelve from 1909 to 1912. However, during this time he continued to be sustained as a member of that governing body. Thus, there was no interruption in his service that might have affected his seniority among the apostles.

President Smith invited the two counselors who had served his predecessor—J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay—to continue to serve with him in his presidency. He led the Church as President and senior apostle until he passed away on April 4, 1951.

David O. McKay as Senior Apostle

In August of 1950, the man who stood next to George Albert Smith in seniority—President George F. Richards—passed away. At the October general conference of the Church, David O. McKay, who now stood next to President Smith in seniority, was sustained not only as the second counselor in the First Presidency, but also as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The next apostle in seniority, Joseph Fielding Smith, was sustained as the Acting President of the Twelve.

Five days after the death of George Albert Smith, David O. McKay was sustained as the President of the Church. In a surprising move, President McKay selected the third senior apostle, Stephen L Richards, as his first counselor and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., as his second counselor. President Clark had served the two previous Presidents as their first counselor, and many were puzzled by President McKay's actions.

President McKay explained:

I thoughtfully and prayerfully considered what two men would be most helpful and most contributive to the advancement of the Church. The impression came, I am sure, directly from Him whose Church this is, and who presides over it, that the two counselors whom you have this day approved should be the other members of the quorum of the First Presidency. Both are members of the Council of the Twelve, though counselors might have been chosen from High Priests outside the presiding body.

I chose these two members from the Council of the Twelve—two men with whom I have labored closely for many years, whose worth, whose ability I know. I have been associated with Elder Richards directly in Church affairs and in presiding positions for over thirty years. I have been associated with President Clark in two quorums of the First Presidency for over sixteen years. With these and other facts in mind, the question arose as to the order they should occupy in this new quorum.

Each man I love. Each man is capable in his particular lines, and particularly with respect to the welfare and advancement of the Kingdom of God.

I realized that there would be a question in the minds of some as to which one of the two should be chosen as first counselor. That question resolved itself in my mind first as to the order of precedence, seniority in the Council of the Twelve Apostles. That should make no difference according to the practice of the Church, because members of the Council had heretofore been chosen irrespective of the position a member occupied in the Council of the Twelve. And, as I have already said, high Priests have been chosen even as first counselors who were not members of the Council.

I felt that one guiding principle in this choice would be to follow the seniority in the Council. These two men were sitting in their places in that presiding body in the Church, and I felt impressed that it would be advisable to continue that same seniority in the new quorum of the First Presidency. I repeat, not as an established policy, but because it seemed advisable in view of my close relationship to these two choice leaders. (In Conference Report, Apr. 1951, pp. 150-51; italics added.)

President Stephen L Richards passed away on May 19, 1959, and President Clark was once again sustained as first counselor in the First Presidency, with Henry D. Moyle of the Council of the Twelve as second counselor. Two years later, on June 22, 1961, because of the failing health of President Clark, an additional counselor was called to serve in the First Presidency: Hugh B. Brown was called from the Twelve to fill this position, and he was replaced in the Quorum of the Twelve by Gordon B. Hinckley. It is ironic that twenty years later Elder Hinckley himself would be called from among the Twelve to serve as an additional counselor in the presidency of President Spencer W. Kimball.

When President Clark passed away, Henry D. Moyle and Hugh B. Brown were sustained as first and second counselors respectively in the First Presidency. Following the death of President Moyle, Hugh B. Brown became first counselor, and the junior member of the Quorum of the Twelve, Nathan Eldon Tanner, was called as second counselor.

In October of 1965, President McKay called President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Twelve, and Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson, an Assistant to the Twelve, as additional counselors in the First Presidency. President Smith retained his position as President of the Twelve and served in a dual capacity. Two years later, another Assistant to the Twelve, Elder Alvin R. Dyer, was ordained an apostle but not given membership in the Quorum of the Twelve, which had no vacancy. In April of 1968, Elder Dyer was sustained as another counselor in the First Presidency, bringing the total in that presiding body to six.

Following the death of President McKay on January 18, 1970, both Elders Isaacson and Dyer were sustained once again as Assistants to the Twelve. Elder Dyer, who lived until March 6, 1977, never did receive membership in the Quorum of the Twelve even though he had been ordained an apostle. He died as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, to which office he had been sustained in October of 1976.

As on previous occasions, those counselors in the First Presidency who had been ordained apostles and been previously sustained as members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles resumed their positions in this governing body. Thus, for the moment at least, the Quorum had fourteen members. (See Spencer W. Kimball, "The Need for a Prophet," Improvement Era, June 1970, p. 92.)

Joseph Fielding Smith as Senior Apostle

Joseph Fielding Smith was ordained as an apostle on April 7, 1910, and was in his sixtieth year of service in that quorum at the time he became President of the Church. He had been sustained as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve on April 9, 1951, and stood second in apostolic seniority to David O. McKay for nineteen years. He was sustained as President of the Church on January 23, 1970.

President Smith chose the next senior apostle, Harold B. Lee, as his first counselor in the newly reorganized First Presidency. President Lee was also sustained as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, and the third-ranking apostle, Spencer W. Kimball, was chosen as the Acting President of the Twelve. Nathan Eldon Tanner, who had served as second counselor to President McKay, was asked to continue as second counselor to President Smith. Hugh B. Brown returned to service in the Quorum of the Twelve.

Joseph Fielding Smith, at the age of 93, is the oldest man to have become the senior apostle on earth. Prior to his call as President of the Church, he had served longer than any other man in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and is only exceeded in combined service in the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Presidency by Presidents David O. McKay and Heber J. Grant. President Smith died on July 2, 1972, less than three weeks short of his ninety-sixth birthday.

Harold B. Lee as Senior Apostle

On July 7, 1972, the fourteen men who held the apostolic office and who had been sustained as members of the Quorum of the Twelve met in solemn council to consider the reorganization of the presidency. Their quorum president, Harold B. Lee, presided and conducted the meeting.

One of those present, N. Eldon Tanner, reported on the proceedings: "At this meeting we called upon the Lord in solemn prayer. Then each member of the Twelve, starting with the junior member, was called by the President of the Quorum to express his feelings regarding the matter at hand. When it became President Kimball's turn to speak, he, at the conclusion of his remarks, nominated President Harold B. Lee as President of the Church, which motion was duly seconded and put to the Twelve and carried unanimously." ("The Priesthood and Its Presidency," Ensign, Jan. 1973, p. 100.)

Thus, Harold B. Lee became the eleventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He had been ordained an apostle thirty-one years earlier, on April 10, 1941. It is of interest to note that in selecting his counselors, he chose the junior of the two to serve as his first counselor, thus departing from the pattern used by David O. McKay at the time he selected his first and second counselors.

President Lee asked Nathan Eldon Tanner, who had served with him in the First Presidency under Joseph Fielding Smith, to serve as his first counselor. Marion G. Romney, who was third in apostolic seniority (behind President Lee and Spencer W. Kimball) was invited to serve as the second counselor in the new presidency.

Spencer W. Kimball as Senior Apostle

President Harold B. Lee passed away unexpectedly on December 26, 1973. At the time of his passing, his second counselor, Marion G. Romney, and the President of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball, were both in the hospital where President Lee was being cared for. During the anxious moments when the medical personnel frantically worked on preserving the life of the unconscious leader of the Church, President Kimball paid deference to President Romney, the presiding officer of the Church on the scene. However, as soon as it was determined that life had passed from their beloved prophet, the transition of authority immediately took place, and Marion G. Romney was asking his new file leader, President Spencer W. Kimball, what he wanted him to do.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie described the significance of this occasion:

At the moment [President Lee] passed, Brother Romney, in harmony with the system and the established tradition and custom of the Church, stepped aside, and President Spencer W. Kimball was then in complete charge and had total direction. President Kimball was at that moment the senior apostle of God on earth. And as the last heartbeat of President Lee ceased, the mantle of leadership passed to President Kimball, whose next heartbeat was that of the living oracle and presiding authority of God on earth. From that moment, the Church continued under the direction of President Kimball. ("Succession in the Presidency," in BYU Speeches of the Year 1974 [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1975], p. 19.)

Commenting on the place of direct revelation in this transition of authority, Elder McConkie further stated: "It was not required, nor was it requisite or needed, that the Lord give any revelation, that any special direction be given. The law was already ordained and established. . . . And so it was with the transfer of leadership from President Lee to President Kimball."

On December 30, 1973, fourteen apostles convened for a sacred and solemn meeting in the Salt Lake Temple under the direction of the senior member of that body, Spencer W. Kimball. The two counselors who had served President Lee both held the apostolic office and had been members of the Quorum of the Twelve prior to their call to serve in the First Presidency. They took their regular places among the other apostles according to their order of seniority. Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson had both been ordained as apostles on October 7, 1943, but President Kimball was the senior apostle of the two because he had been ordained and set apart as a member of the Quorum before Elder Benson.

Following some remarks by President Kimball, each member of the quorum, starting with Ezra Taft Benson and continuing to the junior member of the group, was invited to express himself on the issue of reorganizing the First Presidency. There was no question about who should be the presiding officer. The Brethren were unanimous in their desire to proceed according to the divinely established pattern. Spencer W. Kimball was "chosen by the body" (D&C 107:22) to be the President of the Church and to be sustained as the prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church as well as its Trustee-in-Trust.

He retained the two counselors who had served President Lee—N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was called as an additional counselor in the First Presidency on July 23, 1981. The call was providential, for within a few months President Kimball's failing health put an added responsibility upon the counselors. President Tanner passed away in November of 1982, and Marion G. Romney was sustained as first counselor with Gordon B. Hinckley as second counselor.

The strength of a strong counselor was evidenced as time passed and age took its terrible toll on the health of Presidents Kimball and Romney. President Hinckley had to shoulder what he later referred to as "an almost overwhelming burden of responsibility" for the day-to-day duties of the First Presidency. Reflecting on these times, he said: "I counseled frequently with my Brethren of the Twelve, and I cannot say enough of appreciation to them for their understanding and for the wisdom of their judgment. In matters where there was a well-established policy, we moved forward. But no new policy was announced or implemented, and no significant practice was altered without sitting down with President Kimball and laying the matter before him and receiving his full consent and full approval." ("In Counsellors There Is Safety," Ensign, Nov. 1990, p. 50.)

In the Lord's perfect system of governing the affairs of His kingdom, He had made provision for the continuous and consistent guidance of His church by His chosen servants. In the event of an incapacitating illness, or the inaccessibility of the presiding officer of the Church or quorum, the next senior man may take charge.

President Hinckley provided this explanation:

Some people, most of them not members of the Church, worry because the President of the Church is an elderly man. I want to assure you that under the organization put in place by the Lord himself, there is no need to worry. The President has two counselors. So long as either of them is able to function, there will be an active First Presidency with full powers of decision in all matters affecting the Church. [See D&C 90:6.]

Associated with the Presidency is the Council of the Twelve Apostles. At times in the history of the Church, when there was no First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve governed its affairs. As a matter of fact, these were some of the most difficult and demanding times in the history of the Church. . . .

The Lord will not allow his work to suffer. He will not allow it to be led astray. He has made that clear. There is much of flexibility and resiliency in this inspired organization. It can accommodate almost any imaginable set of circumstances. ("The Sustaining of Church Officers," Ensign, Nov. 1984, pp. 4-5.)

Ezra Taft Benson as Senior Apostle

President Kimball passed away on November 5, 1985, and, as will always be the case upon the death of the prophet, the First Presidency was dissolved, and the leadership of the Church devolved upon the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The two former counselors to President Kimball took their places of seniority among the fourteen apostles who constituted the quorum. The senior apostle of this body was Ezra Taft Benson.

President Benson had been an apostle since October 7, 1943, and had continuously been sustained as a member of that governing body since his ordination. With the approval of President David O. McKay, there was an eight-year period from 1953 to 1961 when Elder Benson had limited service in the Twelve because of his service as the Secretary of Agriculture in the cabinet of U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. However, he was not dropped from the quorum during this period, and therefore his standing in seniority in the council was not impacted.

Thus, at a solemn meeting in the Salt Lake Temple on November 10, 1985, there was no question in the minds of the apostles that Ezra Taft Benson was their leader. He was unanimously sustained by his fellow apostles as the President of the Church, with all of the rights and authority accompanying that high and holy calling. President Benson selected two of his fellow apostles, Gordon B. Hinckley and Thomas S. Monson, to serve as his first and second counselors respectively.

Marion G. Romney was second in seniority to President Benson and was sustained as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve. Because of President Romney's failing health, the man who stood next to President Romney in apostolic seniority, Howard W. Hunter, was named as the Acting President of the Twelve. Once again the Lord's perfect system worked without a hitch and without any uncertainty on the part of those men who understand the apostolic order of succession.

Though vigorous in the first years of his administration, President Benson also began to feel the limitations imposed by age. As always, strong counselors, acting in behalf of the prophet, shouldered more of the burden of governing the affairs of the Church. Once again, President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke of the carefulness with which he and his associate in the First Presidency moved forward:

President Benson . . . does not have the strength or vitality he once possessed in abundance. Brother [Thomas S.] Monson and I, as his counselors, do as has been done before, and that is to move forward the work of the Church, while being very careful not to get ahead of the President nor to undertake any departure of any kind from long-established policy without his knowledge and full approval. . . . We postpone action when we are not fully certain of our course and do not move forward until we have the blessing of our President and that assurance which comes from the Spirit of the Lord. ("In Counsellors There Is Safety," pp. 50-51.)

The Lord Is in Charge

Some have wondered why the Lord has allowed prophets to suffer physical limitations that restrict their ability to serve as they would like to. Elder Boyd K. Packer gave some insights regarding the aging process that imposes limitations upon the Lord's leaders: "There are councils and counselors and quorums to counterbalance the foibles and frailties of man. The Lord organized His church to provide for mortal men to work as mortal men, and yet He assured that the spirit of revelation would guide in all that we do in His name." ("Revelation in a Changing World," Ensign, Nov. 1989, p. 16.) Thus, while we do not know the reasons why prophets and other leaders are allowed to linger in ill health, this much we know: the Lord is in charge!

Suffice it to say that the Lord is all-wise and all-knowing. His ways are proper, and there is divine purpose in all He does. It is well to ponder these inspired words of holy writ: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9.)

The Lord reminded the Prophet Joseph Smith that "the works, and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught." (D&C 3:1.) God is in charge. He selects His servants. He knows whom He wants to preside in His church. He places the apostles in their callings at the appropriate time in His divine plan. He will release them when His purposes are fulfilled.

President Gordon B. Hinckley explained that as long as the current prophet was living, regardless of the limitations that health imposed upon him, he would be the presiding officer of the Church. "None other can or will take his place for so long as he lives. When he passes, there will be another ready, a man who, through long years of experience and service, has been trained, has been tested, has been schooled and refined and prepared to fill that sacred and awesome responsibility." ("The Cornerstones of Our Faith," Ensign, Nov. 1984, p. 50.)

That man will have served his apprenticeship as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and will, step-by-step, have climbed the ladder of seniority according to the will of the Lord. President Spencer W. Kimball provided this insightful summary on the procedure of succession: "Since the death of his servants is in the power and control of the Lord, he permits to come to the first place only the one who is destined to take that leadership. Death and life become the controlling factors. Each new apostle in turn is chosen by the Lord and revealed to the then living prophet who ordains him. The matter of seniority is basic in the first quorum of the Church. All the apostles understand this perfectly, and all well-trained members of the Church are conversant with this perfect succession program." ("We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Ensign, Jan. 1973, p. 34.)
