Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 6

The Senior Apostle and Apostolic Succession

The Nature of the Apostolic Keys

The far-reaching nature of the apostolic keys was described by Brigham Young: "The keys of the eternal Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, is comprehended by being an Apostle. All the Priesthood, all the keys, all the gifts, all the endowments, and everything preparatory to entering back into the presence of the Father and of the Son, is in, composed of, circumscribed by, or I might say incorporated within the circumference of the Apostleship." (Millennial Star 15:489.)

In order for one to lead the Church, it is not sufficient for that person to have received the priesthood or have been ordained to an office therein. The rightful leaders of the Lord's church and kingdom on earth also must have received the keys of presidency. Those keys are vested in the apostolic office of the men who have been properly ordained as apostles and been given membership in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

"These keys are the right of presidency," said President Joseph Fielding Smith. "They are the power and authority to govern and direct all of the Lord's affairs on earth. Those who hold them have power to govern and control the manner in which all others may serve in the priesthood. [Those who] hold the priesthood . . . can only use it as authorized and directed so to do by those who hold the keys." ("Eternal Keys and the Right to Preside," Ensign, July 1972, p. 87.)

Inherent within one's ordination to the apostolic office is the right to function within any office in the Church. This includes the authority to serve as the presiding officer in the First Presidency—the President of the Church—if the one ordained becomes the senior apostle.

President Harold B. Lee observed:

The beginning of the call of one to be President of the Church actually begins when he is called, ordained, and set apart to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Such a call by prophecy, or in other words, by the inspiration of the Lord to the one holding the keys of presidency, and the subsequent ordination and setting apart by the laying on of hands by that same authority, places each apostle in a priesthood quorum of twelve men holding the apostleship.

Each apostle so ordained under the hands of the President of the Church, who holds the keys of the kingdom of God in concert with all other ordained apostles, has given to him the priesthood authority necessary to hold every position in the Church, even to a position of presidency over the Church if he were called by the presiding authority and sustained by a vote of a constituent assembly of the membership of the Church. ("The Day in Which We Live," p. 28.)

In this respect, note the comments of Elder George Q. Cannon regarding Brigham Young's selection of Elder George A. Smith to serve as a counselor in the First Presidency of the Church:

President Young, when he chose brother George A. Smith to be his First Counselor, in the place of Heber C. Kimball, did not lay his hands upon his head to confer upon him any additional power or authority for the position, because brother George A. held the Apostleship in its fulness, and by virtue of that Priesthood he could act in that or in any other position in the Church. He chose other assistant Counselors; he did not set them apart, there was no necessity for it, as they already held the Apostleship. And if he had, he could only have blessed them; he could not bestow upon them any more than they already had, because they had all that he himself had, that is when he chose them from the same Quorum. (Journal of Discourses, 19:235.)

Elder Cannon went on to say that no man who has been ordained to the apostolic office needs to have hands laid on his head and be given any additional authority when called to serve in the presidency of the Church because such a man "already possesse[s] the power, authority and ordination." He noted that such settings apart would not be wrong or improper, but they must be seen as the conferring of a blessing rather than the bestowal of any authority. Such blessings "would not bestow upon him any additional authority or any more keys, presuming that he already had received the fulness of the Apostleship." (Journal of Discourses, 19:236.)

The Apostolic Office Is Conferred by Those in Authority

The apostles hold their keys by virtue of having been called of God and having been properly ordained by those who are recognized by the Church as having the apostolic authority. Ordination to this holy office is not done clandestinely. It follows the order set forth by the Lord in the scriptures: "It shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church." (D&C 42:11.) Furthermore, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared as one of our fundamental statements of belief: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (A of F 1:5.)

The apostolic office is conferred upon one "called of God" by those who themselves have received that holy office from "those who are in authority," having "been regularly ordained by the heads of the church." These men can trace their keys of priesthood authority in an unbroken chain back to the Twelve of Joseph Smith's day, and through him to the heavenly messengers sent from the presence of the Lord Himself to bestow those keys.

The Apostles Must Be Sustained in Their Callings

In addition to their having been ordained as apostles and set apart as members of the Quorum of the Twelve, each of these men has also been sustained to his calling by a constituent body of the Church. Elder John A. Widtsoe explained the necessity of common consent by those who are to be governed:

Every officer of the Priesthood or auxiliary organizations, though properly nominated, holds his position in the Church only with the consent of the people. Officers may be nominated by the Presidency of the Church, but unless the people accept them as officials, they cannot exercise the authority of the offices to which they have been called. All things in the Church must be done by common consent. This makes the people, men and women, under God, the rulers of the Church. Even the President of the Church, before he can fully enter upon his duties, or continue in the office, must be sustained by the people. (Priesthood and Church Government, pp. 233-34.)

The Doctrine and Covenants underscores the relationship between one's being called of God and then sustained or upheld by the people: "The president of the church . . . is appointed by revelation, and acknowledged in his administration by the voice of the church." (D&C 102:9; italics added.) The Lord declared: "No person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." (D&C 20:65.)

Thus the members of the Church participate in a theocratic form of government. God makes the selection of His servants, they are called and set apart by duly recognized leaders of the Church, but they must also be approved and sustained by those they are called to govern, or, perhaps better said, called to serve.

The principle of common consent must not be misunderstood. Although the Lord has given His people the option of voting to "approve" or to "disapprove" the names of those placed before them (D&C 124:144), one must not capriciously, without proper cause, vote against a duly appointed officer of the Church. The Lord declared that the process of common consent in the Church should be accompanied "by much prayer and faith." (D&C 26:2.) This presupposes that Church members will be in tune with the Spirit when they participate in the sustaining process.

While serving as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, President Joseph Fielding Smith cautioned that

no man has the right to raise his hand in opposition, or with contrary vote, unless he has a reason for doing so that would be valid if presented before those who stand at the head. In other words, I have no right to raise my hand in opposition to a man who is appointed to any position in this Church, simply because I may not like him, or because of some personal disagreement or feeling I may have, but only on the grounds that he is guilty of wrong doing, of transgression of the laws of the Church which would disqualify him for the position which he is called to hold. (In Conference Report, June 1919, p. 92.)

The general membership of the Church does not have the right to nominate individuals for positions of leadership. This power rests with the individual or governing body that has the appropriate stewardship. In the case of selecting an apostle, this responsibility rests with the senior apostle, with the concurrence of his apostolic associates. In selecting the President of the Church, the nominating power rests with the Quorum of the Twelve.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., noted that "the sustaining or electing power rests in the body of the Church, which under no circumstances nominates officers, the function of the Church body being solely to sustain or to elect." President Clark went on to say that this system allows for "no electioneering, no speech-making, . . . no proposing of candidates." (In Conference Report, Apr. 1940, pp. 71-72.)

President Spencer W. Kimball observed that "the pattern divine allows for no errors, no conflicts, no ambitions, no ulterior motives. The Lord has reserved for himself the calling of his leaders over his Church." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 28.)

The Senior Apostle Exercises the Keys

Although the keys of the kingdom are conferred upon each member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, only the senior apostle exercises them in their fullness at a given time. One of the early leaders of the Church, Elder George Q. Cannon, explained: "Any one of [the Twelve], should an emergency arise, can act as President of the Church, with all the powers, with all the authority, with all the keys, and with every endowment necessary to obtain revelation from God, and to lead and guide this people in the path that leads to the celestial glory; but there is only one man at a time who can hold the keys, who can dictate, who can guide, who can give revelation to the Church. The rest must acquiesce in his action, the rest must be governed by his counsels, the rest must receive his doctrines." (Journal of Discourses, 19:234.)

More recently, Elder Bruce R. McConkie added his witness of this principle:

These keys, having first been revealed from heaven, are given by the spirit of revelation to each man who is both ordained an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Council of the Twelve.

But since keys are the right of presidency, they can only be exercised in their fulness by one man on earth at a time. He is always the senior Apostle, the presiding Apostle, the presiding high priest, the presiding elder. He alone can give direction to all others, direction from which none is exempt.

Thus, the keys, though vested in all of the Twelve, are used by any one of them to a limited degree only, unless and until one of them attains that seniority which makes him the Lord's anointed on earth. ("The Keys of the Kingdom," p. 23.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith noted that when an apostle becomes the presiding officer of the Church, he does not receive any additional authority:

The Prophet [Joseph Smith], in anticipation of his death, conferred upon the Twelve all the keys and authorities which he held. He did not bestow the keys on any one member, but upon them all, so that each held the keys and authorities. All members of the Council of the Twelve since that day have also been given all of these keys and powers. But these powers cannot be exercised by any one of them until, if the occasion arises, he is called to be the presiding officer of the Church. The Twelve, therefore, in the setting apart of the President do not give him any additional priesthood, but confirm upon him that which he has already received; they set him apart to the office, which it is their right to do. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:155.)

The Senior Apostle Is the Presiding Officer

The senior apostle is the presiding officer or authority of the Church. Where a First Presidency has been organized, the senior apostle has always been the President of the Church. When he dies, thus dissolving the First Presidency, the presiding authority passes to the next senior apostle in the line of succession.

In a letter dated March 28, 1887, President Wilford Woodruff explained: "When the President of the Church dies, who then is the Presiding Authority of the Church? It is the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (ordained and organized by the revelations of God and none else). Then while these Twelve Apostles preside over the Church, who is the President of the Church[?] It is the President of the Twelve Apostles. And he is virtually as much the President of the Church while presiding over Twelve men as he is when organized as the Presidency of the Church, and presiding over two men." (In Conference Report, Apr. 1970, p. 124.)

President Harold B. Lee reaffirmed this principle: "Immediately following the death of a President, the next ranking body, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, becomes the presiding authority, with the President of the Twelve automatically becoming the acting President of the Church until a President of the Church is officially ordained and sustained in his office." ("The Day in Which We Live," p. 28.)

Is the senior apostle, then, always selected as President? That question has occasionally been raised. In the earlier days of the Church, there were even some among the presiding authorities who raised the question.

In 1880, for example, Elder Orson Pratt suggested that "a young man" should be considered as President of the Church rather than one of the elderly Brethren of the Quorum of the Twelve. This was not the first time such a suggestion had been set forth, for in 1877 Daniel H. Wells, who had served as second counselor to Brigham Young, proposed that thirty-nine-year-old Joseph F. Smith be considered for the presiding office. Elder Heber J. Grant made a similar proposal ten years later. The Quorum of the Twelve disapproved each of these suggestions. (See "The Mormon Succession Crisis," p. 220.)

President Wilford Woodruff once responded to the following question: "Do you know of any reason in case of the death of the President of the Church why the Twelve Apostles should not choose some other person than the president of the Twelve to be the President of the Church?" President Woodruff forthrightly replied:

I know several reasons why he should not. First, . . . if [he was] not fit to preside over the Church [he was] not fit to preside over the Twelve Apostles. Second, in case of the death of the President of the Church it takes the majority of the Twelve Apostles to appoint the President of the Church, and it is very unreasonable to suppose that the majority of that Quorum could be converted to depart from the course marked out by inspiration and followed by the Apostles at the death of Christ and by the Twelve Apostles at the death of Joseph Smith. I see no reason for discussing this subject until there is some reason for it. (In Wilford Woodruff, p. 561; italics added.)

Many years later, President Joseph Fielding Smith, who as one of the Twelve had participated in the transition of the presidency on four previous occasions, declared: "There is no mystery about the choosing of the successor to the President of the Church. The Lord settled this a long time ago, and the senior apostle automatically becomes the presiding officer of the Church." (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:156.)

In 1967, while I was teaching the principle of succession to a group of graduate students in Southern California, one of them challenged the above statement by President Smith. At the time Joseph Fielding Smith was the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, second in seniority to David O. McKay, who was serving as President of the Church. The student glibly commented that President Smith's statement was self-serving because he was next in apostolic seniority and that he was "too old" and "too dogmatic in doctrine" to ever become the President. I pointed out that President Smith had made the statement long before he became the number-two apostle, but I did not dissuade the student.

In those days it was appropriate to write directly to one of the General Authorities in seeking answers to questions, and I decided to ask Elder Harold B. Lee, the ranking apostle behind Presidents McKay and Smith, to respond to the question of succession by seniority. I wrote that I did not question the order of succession but felt that having the opinion of another member of the Twelve on the matter would be helpful to my students. Elder Lee was very gracious in responding. A copy of his letter, dated January 19, 1968, follows:

Dear Brother Brewster:

I will attempt to answer your question as I have understood it from the brethren much older than I in experience and in seniority in the presiding councils of the Church.

The Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants 107, speaks of the Quorum of the First Presidency consisting of three presiding high priests, the traveling high council or Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and the First Quorum of Seventy as being equal in authority. This does not mean that they are co-equal, but in the event of the death of the president of the Church when the First Presidency would become disorganized, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles would then automatically become the acting presiding authority of the Church. Should there ever be an occasion when all of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve were to be taken away by some calamity, the First Quorum of the Seventy would be fully organized and they then by the direction of the Lord could proceed to organize the Church in all its departments.

When the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles become the acting presiding authority upon the death of the president of the Church, the president of the Quorum of the Twelve automatically becomes the acting presiding authority of that body, which means the acting president of the Church until the president of the Church is chosen.

Referring to Section 107, Doctrine and Covenants, it speaks of the President of the Church "chosen by the body and upheld by the faith and prayers of the saints," which has been interpreted to mean president of the Church chosen by the Quorum of Twelve Apostles and sustained by the vote of the membership of the Church, could then preside over the Church. Every member of the Twelve and First Presidency are sustained as prophets, seers and revelators, which means that each such one when ordained as Apostles hold the priesthood necessary to hold every position in the Church if "chosen by the body and upheld by the vote of the Church." This, however, must not be misunderstood. The brethren have declared time and time again, that the only way that one other than the president of the Twelve could be the president of the Church would be that the president of the Twelve would receive a revelation from the Lord designating someone else to act in his stead. That, I firmly believe. It has always been so and in my judgment it will always continue to be so that the President of the Quorum of the Twelve would become the President of the Church unless the Lord were to direct him otherwise.

Trusting that these comments will give you what I understand to be the teaching of the brethren over the years, I am

Sincerely yours,

Harold B. Lee

It is inconceivable that the Lord would ever select one other than His senior apostle to preside over His earthly church. President Spencer W. Kimball's pertinent statement is repeated: "Since the death of his servants is in the power and control of the Lord, he permits to come to the first place only the one who is destined to take that leadership. Death and life become the controlling factors." (In Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 29; italics added.)
