Hoyt W. Brewster, Prophets, Priesthood Keys, and Succession ( 1991)

Chapter 7

Apostasy and False Prophets in the Latter Days

Beware of False Spirits and Prophets

One of the great tragedies of life is the loss of individuals who are kept from the truth, or who stray from the strait and narrow path, because they are deceived by false spirits or evil and designing mortals who teach and practice false and damnable doctrines. Through His prophet, the Lord declared that many are "blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (D&C 123:12.)

This spiritual blindness prevents people from seeing or recognizing the truth. Unfortunately, many of those who are blinded or wayward come to believe that the perilous path they are pursuing is the right one. The Prophet Joseph Smith warned that "nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God." (History of the Church, 4:573.)

The voices of false spirits are not confined to those unembodied hosts of hell from the largely unseen world of spirits who are in league with the devil, having been cast out of God's presence in the beginning. (See D&C 29:36-38.) False spirits, or false voices, also emanate from "false brethren" (D&C 122:5; 2 Cor. 11:26), "false teachers" (2 Ne. 28:12), "false prophets" (Matt. 7:15), and even "false Christs" (Matt. 24:24). Each of these false voices, whether spirit or mortal, leads people astray.

It was revealed to Brigham Young that "if the people did not receive the spirit of revelation that God had sent for the salvation of the world, they would receive false spirits, and would have revelation" from the powers of darkness. (Journal of Discourses, 13:280-81). On the other hand, the Lord declared that "they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide . . . have not been deceived." (D&C 45:57.)

The Trickery of the Tempter

The devil is the master deceiver. (See Rev. 12:9.) He is the tempter (see Matt. 4:3), the "father of all lies" (2 Ne. 2:18; Moses 4:4), and was a "liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25). He will use trickery of any kind to lead mankind astray. He will even quote scripture to accomplish his nefarious schemes. (See Matt. 4:6.)

One of the tempter's most effective ploys is to teach some truths or partial truths in order to get an unsuspecting victim to accept one or more falsehoods. It doesn't matter how many truths one may accept if the devil can deceive an individual into accepting one falsehood that puts his or her soul at risk.

On one occasion Elder Orson Pratt was striving to teach this to some members of the Church who had been led astray. They couldn't understand how they could be deceived if they believed in essentially the same things the Church taught. They claimed their beliefs were similar to those espoused by the Church, with just a few exceptions. (The exceptions were the reason they had joined an organization separate from the Church.)

Elder Pratt explained:

Don't you know that the devil would be very foolish, if he wished to lead astray men who had been in this Church, who had been taught for years to believe the principles you believe in, if he should undertake to lead them astray by telling them there was no truth in all these things? The devil can adapt himself to the belief of any person. If you believed in plurality [of wives] he would make you think it was all right. If he could get you to swallow down one or two great lies that would effect your destruction, and which you would preach and destroy many others, he would not mind how many truths you might believe. He would be willing that you should believe a great many things absolutely true if he could only deceive you and lead you astray and get you to reject some of the fundamental principles of your salvation, and the salvation of the people. (Journal of Discourses, 13:73.)

What these misled people did not understand is that believing or accepting oven one exception to the truths, saving principles, and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ—just one deviation—can lead one out of God's kingdom.

One Can Discern between True and False Prophets

Wherever true prophets of God have been, the devil has brought forth his false prophets. From the day that Lucifer disguised himself and sought to deceive our first parents in the Garden of Eden, he and his evil emissaries have sought to pass themselves off as true messengers of God in order to lead God's children astray.

The Apostle Paul warned of such instances: "For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works." (2 Cor. 11:13-15.)

While there are instances in which the adversary is spoken of as posing as an "angel of light" (2 Cor. 11:14; D&C 128:20; 129:8; Teachings of Joseph Smith, pp. 162, 214), it appears that these deceitful efforts can be detected by the spiritually discerning. Moses, for example, discerned Satan as a false angel of light: "Where is thy glory," he asked, "for it is darkness unto me?" (Moses 1:12-15; italics added.) Perhaps this is why an ancient prophet declared that the devil "transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light." (2 Ne. 9:9; italics added.)

There is a difference in the countenance of a true messenger from God and that of one who is not. Indeed, the words of the prophet Isaiah are very revealing in this respect: "The shew of their countenance doth witness against them," he declared. (Isa. 3:9; 2 Ne. 13:9.) True servants of God will emanate a spirit that is edifying, peaceful, and full of light. Their message will not be contentious, although it may have a disquieting effect on one in need of repentance. In a similar fashion, the listener who is in tune with the Spirit of God, who is humble, prayerful, and striving to live a righteous life, will be edified and know the truthfulness of the message spoken by one truly sent by God.

The Lord gave the following counsel on this matter:

He that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? And if it be by some other way it is not of God. And again, he that receiveth the word of truth, doth he receive it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? If it be some other way it is not of God.

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth? Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. And again, verily I say unto you, and I say it that you may know the truth, that you may chase darkness from among you. (D&C 50:17-25.)

Discerning between Having and Losing the Spirit

One means of discerning between messengers and messages of light and darkness is to consider the spirit in which the message is presented. As already mentioned, messengers who come from God will not be contentious. The message they bring will have a calming, spiritually soothing, and peaceful effect upon the listener; unless, of course, one's conscience needs to be pricked, troubled, or seared. The unrepentant will always be uncomfortable when called to repentance. If acted upon positively, however, that discomfort can turn one to the Lord. Consider the remarkable example of Alma, whose repentance turned "torment" to "exquisite joy." (See Alma 36.)

The peaceful nature of the Spirit emanating from God's presence, or one who is filled with his Spirit, is illustrated in an experience that Brigham Young had in February of 1847. President Young described a dream or vision in which Joseph Smith appeared to him. In the course of that experience, the Prophet Joseph gave his faithful friend and associate in the ministry the following counsel to carry to the people:

Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and to be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the still small voice; it will teach them what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the Brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. (Manuscript History of Brigham Young: 1846-47, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, pp. 528-31; italics added; see also Conference Report, Apr. 1989, p. 42.)

On the other hand, darkness is chased away by righteousness. One cannot be successful in obtaining and keeping the Spirit if his or her life is not in order. The Holy Ghost will not abide in the presence of one who is violating God's laws. To turn from God, even ever so slightly, is to turn from light to darkness. Unrepented of, such a turning away leads down the path of apostasy.

President Joseph Fielding Smith warned that "apostasy comes through the sins of omission as well as through sins of commission." For example, failure to take seriously the covenants made at baptism and renewed in the weekly sacrament service can lead one out of the light. One who becomes causal about participating in Sunday worship services, neglectful of regular scripture study and prayer, tolerant of inappropriate media, language, or behavior, and lax in fulfilling Church and family responsibilities puts his or her spiritual well-being at risk. President Smith further noted that "apostasy does not come upon an individual suddenly, but it is a gradual growth in which darkness through sin crowds out the spirit of light from the soul." (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:125.)

The Danger of Being Critical of the Lord's Anointed

One of the quickest ways to lose the Spirit of God and slide into apostasy is to criticize the Lord's anointed. The Prophet Joseph Smith proclaimed that one "who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives." (Teachings of Joseph Smith, pp. 156-57.)

In 1896, President George Q. Cannon warned of the consequences that follow criticism of the Lord's anointed: "God has chosen His servants. He claims it as His prerogative to condemn them, if they need condemnation. He has not given it to us individually to censure and condemn them. No man, however strong he may be in the faith, however high in the Priesthood, can speak evil of the Lord's anointed and find fault with God's authority on the earth without incurring His displeasure. The Holy Spirit will withdraw itself from such a man, and he will go into darkness." (Gospel Truth, 1:278.)

Consider the classic, yet tragic, example of a man who at one time had been the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Thomas B. Marsh was excommunicated four years after he was ordained to the holy apostleship. How could one in such a high calling fall away? In 1857, a repentant Thomas B. Marsh returned to the Church and answered this question:

I have frequently wanted to know how my apostacy began, and I have come to the conclusion that I must have lost the Spirit out of my heart.

The next question is, "How and when did you lose the Spirit?" I became jealous of the Prophet, and then I saw double, and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil; and then, when the Devil began to lead me, it was easy for the carnal mind to rise up, which is anger, jealousy, and wrath. I could feel it within me; I felt angry and wrathful; and the Spirit of the Lord being gone, as the Scriptures say, I was blinded, and I thought I saw a beam in brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam. (Journal of Discourses, 5:206-7.)

Contrast Elder Marsh's tragic experience and the attitude that led to his apostasy with an experience of Brigham Young, the man who succeeded him as the President of the Quorum of Twelve. On one occasion Elder Young admitted that he had once felt critical of the Prophet, but that he quickly dismissed the thought from his mind:

Once in my life, I felt a want of confidence in brother Joseph Smith, soon after I became acquainted with him. It was not concerning religious matters—it was not about his revelations—but it was in relation to his financiering—to his managing the temporal affairs which he undertook. A feeling came over me that Joseph was not right in his financial management, though I presume the feeling did not last sixty seconds, and perhaps not thirty. But that feeling came on me once and once only, from the time I first knew him to the day of his death. It gave me sorrow of heart, and I clearly saw and understood, by the spirit of revelation manifested to me, that if I was to harbor a thought in my heart that Joseph could be wrong in anything, I would begin to lose confidence in him, and that feeling would grow from step to step, and from one degree to another, until at last I would have the same lack of confidence in his being the mouthpiece for the Almighty. . . .

I repented of my unbelief, and that too, very suddenly; I repented about as quickly as I committed the error. It was not for me to question whether Joseph was dictated by the Lord at all times and under all circumstances or not. . . .

It was not my prerogative to call him in question with regard to any act of his life. He was God's servant, and not mine. He did not belong to the people but to the Lord, and was doing the work of the Lord. (Journal of Discourses, 4:297.)

In recent years, a counselor in the First Presidency has reiterated the need of sustaining the servants of God and of the dangers of finding fault with the Lord's leaders. In a general priesthood meeting in 1974, President N. Eldon Tanner said:

As in the past, there are still some who question the procedure and the choice of the president, and one in particular has written expressing his feeling that he himself should be the president of the Church and the teachings of Jesus Christ are not on trial. We as individuals are on trial, and have the great privilege and responsibility and blessing of being members of his church and kingdom, and of approving and sustaining the prophet, and it is up to us to prove ourselves worthy of the membership and priesthood which we hold.

Let us always remember that leaders of the Church are responsible to the Lord, and it is for him to straighten them out if they go wrong and to release them when they have finished their mission. We have been warned and forewarned that if we raise ourselves against the authority which God has placed in the Church for its government, unless we repent, he will withdraw his Spirit from us.

Brethren, if we wish to be guided by the Spirit of the Lord and enjoy his blessings, we must be true to the one who has been chosen as our leader and never murmur, complain, or find fault, or feel that someone else should be in his position. ("Chosen of the Lord," Ensign, May 1974, p. 85.)

In addition to the perils of being personally critical of the Lord's servants, there is great danger in listening to the voices of critics. Not only will self-appointed judges criticize the leaders of the Lord's kingdom, but they will also find fault with divine doctrines, sacred ordinances, and holy places and practices. Some of these critical voices are spiritually shrill and are easily detected as disturbing and deceptive. However, other voices are more subtle and, almost siren-like, will carefully lead the curious or the unwary into dangerous waters and potential disaster on the reefs of doubt and apostasy.

The spiritually wise will avoid the critics and rely upon the scriptures and the words of the prophets. "For they that are wise and have received the truth," declared the Lord, "have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived." (D&C 45:57.) Faith is neither developed nor maintained by spending time listening to or reading the words of detractors. Elder Neal A. Maxwell noted that to study the Church only through the eyes of critics is like interviewing Judas to understand Jesus. ("All Hell Is Moved," in 1977 Devotional Speeches of the Year [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978], p. 177.)

Revelation Comes through Proper Channels

As pointed out in chapter 1, the Lord reveals His will and directs His church through leaders whom He has called. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is led by revelation. While each member of the Church has the right to receive revelation for his or her individual needs and stewardship, revelation for the Church as a whole, or any of its units, must come through the designated presiding authority. In 1883 President Joseph F. Smith gave the following counsel:

It is the right of individuals to be inspired and to receive manifestations of the Holy Spirit for their personal guidance, to strengthen their faith, and to encourage them in works of righteousness, in being faithful and observing and keeping the commandments which God has given unto them; it is the privilege of every man and woman to receive revelation to this end, but not further. . . . We can accept nothing as authoritative but that which comes directly through the appointed channel, the constituted organizations of the Priesthood, which is the channel that God has appointed through which to make known His mind and will to the world. (Journal of Discourses, 24:188-89.)

President Smith then added this caution:

The moment that individuals look to any other source, that moment they throw themselves open to the seductive influences of Satan, and render themselves liable to become servants of the devil; they lose sight of the true order through which the blessings of the Priesthood are to be enjoyed; they step outside of the pale of the kingdom of God, and are on dangerous ground. Whenever you see a man rise up claiming to have received direct revelation from the Lord to the Church, independent of the order and channel of the Priesthood, you may set him down as an impostor. (Journal of Discourses, 24:189-90.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "It is contrary to the economy of God for . . . any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves." Then he added this caution: "Therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them." He then noted that "if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger [or might we say any form of revelation], it must be for his own benefit and instruction." (Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 21.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer added this observation: "In the pattern of constituted authority in the Church we always know where revelation comes from. Revelation is always vertical. There is no horizontal revelation in the Church. It is all vertical. A bishop will get no revelation from a fellow bishop, or a stake president from a fellow stake president; but a bishop will receive it from his stake president, and his stake president from the general officers of the Church." ("Follow the Rule," in 1977 Devotional Speeches of the Year [Provo: Brigham Young University, 1978], p. 19.)

Some years ago while I was teaching at an institute of religion adjacent to a large university, a man whom I did not know came into my office with a question. He asked, "Is it possible for a heavenly messenger or a translated being such as John the Beloved to visit a lay member of the Church?"

I answered that if God had a purpose in sending such a messenger to mortal man, it surely seemed within the realm of possibility. "Why do you ask?" I inquired.

The man then said, "I have a friend who claims that he was visited by John the Beloved. He says that he knows the messenger was sent from God because he put him to the test outlined in the Doctrine and Covenants. [See D&C 129:1-9.] According to the test, my friend requested the messenger to shake hands with him. They shook hands, and my friend says he felt the flesh. Now, don't you agree this messenger was sent by God?"

I responded with a question: "Why did this messenger visit your friend? Did he have a message for him, and if so what was it?"

My visitor said that the messenger had given his friend a message to take to the President of the Church, whereupon I immediately said, "It was not of God!" I then explained to the man that it is contrary to the order of heaven for one to receive revelation for someone higher in authority.

"Why did my friend then feel the flesh of the messenger?" the man replied.

I told him that while we may not know the full answer to that question, there were several possibilities to consider: (1) his friend was lying; (2) his friend had dreamed that the occurrence took place; or (3) he had been the object of some hoax foisted on him by some miscreant mortals. "However," I continued, "I know with absolute certainty that your friend was not visited by the Apostle John or any other messenger sent from the presence of God. The story is inconsistent with revealed truth."

President Harold B. Lee stated that "the President of the Church . . . alone has the right to declare new doctrine. . . . The President of the Church alone may declare the mind and will of God to His people. No officer nor any other church in the world has this high and lofty prerogative." (Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], p. 110.) The President of the Church is the only one who may receive revelation for the entire Church or for himself. While the Prophet works closely with trusted counselors and associates in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, listening to and not infrequently following the counsel they give, he is not led by revelation given through another. The Prophet's file leader is the Lord Himself—He who is the head of the Church.

A First Presidency Declaration

Because there have always been those who are deceived, and the deceivers and the deceived are still among us today, it is worthwhile to reproduce an official declaration of the First Presidency issued on August 2, 1913, entitled "A Warning Voice":

From the days of Hiram Page [D&C 28], at different periods there have been manifestations from delusive spirits to members of the Church. Sometimes these have come to men and women who because of transgression became easy prey to the Arch-Deceiver. At other times people who pride themselves on their strict observance of the rules and ordinances and ceremonies of the Church are led astray by false spirits, who exercise an influence so imitative of that which proceeds from a Divine source that even these persons, who think they are "the very elect," find it difficult to discern the essential difference. Satan himself has transformed himself to be apparently "an angel of light."

When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or any extraordinary gift or inspiration conveys something out of harmony with the accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear. Also they should understand that directions for the guidance of the Church will come, by revelation, through the head. All faithful members are entitled to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit for themselves, their families, and for those over whom they are appointed and ordained to preside. But anything at discord with that which comes from God through the head of the Church is not to be received as authoritative or reliable. In secular as well as spiritual affairs, Saints may receive Divine guidance and revelation affecting themselves, but this does not convey authority to direct others, and is not to be accepted when contrary to Church covenants, doctrine or discipline, or to known facts, demonstrated truths, or good common sense. No person has the right to induce his fellow members of the Church to engage in speculations or take stock in ventures of any kind on the specious claim of Divine revelation or vision or dream, especially when it is in opposition to the voice of recognized authority, local or general. The Lord's Church "is a house of order." It is not governed by individual gifts or manifestations, but by the order and power of the Holy Priesthood as sustained by the voice and vote of the Church in its appointed conferences.

The history of the Church records many pretended revelations claimed by impostors or zealots who believed in the manifestations they sought to lead other persons to accept, and in every instance, disappointment, sorrow and disaster have resulted therefrom. Financial loss and sometimes utter ruin have followed. We feel it our duty to warn the Latter-day Saints against fake mining schemes which have no warrant for success beyond the professed spiritual manifestations of their projectors and the influence gained over the excited minds of their victims. We caution the Saints against investing money or property in shares of stock which bring no profit to anyone but those who issue and trade in them. Fanciful schemes to make money for the alleged purpose of "redeeming Zion" or providing means for "the salvation of the dead" or other seemingly worthy objects, should not deceive anyone acquainted with the order of the Church, and will result only in waste of time and labor, which might be devoted now to doing something tangible and worthy and of record on earth and in heaven.

Be not led by any spirit or influence that discredits established authority, contradicts true scientific principles and discoveries, or leads away from the direct revelations of God for the government of the Church. The Holy Ghost does not contradict its own revealings. Truth is always harmonious with itself. Piety is often the cloak of error. The counsels of the Lord through the channel he has appointed will be followed with safety. Therefore, O! ye Latter-day Saints, profit by these words of warning. (Signed by Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose of the First Presidency; in James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 6 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75], 4:285-86; italics added.)

Avoid Alternate Voices

Almost a century later, this inspired counsel by the First Presidency is still pertinent. In our day we are still troubled by individuals who rise up with false revelations, claiming a higher authority than that possessed by the one whom God has designated to lead His church. We still have some of "the elect" being led astray and destroyed, spiritually and temporally, as modern-day deceivers peddle their pernicious promises and damning doctrines.

Latter-day Saints would do well to follow the example of an earlier people of great faith—the people of Ammon. In contrast to their foolish Nephite neighbors whose hearts were led away the preachings of a purveyor of false doctrine, the people of Ammon "were more wise." (Alma 30:20.) When the false prophet Korihor came among them, they did not waste their time in listening to his malevolent message. Their faith was secure. They took the antichrist to their high priest, who then removed him from their presence. (See Alma 30:18-21.)

In like manner, the followers of Christ today would be wise to avoid wasting their time listening to, or reading the words of, those who do not preach "sound doctrine." (See 2 Tim. 4:3-4.) A modern-day apostle, Elder Dallin H. Oaks, has cautioned us against "alternate voices." These are those who speak "without calling or authority." While some may be well-meaning, others' "avowed or secret object is to deceive and devour the flock." ("Alternate Voices," Ensign, May 1989, pp. 27-30.)

Latter-day Saints are best served by searching the scriptures and following the counsel of God's living prophet—the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He is the one whom the Lord has declared holds the keys of priesthood authority, and "there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred." (D&C 132:7.)
