Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-EIGHT

An Everlasting Covenant

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:255 (D. & C. Sec. 78.)

Topics

1.Order Regulating Establishment of Store House for the Poor. Note 1.

a.A call to brethren of the high Priesthood.

b.The Lord's words of wisdom.

c.Time for organization in behalf of the poor.

d.Reason for change of names.

2.The Establishment to Be Permanent. Note 2.

a.Order to advance Zion's cause.

b.For salvation of man.

c.And the glory of the Father.

d.Consecration is not Communism.

3.Saints to Be Equal In All Things. Note 3.

a.To be equal in heavenly things.

b.And in earthly things.

c.Place in the celestial kingdom.

4.All Things to the Glory of God. Note 4.

a.All our righteous acts add to the glory of God.

b.Even so in our temporal things.

c.All things spiritual to God.

5.The Power of Satan. Note 5.

a.Satan's plan is to destroy.

b.A bond that cannot be broken.

c.The buffetings of Satan if bond is broken.

6.Church to Stand Independent Above All Creatures. Note 6.

a.This independence to come through obedience to the Lord's law.

b.Tribulation as a preparation.

c.The crown of faithfulness.

d.The righteous to be rulers over many kingdoms.

7.Authority of Michael the Prince. Note 7.

a.The foundation of Adam-ondi-Ahman.

b.Michael appointed to hold keys of salvation.

c.This authority under direction of Holy One of Zion.

d.The Son Ahman.

Notes

We have seen in earlier lessons that the Lord had revealed the law of consecration, and had indicated to the members the absolute necessity of living this law, if they would establish Zion. In January, 1831, the commandment was given that the little band of believers should "go to the Ohio," and there the Lord would give them his law (D. & C. 38:32.) In February 1841, just after the saints had assembled in Ohio, the Lord said to them: "He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple; and he that saith he receiveth it, and doeth it not, the same is not my disciple, and shall be cast out from among you." February 9, 1841, the promised law was given and it covered numerous subjects of vital importance to the Church. In this commandment the Lord said: "If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments. And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken." Then follow instructions how these properties are to be laid before the bishop of the Church and his counselors. "And it shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the bishop of the Church and his counselors. "And it shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the bishop of my Church and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the consecration of the properties of my Church, that they cannot be taken from the Church, agreeable to my commandments, every man shall be made accountable unto me, a steward over his own property, or that which he has received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and family." (D. & C. 42:29-32.) Then follows the charge that "if there shall be properties in the hands of the Church, or any individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support after this first consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the bishop, it shall be kept to administer to those who have not, from time to time, that every man who has need may be amply supplied and receive according to his wants. Therefore the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the Church, and the bishop and his council." All of this was to be by covenant, for "the salvation of my people."

Now (in March 1832), the Lord says: "The time has come and is now at hand," for this great undertaking to be accomplished. (v. 3.)

The reason for the substituted names in this and some subsequent revelations was to keep from the knowledge of the enemies of the Church the true names of the brethren and some places, that they might not be known to the hurt of the Church. Some years later in the Doctrine and Covenants the correct names were inserted.

It is a strange thing that there are members of the Church who cannot distinguish the difference between the law of consecration and communism. Consecration and communism have nothing in common. Communism as it is practiced relieves the individual of all his inherent rights bestowed upon him by divine agency. It makes of him a pawn of the state and removes from him his freedom. He is denied the right of independent action. Even his home life is disturbed and is controlled by the state. All freedom of expression is gone and fear takes the place of love; obedience is forced, not voluntarily given. In the Lord's plan, the inalienable rights of the individual are strictly and jealously protected. What he does he does voluntarily, not by force. His stewardship is given into his own hands and is of his own choice. His wants are carefully guarded and he is at liberty to surround himself with such comforts and conveniences as suit his fancy. His work is entirely voluntary and what he does is based in love of his fellow man. Such a plan naturally is for the salvation, temporally and spiritually, of man, and to the glory of God.

Tribulation is the heritage of the righteous. It was never intended that those who serve the Lord in faithful obedience to covenants should find a rosy path to eternity. Persecution has been the reward of righteousness. Hatred of those who love the world is usually made manifest against that which is good. "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent." (Rev. 3:19.) Again: "Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty." (Job 5:17.) "And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them." (Rev. 7:14-15.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said of Adam: "Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great progenitor of whom it is said in another place is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed henceforth. Adam holds the keys of all the dispensations of the fulness of times, i.e. the dispensations of all times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning." Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 167-168.

Again: "This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the presidency of them all, even Adam; and Adam receiving his presidency and authority from the Lord, but cannot receive a fulness until Christ shall present the kingdom to the Father, which shall be at the end of the last dispensation." (Teachings, p. 169.)

The Lord explained that Adam-ondi-Ahman "is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the 'Ancient of Days' shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." (D. & C. 116.) It is also the place, where Adam assembled his posterity three days before his death and blessed them. (D. & C. 107:53.)

Speaking of Adam-ondi-Ahman, Elder Orson Pratt said: "The valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, according to the view and belief of the Latter-day Saints, was located on the western hemisphere of our globe. (I would here say, that as the greater portion of this congregation are Latter-day Saints, the proofs and evidence which I shall bring forth, in relation to the matters before me, will be selected from those books which are believed by them, which may not be particular evidence to strangers, but to the Latter-day Saints they will be undisputed evidence.) Adam-ondi-Ahman, the Valley of God, where Adam dwelt, was located about fifty miles north of Jackson County, in the State of Missouri. The Lord has revealed to us that Adam dwelt there towards the latter period of his probation. Whether he had lived in that region of country from the earliest period of his (mortal) existence on the earth, we know not. He might have lived thousands of miles distant, in his earlier days." (J. of D. Vol. 16:48.)

We also learn from the closing verse of this revelation that Jesus Christ is also called Son Ahman. (See D. & C. 95:17.) Therefore his name is connected with the name of the place where Adam dwelt. For that reason Elder Orson Pratt gives it the interpretation of "The Valley of God."
