Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-NINE

The Keys of the Kingdom—Mob Violence in Hiram

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:257-265.

Topics

1.Organization of the First Presidency.

a.Joseph Smith chosen President of the High Priesthood. Note 1.

b.Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

c.Sidney Rigdon an assistant to the Prophet.

d.The Presidency of the High Priesthood.

e.The Keys of the Kingdom. Note 2.

f.Call of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams.

g.The calling of Peter, James and John, in the Meridian Dispensation.

h.Why they came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

2.Mob Violence in Hiram.

a.The Prophet's stay in Hiram. Note 3.

b.The Prophecy to Olmsted Johnson.

c.Early Apostates. Note 4.

d.The mob attack and their brutality.

e.The Prophet's undaunted spirit.

f.Effect of the mobbing on Elder Rigdon.

g.The healing of Father Johnson

h.The Prophet's Twins.

i.Fate of members of the mob. Note 5.

Notes

When Sidney Rigdon came in the Church he became closely associated with the Prophet Joseph Smith and acted as his scribe in the revision of the scriptures. Sidney Rigdon was a man of considerable experience, years older than the Prophet and he became a valuable assistant to the Prophet in those early days. In March, 1832, the Lord revealed that the First Presidency of the Church should be organized. He called by revelation Elder Frederick G. Williams to be a counselor in that body of Priesthood with Sidney Rigdon as the other counselor to Joseph Smith. The Lord said to him: "Verily, verily I say unto you my servant Frederick G. Williams: Listen to the voice of him who speaketh, to the word of the Lord your God and hearken to the calling wherewith you are called, even to be a high priest in my Church, and a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. Unto whom I have given the keys of the kingdom, which belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood." (D. & C. 81:1-2.)

From the time when this presidency was organized these four men were to hold these keys for it was revealed that this authority is vested in the First Presidency of the Church. The President of the Church holds the supreme authority. They are to aid him, to sit in counsel with him and advise, but he, it is, who holds the right of decision and the right of revelation for the Priesthood and for the Church. It was not until March 18, 1833, that the First Presidency was organized, although Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams had been acting in the capacity of counselors to the Prophet Joseph Smith for several months, or shortly after the call of Frederick G. Williams by revelation in March 1832.

To Frederick G. Williams the Lord said: "Therefore, verily I acknowledge him (Joseph Smith, Jun.) and will bless him, and also thee, inasmuch as thou art faithful in counsel, in the office which I have appoined unto you, in prayer always, vocally and in thy heart, in public and in private also in the ministry in proclaiming the gospel in the land of living, and among thy brethren." (v. 3.) Great blessings were to be given him if he would be faithful: "Wherefore be faithful; stand in the office which I have appointed unto you; succor the weak lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees. And if thou art faithful unto the end thou shalt have a crown of immortality, and eternal life in the mansions which I have prepared in the house of my Father." (v. 5-6.)

It was the natural thing, then, since the keys of the kingdom belong to the First Presidency, for Peter, James and John to come to bestow these keys to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and give them the authority to organize the Church. (See D. & C. Sec. 27:12.)

"Father Johnson's son, Olmsted Johnson, about this time came home on a visit, during which I told him if he did not obey the Gospel, the spirit he was of would lead him to destruction, and when he went away, he would never return or see his father again. He went to the Southern States and Mexico; on his return he took sick and died in Virginia."

The friends in their rage and with blasphemous oaths, swore they would kill the Prophet if he made further resistance. They choked him into unconsciousness. When he came to, he discovered Sidney Rigdon, whom they had also taken out of his home and dragged by the heels so that his head struck the ground. It was about six rods from the house where these evil creatures held a council to decide what further steps to take. Some favored killing their victims but after some consultation they attempted to force a vial of acid between the Prophet's teeth. This failed. Another attempt was made to fill his mouth with tar and in this they failed. In their maddened fury they tore off his clothes and applied tar to his body and then added feathers, a practice rather common by the vicious in those days. After beating their victims shamefully and perhaps because they had been frightened for fear the Prophet's friend might arrive, they left him bleeding and helpless on the ground. He attempted to rise, but fell to the ground and remained until his strength had sufficiently returned. With difficulty he made his way back to his house. Sidney Rigdon had received similar treatment which left him delirious for several days. Friends came to the homes of these bruised and bleeding brethren and assisted in cleansing the tar from their bodies. The next day being the Sabbath, the Prophet met with the members of the Church and some who had come out of curiosity, including several members of the mob, and he addressed them. In the congregation was Simons Rider, the apostate, the leader of the mob, a Mr. McClentic and Felatiah Allen, who had provided the mob with a barrel of whisky to make them brave so they could make their attack.

During the trouble John Poorman, a member of the Church, heard the outcry and came across a cornfield to assist his brethren; coming through the field he met Father Johnson; each thinking the other a robber, they grappled, and Brother Poorman gave Brother Johnson a severe blow on the shoulder with a stick or stone. Brother Poorman then rushed immediately to the Johnson home, shouting, "I'm afraid I've killed him." "Killed who," asked one when Brother Poorman related the circumstances of the encounter in the cornfield. Father Johnson soon recovered, as David Whitmer administered to him; he had a broken collar-bone, but he was immediately healed.

During the mobbing one of the twins contracted pneumonia and continued to grow worse and died. This was John Murdock, whose death occurred March 29, 1832, his age being one day less than eleven months. His sister Julia lived to maturity. Julia Murdock married Elisha Dixon. He was killed in an explosion of a steamship on Red River, Texas. Julia Murdock later married John J. Middleton; they had no children. She died at the home of Mr. James Moffatt near Nauvoo in 1880.

The mob was composed largely of ministers, Campbellites, Methodists and Baptists, particularly, and they continued to molest and menace Father Johnson's home for a considerable time after this event. Elder Rigdon shortly moved with his family to Kirtland and later to Chardon about five miles from Kirtland.
