Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY

The Order of Enoch

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:265-270. D. & C. 82 and 83.

Topics

1.The Second Visit to Missouri.

a.Avoiding the mob. Note 1.

b.The journey to Missouri.

c.Purchase of paper for the press.

d.Arrival in Zion.

e.The Prophet sustained in Zion. Note 2.

2.The Order of Enoch. (D. & C. 82.)

a.A Warning against sin. Note 3.

b.To whom much is given much is required.

c."Watch for the adversary spreadeth his dominions." Note 4.

d.The anger of the Lord is kindled.

e.Former sins to return to the transgressor. (V. 7.)

3.A New Commandment.

a.Brethren directed how to act. (V. 8.) Note 5.

b.The Lord bound when we obey. (V. 10.)

c.Brethren bound by covenant. (V. 11.)

5.The Care of the Poor.

a.Land of Kirtland consecrated and became a stake. (Vs. 12-13.) Note 6.

b.Zion to increase in beauty. (V. 14.)

c.Covenant according to the laws of the Lord. Note 7.

d.Equality commanded in all things. (V. 17.)

e.All for the benefit of the Church. (V. 18.)

f.The Lord's storehouse as common property.

5.The Second Great Commandment.

a.Every man to seek interest of his neighbor. Note 8.

b.An everlasting order. (V. 20.)

c.Fate of the covenant breaker. (V. 21.)

d."Make friends with mammon of unrighteousness." Note 9.

e.Judgment is the Lord's (V. 23.)

6.The Colesville Branch.

a.Wicked nature of Missourians. Note 10.

b.The Colesville settlers.

c.Dependent women and children. (D. & C. 83.)

d.The unfaithful have no fellowship.

e.Claims of children on the parents.

f.Storehouse to be kept by consecration.

Notes

The Prophet writes: "After we left Hiram, fearing for the safety of my family, on account of the mob, I wrote to my wife (in connection with Bishop Whitney) suggesting that she go to Kirtland and tarry with Brother Whitney's family until our return." Leaving Wheeling they took passage on the steamer Trenton. While at the dock, in the night, the boat twice was on fire, burning the width of the boat through into the cabin, but with little damage so that the boat left in the morning for Cincinati. It appears that some members of the mob had followed the brethren intent upon doing them bodily harm, but they gave up the attempt by the time the boat had reached Cincinnati. The captain of the boat gave the brethren protection; also their supper and they arrived safely in Louisville the same night. In Louisville the brethren were joined by Titus Billings in charge of a company of saints from Kirtland, and they took passage on the steamer Charleston for St. Louis. From this point the brethren took stage for Independence. They arrived on the 24th of april, having traveled about three hundred miles from St. Louis. There was great rejoicing when they arrived and found the members in Independence well.

"Ye call upon my name for revelations, and I give them unto you; and inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto my law." This was the counsel given. Apparently there are many who seem to to think that mercy can rob justice but this is not so. Alma has said very correctly: "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.) The Lord is always willing to forgive the truly repentant transgressor, unless he has sinned unto death. Forgiveness of sin, does not mean, however, that the penalty of the transgression will always be set aside. Mercy may temper, but cannot rob justice. The price of every sin has to be paid. Our Lord paid the price for us on the one condition that we truly repent.

None but the ignorant would contend that Satan is not spreading his dominions. In giving the preface to the Book of Commandments, the Lord said the day was not then, but was near at hand, when peace would be taken from the earth and the devil would have power over his own dominions. These dominions were spreading at that time, but today this prediction is literally fulfilled. This was a solemn warning to the Saints that they would have to be on their guard, lest they be overcome. How frequently this warning was given! Today, we need to heed this warning with just as faithful obedience, as did our fathers in that day. We should also remember that when a man is forgiven and then he returns to the same sin his former sins return to him again. (See Ezekiel 33:11-20.)

The brethren, once more, are bound by a covenant. This is, in fact, a renewal of the covenant given in earlier revelations. The Lord frequently repeats instructions and commandments that we may be more deeply impressed. These covenants were of the nature that they could not be broken, without losing the reward.

The expression "stake of Zion," first used in the revelation given in November 1831 (Sec. 68) is taken from the expression in Isaiah: "Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken." (Isa. 33:20.) Again: "Enlarge the place of thy tent and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitation: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." (Isa. 54:2.) Isaiah speaks of Zion as a tent, or tabernacle, having in mind the Tabernacle which was built and carried in the wilderness in the days of Moses, and the cords are the binding cables that extend from the tent, or tabernacle, to the stakes which are fastened in the ground. Now, the Lord revealed that Zion was to be built and surrounding her would be the stakes helping to bind and keep her in place. This figure of speech has almost been lost through the intervening years, but it retains its significance, or beauty. To speak of Zion, the new Jerusalem, or even that section where the city will be built as a stake of Zion is a sad mistake. Zion is the tent, the stakes of Zion are the binding pegs that support her. Zion, therefore, cannot be a stake, it would be as improper to call a tent a stake as to apply this term to Zion.
