Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-ONE

Literary Activities in Independence—The Prophet Poisoned

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:270-284.

Topics

1.More About the Book of Commandments. Note 1.

a.The council of May 1, 1832.

b.Copies of the Book of Commandments reduced.

c.W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer, supervisors of the publication.

d.William W. Phelps and Company, publishers.

2.The First Hymn Book. Note 2.

a.Emma Smith's appointment.

b.The selection of hymns.

c.Character of the hymns.

d.The importance of singing in religious services.

e.Elder Rigdon's sermons.

3.The Creation of Stores. Note 3.

a.Stores organized in Kirtland and in Zion.

b.For the benefit of Church members.

c.Money borrowed to establish stores.

4.The Prophet's Return Journey. Note 4.

a.Bishop Whitney's accident.

b.Remarks of Dr. Porter.

c.The brethren poisoned.

d.The Prophet's seership. Note 5.

Notes

However, the great importance of the publication of the revelations had been impressed upon the brethren, for the Lord had indicated that they were of untold value for the guidance and advancement of the Church. Great care had been taken in guarding the revelations on their way to Missouri. Now as they were about to be published, a committee of responsible men was appointed to see this publication and to guard the manuscript while the printing was being done. This committee consisted of William W. Phelps, the printer, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer, the two brethren particularly charged with the care of the revelations on the way to Independence. They were to review and prepare these revelations for the press and print them as soon as possible. The publisher to be "William W. Phelps & Co." This work was immediately undertaken, but many difficulties arose which delayed the publication. More will be said of this at a later time.

In July 1830, Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet, was given the important responsibility of selecting hymns for the use of the Church. She was also promised other great blessings, if she would be faithful and endure to the end. She was told it was her duty to "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better." The Lord said: "And it shall be given thee, also to make a selection of sacred hymns, as it shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my Church. For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart, yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads. Wherefore lift up thy heart and rejoice, and cleave unto the covenants which thou has made." (D. & C. 25.) This was the charge to Emma Smith. Surely it would be a strange heaven if where our Father dwells there were no music no choirs or singing. We read in the scriptures where the angels sing. They sing before the throne of our heavenly Father. New songs are promised us when Zion is redeemed. Singing, when it comes from the heart and breathes forth the spirit of the Gospel, is just as important in our worship as prayer, or the preaching of discourses on the principles of the Gospel. The need of proper music was realized by the Church in the beginning, and the Lord commanded among the first instructions given to the Church that steps be taken to care for this great need.

However, the hymn book which was ordered printed in Independence was never printed. Before this step could be taken the enemies of the Latter-day Saints had destroyed the press. Emma Smith, however, went to work and made her selection. Some of the brethren and sisters in the Church were poets of the higher order and by them many hymns were written. Among these are William W. Phelps, the man appointed to do the publishing; Parley P. Pratt, and Eliza R. Snow. It was not until 1835, and in a more tranquil setting, that the commission given to Emma Smith was fulfilled. In that year the first hymn book for the Church was published in Kirtland by "Frederick G. Williams and Co." Following is the Preface to this Hymn Book:

"PREFACE"

"In order to sing by the Spirit, and with the understanding, it is necessary that the Church of the Latter-day Saints should have a collection of 'Sacred Hymns,' adapted to their faith and belief in the gospel, and, as far as can be, holding forth the promises made to the fathers who died in the precious faith of a glorious resurrection, and a thousand years' reign on earth with the Son of Man in his glory. Notwithstanding the Church, as it were, is still in its infancy, yet, as the song of the righteous is a prayer unto God, it is sincerely hoped that the following collection, selected with an eye single to his glory, may answer every purpose till more are composed, or till we are blessed with a copious variety of the songs of Zion."

Twenty of the hymns in this book which are found in later editions, are by William W. Phelps; two are by Parley P. Pratt and one by Eliza R. Snow. Other hymns were selected from other publications, but with wisdom and care. There were all told 90 hymns.

The second American edition, prepared under the direction of Emma Smith, was published by Ebenezer Robinson in 1841. It contained 304 hymns. However, an edition was published by the apostles in England in 1840.

Elder Sidney Rigdon, while the brethren were in Independence, preached two "powerful discourses" for the benefit of the saints and strangers who were willing to give ear.

"During all this time, Brother Whitney lost not a meal of victuals or a night's sleep, and Dr. Porter, our landlord's brother who attended him, said it was a pity we had not got some Mormon there, as they could set broken bones or do anything else. I tarried with Brother Whitney and administered to him till he was able to be moved. While at this place I frequently walked out in the woods, where I saw several fresh graves; and one day when I rose from the dinner table, I walked directly to the door and commenced vomiting most profusely. I raised large quantities of blood and poisonous matter, and so great were the muscular contortions of my system, that my jaw in a few moments was dislocated. This I succeeded in replacing with my own hands, and made my way to Brother Whitney (who was on the bed), as speedily as possible; he laid his hands on me and administered to me in the name of the Lord, and I was healed in an instant, although the effect of the poison was so powerful, as to cause much of the hair to become loosened from my head. Thanks to my heavenly Father for his interference in my behalf at this critical moment, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

There was no doubt in the Prophet's mind that this was a deliberate attempt to poison him. This being true the motive must have been robbery or hatred because of his religious faith. The Prophet's reference to the newly made graves, would indicate that the former may have been the motive in his case.

On many occasions the Prophet's power of seership was made manifest during his life, but on no occasion was it more pronounced than on this occasion when necessity declared unto him the need of haste from the boarding house of Mr. Porter in the little town of Greenville. Every detail of the journey was shown to the Prophet even to the minutes he and Bishop Whitney would arrive and leave from certain points. The method of travel from place to place, the kind of conveyance in which they would travel to the smallest detail was revealed to him. One of the things, as pointed out in the footnote on page 272 of the Documentary History, that convinced Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer of the divine call of Joseph Smith was the revelation by the Prophet to Oliver Cowdery, of the detailed journey of David Whitmer on his way to Harmony. This story as related by President Joseph F. Smith as it was told to him and Elder Orson Pratt by David Whitmer, is as follows:

"Soon after this Joseph sent for me to come to Harmony, to get him and Oliver and bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do. I was pressed with my work. I had some 20 acres to plow and so I concluded I would finish plowing, and then go. One morning I got up as usual to go to work. On going to the field I found between 5 and 7 acres of my ground had been plowed during the night. I don't know who did it, but it was done, just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow. This enabled me to start sooner. When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming towards me, and met me some little distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had told him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night and that I would be there before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me, all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished." (Life of Joseph F. Smith, page 243.)
