Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-TWO

The Evening and Morning Star

Reference

D.H.C. Vol. 1:273-284.

Topics

1.The First Church Periodical Note 1.

a.The prospectus of the Star.

b.Opposition from other papers.

c.Issues of the Star.

2.The First Number of the Star. Note 2.

a.The Prophet's endorsement.

b.Address to Man.

c.A harbinger of peace.

d.An ensign to the nations.

e.A day of tribulation.

f.An instructor to the saints.

3."To the Church of Christ Abroad in the Earth." Note 3.

a.Restoration of Israel to lands of inheritance.

b.Saints to teach their children the Gospel.

c."The 'Star' Office."

4.Common Schools. Note 4.

a.Attitude of the Church on education.

b.Children to be taught.

c.The selection of text-books.

5.The Second Number of the Star. Note 5.

a.The elders in Zion to the Church scattered abroad.

b.The old world rejected for rejecting the word of the Lord.

c.Need of revelation in this day.

d.The work of gathering.

e.Instruction to those coming to Zion.

f.Obedience of saints commanded.

g.Instruction to the elders sent to preach.

h."Foreign news."

i."Items for the public."

6."To the Honorable Men of the World." Note 6

a.Evidence of the Prophet's teachings in these articles.

b.Need of searching the Scriptures.

c.Salvation in the kingdoms.

7.Notable Converts Join the Church. Note 7.

a.George A. Smith.

b.Brigham and Joseph Young.

c.Heber C. Kimball.

d.John P. Greene.

Notes

The "Evening and Morning Star" was a monthly periodical of large octavo size. The first fourteen numbers were published in Independence, the first issue being in May, 1832. The publisher and editor was William W. Phelps. It was printed regularly until July 1833, when the printing office was destroyed by a mob along with other property of the Church. At the same time the members of the Church were wickedly abused. In December 1833, another printing office was established in Kirtland, Ohio, and the publication of the "Star" continued to be published by Oliver Cowdery. It continued until September 1834, when the name of the paper was changed to the "Messenger and Advocate." Twenty-four numbers, or two complete volumes of the Star were published. The numbers published in Missouri were re-published in Kirtland. The subscription price was one dollar a year.

This publication was sent forth as a "harbinger of peace," as well as a messenger of truth to mankind everywhere. The Church held forth the olive branch to the people in Missouri and elsewhere in the communities of the saints. They would have been happy could they by any honorable means allay prejudice and live in peace with their neighbors. The Lord had called upon them to "make friends with the mammon of unrighteousness," and this they were endeavoring to do, but the hatred of the wicked was so deeply rooted in their souls that every endeavor in righteousness brought forth only anger and violence. This publication was to be "an ensign to the nations," and the editor declared that it came "in meekness and mercy to all mankind, that they may do works meet for repentance and be saved in the first resurrection, and afterwards dwell with the spirits of just men made perfect in the celestial kingdom." It was also contemplated to bring to the world, through the teaching of the Gospel, the knowledge of those saving principles essential to our salvation. It was to show that "the ensign is now set up unto which all nations shall come, and worship the Lord, the God of Jacob, acceptably."

Moreover, it came to counteract, through the teaching of correct principles, the vain philosophies and the false traditions so prevalent in the world, and to prepare the way for the coming of the Lord. This editorial, or introduction, is a well written and inspired document, but it fell on deaf ears outside of the members of the Church and they rejoiced in its teachings. The closing paragraph of this article is as follows:

"As this paper is devoted to the great concerns of eternal things and the gathering of the Saints, it will leave politics, the gainsaying of the world, and many other matters, for their proper channels endeavoring by all means to set an example before the world, which when followed, will lead our fellowmen to the gates of glory where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary will find rest. That there may be errors, both in us and in the paper, we readily admit, but we mean to grow better, till, from little children, we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, which we pray may be the happy lot of thousands, before He comes with the hundred and forty and four thousand that are without guile."

"Every man lives for himself, Adam was made to open the way of the world, and for dressing the garden. Noah was born to save seed of everything, when the earth was washed of its wickedness by the flood; and the Son of God came into the world to redeem it from the fall. But except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of all men's religion. A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and the Spirit. He may receive the glory like unto the moon (i.e. of which the light of the moon is typical), or a star, (i.e. of which the light of the stars is typical), but he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and Church of the First born, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God."

If the members of the Church could fully grasp what is here taught it would be a great aid to them in their understanding of the Gospel, and who will enter, and how, the three kingdoms.

In November Joseph Young, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and John P. Greene came to visit the Prophet. Joseph Young was baptized April 6, 1832. Brigham Young was baptized April 14, 1832; Heber C. Kimball was baptized the following day, April 15, 1832. We have previously studied how Samuel H. Smith left a copy of the Book of Mormon with John P. Greene, then a Methodist preacher, and how he placed that book in the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball early in 1830, and this was their start towards membership in the Church. Brief sketches of these brethren are found in the Documentary History, as indicated above. It is remarkable how many great characters came into the Church in the first two or three years following its organization; men, upon whom the burden of directing the Church was soon to fall.
