Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-THREE

The Building of Zion—Revelation on Priesthood—Section 84

References

D.H.C. Volume 1:287.

Topics

1.Gathering of the Saints to Mount Zion. (Vs. 1-5, 31.) Note 1.

a.Mount Zion the New Jerusalem. (Vs. 1-2.) Ether 13. Rev. 3:12; 21:2.

b.Site for the city described. (V. 3.)

c.To be built by the gathering of the saints. (Vs. 4.)

d.The Temple to be reared in this generation. (Vs. 5, 31.)

2.The Priesthood in all Generations.

a.Descent of the Melchizedek Priesthood from Adam to Moses. (Vs. 6-17.) Note 2.

b.Aaronic Priesthood conferred on Aaron and his seed. (Vs. 18.) Note 3. D. & C. 68:15-22.

c.The Greater Priesthood holds the keys of mysteries and the knowledge of God. (Vs. 19-22.) Note 4.

d.Children of Israel could not endure presence of God, so Greater Priesthood was withdrawn from them. (Vs. 23-25.) Note 5.

e.The Lesser Priesthood and the law. (Vs. 26-30.)

f.Sacrifice to be offered by sons of Aaron. (Vs. 31-32.) Mal. 3:3.

g.Whoso is faithful become sons of Moses and of Aaron and the elect of God. (Vs. 33-38.)

h.The oath and covenant of the Priesthood. (Vs. 39-43.) Note 6.

3.The Spirit of Jesus Christ. (Vs. 44-53.) (See also Sec. 88:1-13.)

a.Man to live by every word from God. (Vs. 44.) Deut. 8:3. Matt. 4:4.

b.Word of the Lord is truth and truth is Spirit of Jesus Christ. (Vs. 45-46.) Note 7.

c.The Spirit of Christ gives light to every man who comes into the world. (Vs. 46-48.) D. & C. 88:5-13.

d.All who hearken not to the voice of the Spirit are under the bondage of sin. (Vs. 47-54.)

e.Saints suffer because of unbelief. (Vs. 54-58.)

Notes

"Which city shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed by the finger of the Lord in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and dedicated by the hand of Joseph Smith, Jun., and others with whom the Lord was well pleased." This city is to be built by the gathering of the Saints, and, as we have discovered in other revelations, those who gathered there were to be saints, and not half-hearted members of the Church giving indifferent service and heed to the commandments the Lord offered them. The word of the Lord to these Elders was that the city New Jerusalem should be built beginning at the place of the Temple, which was to be reared in this generation. "For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it. This statement has been a stumbling block to some and there have been various interpretations of the meaning of a generation. It is held by some that a generation is one hundred years; by others that it is one hundred and twenty years; by others that a generation as expressed in this and other scriptures has reference to a period of time which is indefinite. The Savior said: "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign." This did not have reference to a period of years, but to a period of wickedness. A generation may mean the time of this present dispensation. Moreover, the statement is qualified in this revelation in the above quotation. "For verily this generation shall not pass away," etc. It is not our intention to place any interpretation on this expression, but to say that these matters are in the hands of the Lord and he will accomplish his purposes when he considers that the time has come. It is also held by some members of the Church, that the Saints were released from this promise to build the Temple in this generation because of the opposition of their enemies, and the Lord has indicated that the Saints are not bound when their enemies prevent them from doing the thing he has commanded, but he will accept the intent and willingness on their part to do his will. (D. & C. 124:49-52.) However this may be, the time must come when the City of Zion, or New Jerusalem, must be built and also the Holy Temple which the Lord has commanded the Saints to rear and on which his glory shall be made manifest. This promise was made to the ancient prophets (Ether 13); and we have not been released from this responsibility which will be carried out when the Lord desires it. But only the "sons of Moses and Aaron," who have proved themselves true to the oath and covenant of the Priesthood will take part in the great labor.

Thus, we see, that it is impossible for men to obtain the knowledge or the mysteries of the kingdom or the knowledge of God, without the authority of the Priesthood. Secular learning, the study of the sciences, arts and history, will not reveal these vital truths to man. It is the Holy Priesthood that unlocks the door to heaven and reveals to man the mysteries of the Kingdom of God. It is this Divine Authority which makes known the knowledge of God! Is there any wonder that the world today is groping in gross darkness concerning God and the things of his kingdom? We should also remember that these great truths are not made known even to members of the Church unless they place their lives in harmony with the law upon which these blessings are predicated. (D. & C. 130:20-21.)

"And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the word of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou breakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.

"But I will give unto them the law as at first, but it shall be after the law of carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath. that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. Therefore do as I have commanded thee." (Compare Exodus 34:1-2.)

The Aaronic Priesthood remained with Israel and also the law of Moses, or the law of carnal commandments, until the coming of Jesus Christ, when again the fulness of the Gospel and the Priesthood were given to Israel. The Prophets of Israel and Judah, however, from the time of Moses until Malachi, held the Melchizedek Priesthood, but it was not conferred upon others during that time. Elijah, who held the fulness of the Priesthood, was a prophet during that time when the people of Israel were restricted to the preparatory Gospel.

"Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space.

"The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the midst of all things." (D. & C. 88:12-13.)

President Joseph F. Smith has drawn a clear distinction between the light of truth, or Spirit of Christ, and the Holy Ghost in these words:

"The question is often asked, Is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 82.)
