Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-FOUR

The Commission to Preach the Gospel

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:290-295. (D. & C. 84:40-120.)

Topics

1.Elders to Proclaim the Gospel to All the World. Note 1.

a.Testimony to go to all peoples.

b.In spirit of prayer.

c.The same commission as given to the apostles.

d.A witness before the end shall come.

2.Signs to Follow Believers. Note 2.

a.Blessings based on faith.

b.For the benefit of believers.

c.Miraculous manifestations not to be boasted of before the world.

3.Condemnation of Unbelievers. Note 3.

a.Serious consequences follow rejection of the Gospel message.

b.Laborers to be sent to prove the world.

c.Revelation in force in all the world.

d.Blessings promised faithful elders.

4."Take No Thought Beforehand." Note 4.

a."The lilies of the field."

b.The Father knoweth your needs.

c.Store up useful knowledge.

d.Blessings for all who befriend the elders.

e.A scourge for the wicked.

f.Only those who know the Lord shall remain.

5.Work to Be Cut Short in Righteousness. Note 5.

a.Unbelieving nations to be punished.

b.Plagues to go forth.

c.A new song.

d.Care of families.

e.Rebellious cities to be destroyed.

f.Starry heavens to tremble.

Notes

In calling these brethren apostles more than two years before the first apostles in this dispensation were ordained, the Lord had reference to their mission to all the world as his witness, and upon them the same commission to preach and bear witness was laid as was given to his disciples when he sent them forth on such a mission. In the broad sense an apostle is a witness, or one who is sent to proclaim his truth. The dictionary said he is "one who first evangelizes a certain nation;" and to this great work these brethren were now called. "Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost." (V. 64.) For many centuries, men had been without the guidance of the Holy Ghost because there was none to lay hands on them to bestow that gift, and therefore false doctrines and traditions had found place among the nations.

"And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief.

"And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth good, he shall work by the power and gifts of God.

"And wo unto them who shall do these things away and die, for they die in their sins, and they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God; and I speak it according to the words of Christ; and I lie not." Mor. 10:24-26.

The gifts of the Spirit, as we have previously discussed them, are given to the faithful for their edification and for the edification of the Church. To one is given one gift, and to another, another gift. Some have the gift of healing, others of prophecy and vision, others to work miracles according to their faith. "And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally according as he will." (V. 17.)

These gifts and blessings are only for those who have faith and believe the Gospel. They are not for the world. Should the Lord bestow on an elder one of these great gifts and should he boast of his power, then the gift would be taken from him, for they are not for the world. "But a commandment I give unto them," said the Lord to the elders. "they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation." (V. 73.)

The faithful elders who go forth duly commissioned and with the spirit of the Gospel upon them, such as the Lord can call his friends, should have the guiding influence of his Spirit go before them. "Behold, I send you out to prove the world, and the laborer is worthy of his hire." What a wonderful blessing is promised them: "And any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom and fail not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither athirst." (V. 80.) Thousands of missionaries have put this promise to the test and the Lord has kept his promise to all those who have been faithful in their calling. Surely if the Father notices when a sparrow falls, he will not forsake any who in faithful obedience to his will seek his aid. That there have been those who have gone forth and have been weary in body and mind, and who have gone hungry, there is no doubt, for there are missionaries who have not given all their heart to the Lord and they have idled away valuable time when it was needful for them to proclaim the truth.

"Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man, Therefore, let no man, among you, for this commandment is unto all the faithful who are called of God in the Church unto the ministry, from this hour take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim this gospel of the kingdom. Behold, I send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, and to teach them of a judgment which is to come." (Vs. 85-87.)

This advice to the members of the Church as well as to its missionaries, that they store up useful knowledge so that they will always be prepared, has, too frequently, been neglected. Every member of the Church should have a thorough knowledge of the Gospel. Such a knowledge is a protection against deception and false doctrine. Because this foundation in truth is not laid; because of lack of study of Gospel principles, many are brought into captivity to the powers of darkness. They have not been able to distinguish between truth and error. Alma has discoursed on this most effectively in his teaching of Zeezrom. A member of the class may read these words in Alma 12:9-11.

If we would follow this advice it would not be necessary to prepare discourses beforehand, for our faith would cause us to rely on the promise of the Lord. In these early days the Lord required that the elders go forth as they did of old, without purse or scrip, for the laborer was worthy of his hire. Today we do not go forth in this manner. To preach the Gospel is expensive and the elder with plenty of money may not feel the need of reliance on the Lord. However, the Lord has permitted this change because of changed conditions.

Another wonderful promise is given that "whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." This promise is only to the faithful. To the slothful elder, there is no such promise, but the angels will be there to take record of his disobedience and waste of time.

The promise is also made that those who are willing to receive the elders also receive the Lord, and they will feed, clothe and give money to the missionaries as it is needed. Many testimonies may be given wherein this promise has been fulfilled. Surely no one who feeds, clothes or gives money to the missionaries, will lose his reward. But those who refuse to do these things shall also receive their reward in punishment. "He that receiveth you not, go away from him alone by yourselves, and cleanse your feet even with water, pure water, whether in heat or cold, and bear testimony of it, unto your Father which is in heaven, and return not again unto that man." (V. 92.)

The Lord promised that plagues should go forth and should not be taken from the earth until he had completed his work which should be cut short in righteousness. When this day comes, then the earth will be cleansed, and only those will remain who are willing to be obedient to commandments. Then they will "see eye to eye," and shall lift up their voice and with the voice together shall they sing.

Before this day, however, the nations are to be punished for their iniquities. We have lived to see much of the punishment even now poured out upon them, which shall continue until the work of the Lord is finished, the earth cleansed and wickedness come to an end on its face.

The Lord gave commandment that the families of those who go forth should be cared for. The missionaries were at liberty, if they received means beyond their needs, to send it to their families and for the printing of revelations and the establishment of Zion. They were told to take their old coat or suit, or whatever it might be, and give to the poor when some benevolent person supplied them with that which was new. The Lesser Priesthood, in that day, were also to engage in the ministry, and go before to prepare the way, for this is the way it was done in former days. (Vs. 107-109.)

The Lord threatened destruction to great cities if they in their iniquity rejected his truth. This destruction, evidently is to come when their cup is full. Desolation awaited them and the hour of their judgment would come. "For, with you saith the Lord Almighty, I will rend their kingdoms; I will not only shake the earth, but the starry heavens shall tremble. For I, the Lord, have put forth my hand to exert the powers of heaven; ye cannot see it now, yet a little while and ye shall see it. and know that I am, and that I will come and reign with my people. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. Amen." (Vs. 118-120.)
