Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-FIVE

Letter of Instruction to William W. Phelps

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:297-299. D. & C. 85.

Topics

1.The Prophet's Tribute to William W. Phelps. Note 1.

a.The Prophet's prayer.

b.His confidence in W. W. Phelps.

2.Importance of the Record of Transactions in Zion. Note 2.

a.The Lord's interest in record-keeping.

b.Duty of the Lord's clerk.

c.Record of all consecrations to be kept.

d.Record of faithful members to be kept.

e.All without inheritances not enrolled.

f.A day of vengeance coming.

g.Names of apostates blotted out.

3."One Mighty and Strong." Note 3.

a.One to be sent to set in order inheritances.

b.The one appointed to fall.

c.Conditions on which these events were to come.

4.The Book of Remembrance. Note 4.

a.The worthy to have names written in the book.

b.The unworthy to be dealt with as in days of Ezra.

c.Warning to all that they fail not.

d.The last days.

e.Unspeakable joy to come to the faithful.

f.The Prophet's prayer.

Notes

"My God, great and mighty art Thou, therefore show unto Thy servant what shall become of all those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecration, by order or deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same.

Then the Prophet adds: "Brother William, in the love of God, having the most implicit confidence in you as a man of God, having obtained this confidence by a vision of heaven, therefore I will proceed to unfold to you some of the feelings of my heart, and to answer the questions." Then what follows by the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord has been accepted by the Church as a revelation. (D. & C. Sec. 85.)

The thought that it is not a very important matter who is called to keep the records as long as he can write, is a very fatal error. In the choosing of recorders, and clerks in wards and stakes or in other Church work where vital information is to be recorded, the choosing of the most efficient and capable man should be chosen. This is just as important as it is to choose a good bishop or president of a stake, for the records are to be permanent and to contain all the essential and vital information pertaining to an organization, a quorum, or the Church. This truth is too frequently lost sight of, however, by our officers in making a choice of recorders.

The Lord's clerk in the matter of consecration and inheritance was to keep a history and "a general Church record of all things that transpire in Zion, and of all those who consecrate properties and receive inheritances legally from the bishop." Not only was this recorder, or clerk, to keep this record, but he was to keep a record also of their manner of life, their faith, and works; and also of the apostates who apostatize after receiving their inheritances. It is seen from this that this was a very important position requiring the attention of someone who was alert and filled with the Spirit of faith and obedience to the Gospel. To keep a record of the manner of life of these consecrated members was important because of the nature of the covenant which they were required to make when they entered into this order, or covenant. Those who would not work, were not to receive the blessings. Previously the Lord had declared in a standing commandment to the Church: "And let all things be done in cleanliness before me. Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garment of the laborer." (D. and C. 42:41-42). When stewardships were assigned, it was supposed that each man would be given the work which he was most capable of doing, and if he had faith he would put forth every effort to be successful for the building up of the kingdom and the establishment of Zion. The names of all faithful members were to be recorded, with an account of their stewardship, their faith and their works. What a happy people they would have been if they had hearkened with singleness of heart to these commandments, for the Lord had promised to protect them in these inheritances if they would be faithful to him. The Lord knew that there would be some among them who would falter; some who would come to Zion not willing to enroll themselves and consecrate themselves and their property to the welfare of Zion, and therefore could not be given stewardships in the covenant which the Lord had made with the saints. He, therefore, commanded that all those who came to Zion and who were not willing to receive an inheritance, and consecration agreeable to his law should not be numbered among the faithful. It was the intention of the Lord to have his people consecrated in preparation "against the day of vengeance and burning," when so many of the prophets in ancient times as well as now, have predicted shall come. This class, as well as the apostate who may have entered into these covenants, were not to have their genealogy kept, "or to be where it may be found on any of the records or history of the Church." This was a matter far more serious perhaps than it was supposed at the time this revelation was given. The Lord said "Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts." The book of the law of God, was the book to be kept by the Lord's clerk. There is also another book which is kept in heaven, and the one kept by the Lord's clerk should be accurately kept so that it would agree with the "Lamb's Book of Life." In the Lamb's Book of Life only the names are received of those who have washed their garments white "in the blood of the Lamb." This is in harmony with the word of the Lord to John:

"And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life."—Rev. 21:17.

"Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest, saying:

"And it shall come to pass "that I, the Lord God, will send, one mighty and strong, holding the scepter of power in his hand, clothed with light for a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the saints whose names are found, and the names of their fathers, and of their children, enrolled in the book of the law of God.

"While that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning," (Vs. 6-8.)

There have arisen from time to time men of doubtful intelligence who have laid claim to being the "one mighty and strong." Some of these, notwithstanding their limitations of intellect and power of understanding, have succeeded in gathering around them a few followers of like spirit and lack of understanding. Some of these have passed away and others have arisen to make similar claims, but all without making very much commotion. Then, in our Priesthood classes, Sunday Schools and other organizations there has been too much discussion of uncertain sound, as to whom it was that was smitten and who will be appointed to come and set in order the inheritances. Speaking of those who rise up and proclaim themselves the appointed one, the First Presidency in an article in the Deseret News, Nov. 13, 1905, has said:

"One would think in such a matter as this that sufficient native modesty would assert itself to restrain a man from announcing himself as the one upon whom such high honors are to be conferred, and who is to exercise such great powers in establishing the Saints in their inheritances; and that even if one suspected, for any reason, that such a position, and such exceptional powers were to be conferred upon him, he would wait until the Lord would clearly indicate to the Church, as well as to himself, that he had been indeed sent of God to do the work of so noble a ministry, as is described in the passage under question. Those, however, who have so far proclaimed themselves as being the "one mighty and strong," have manifested the utmost ignorance of the things of God and the order of the Church. Indeed their insufferable ignorance and egotism have been at the bottom of all their pretensions, and the cause of all the trouble into which they have fallen. They seem not to have been aware of the fact that the Church of Christ and of the saints is completely organized, and that when the man who shall be called upon to divide unto the Saints their inheritances comes, he will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord to the proper authorities of the Church, appointed and sustained according to the order provided for in the government of the Church."

It is clear from what is written in the revelations and also in this letter that it was the bishop Edward Partridge who had been appointed to set in order the inheritances. It is also evident from the recorded history that the bishop had failed at times in his duty and had to be rebuked for his opposition and rebellion and for being out of harmony with the Prophet and his brethren. However, all that was written by revelation in the letter was contingent upon the unfaithfulness of the bishop who was appointed to set the inheritances in order, and when a man repents he is forgiven. Edward Partridge turned away from his errors in the true spirit of repentance and therefore the punishment which otherwise would have come upon him was set aside, and the threatened calamity averted. The First Presidency in this article call attention to the subsequent faithfulness of Edward Partridge, who suffered much persecution and privation for his faithfulness to and love for the truth.

When the day comes for one to be appointed to set in order the inheritances as stated in this letter, it will be in a day when the members of the Church who are privileged to remain and obtain inheritances, will be willing to keep the commandments of the Lord. The First Presidency stated:

"As to the 'one mighty and strong' some hold that he has come, others that he is yet to come. Some have held that the Prophet Joseph Smith was the man, and that he would be raised from the dead and appear among the Saints to fulfill the terms of this prophecy. Others have insisted that the late President Brigham Young was the man who fulfilled the prediction, when, with such heaven-inspired wisdom and masterly skill, he led the exiled Saints from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountains and laid their settlements in the valleys of Utah,

"All these theories have been entertained and some of them by very good brethren; but good men and well informed men, are sometimes mistaken, and all are capable of receiving larger information, and more and more light respecting the things which God reveals."

Since this entire subject has to do with the inheritances in Missouri, it is evident that all such theories are in error. Further the First Presidency have said:

"If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of 'one mighty and strong,' is still to be regarded as relating to the future, let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future bishop of the Church, who will be with the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, when the Lord shall establish them in that land; and he will be so blessed with the spirit and power of his calling that he will be able to set in order the house of God, pertaining to the department of the work under his jurisdiction; and in righteousness and justice will 'arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints.' He will hold the same high and exalted station that Edward Partridge held; for the latter was called to do just this kind of work—that is, to set in order the house of God as pertaining to settling the Saints upon their inheritances, as will appear from the following passages." Then follow quotations from D. & C. 57:7 and 15, and 58:14 and 17.

"These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood." (Ezra 2:62.)

The members of the Church today should take warning from this which is written and keep themselves prepared by their faithful adherence to the principles of the Gospel, and be true to their covenants, so that when that day shall come, if they are here to share in it, they will not be found like these Jews in the days of Ezra, but will have their names written in the book of remembrance.
