Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-SIX

The Wheat and the Tares—Lawful Heirs to the Priesthood

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:300. D. & C. Sec. 86.

Topics

1.Explanation of the Parable of the Wheat and the Tares. Note 1.

a.Explanation given to the elders. (V. 1. Matt. 13:24-30.)

b.The field is the world, the sowers, the Apostles. (V. 2.)

c.Babylon, the enemy of the Church, after the apostles fell asleep, sowed the tares and the Church was driven into the wilderness. (V. 3) Note 2. Additional reference Rev. 12.

d.In the last days, while the blade (newly sown) is springing up, the angels cry to the Lord for the privilege of reaping down the field (world.) (Vs. 4-5.) Note 3.

e.The Lord commands them to wait until the end of the harvest. (Vs. 6-7.) Additional reference Matt. 13:24-30.)

2.The Priesthood Given to Lawful Heirs Through Lineage of Their Fathers. (Vs. 8-10.) Additional references Abraham 2:7-11; Gen. 22:15-18.

a.The Promise of the Lord to Abraham.

b.All who receive the Gospel to become the children of Abraham by blood or adoption. Additional reference D. & C. 84:33-34.

c.The Priesthood to remain through the lineage of the elders who have received it, until all things are accomplished. (V. 10.)

d.Blessed are all who continue in goodness of the Lord, and who minister to others. (V. 11.)

Notes

While the field is the world and the wheat represents the righteous who hear the Gospel and the tares the rebellious and workers of iniquity, let us not forget that even in the Church the tares are to be found. It is the tares which are to be gathered up and burned from all over the world, but those in the Church will also be gathered out and find their place in the fire. The Savior also bore witness of this when speaking to the Nephites he said: "For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from my people, O house of Israel." (3 Nephi 21:20.)

In the early days of the Church the Lord said the harvest was great and the laborers were few, and the field white already to harvest, and when the missionaries were sent forth they were able to convert the lost sheep by the scores and by the hundreds, for they were ready and waiting for the harvest. Today it is not so; it takes both time and effort to bring to repentance one or two souls while the great majority of men refuse to give ear to anything which is said by the missionaries. At the October Conference, 1923, President Heber J. Grant, after quoting Section Four of the Doctrine and Covenants, made these remarks:

"Many of these revelations given before the Church was organized announce that the field was white already to harvest.

"When I stop to think that Wilford Woodruff baptized some eighteen hundred people in less than a year in Herefordshire, England, and that Orson Pratt baptized several thousand people in his missionary work, I realize that the field was indeed ready to harvest.

"We have had as high as twenty-three hundred missionaries out in the field for one year, and they did not accomplish as much as Wilford Woodruff accomplished in one year. His labors were simply marvelous to me. The field was 'white, ready to harvest.'

"Today it is a day of gleaning." That we are drawing near "the end of the harvest" when the wheat is to be fully gathered and the tares prepared for the burning is discovered in the following prediction and prophecy made by President Wilford Woodruff at a gathering of temple workers in Brigham City, June 24, 1894:

"I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have a vision of night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured upon this world, when I know these things are true, and while I am holding this position before God and this world (i.e. President of the Church) can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people, and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be, but while I live and see these things continually before my eyes, I shall raise my voice in warning.* * *Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I will tell you, the priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings, are the only ones who shall have their safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we will have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and safety. Read the scriptures and the revelations. They will tell you about all these things. Great changes are at our doors. The next twenty years will see mighty changes among the nations of the earth. You will live to see these things, whether I do or not. I have felt oppressed with the weight of these matters, and I felt I must speak of them here. It is by the power of the gospel that we shall escape.

It was in August twenty years later that the World War broke out. In July (15th), 1894, President Woodruff repeated this prophecy and again declared that the angels had been sent forth to reap down the earth, while speaking at the Weber Stake Conference in Ogden, and again, October 4, 1896, at the general conference of the Church in Salt Lake City. On divers other occasions he also warned the Saints and told them that the gathering of the tares had commenced. At this point we may properly quote the words of our Lord to his disciples when speaking of these times:

"And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.

"For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.

"Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man, (Luke 21:34-36.)

"And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

"And I will bless them through thy name: for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

"And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:9-11.)

It is in harmony with this promise to Abraham the Lord declared to these Elders of the Church that the Priesthood had continued through the lineage of their fathers "for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God." (V. 9.) Moreover that this Priesthood must remain through them and their lineage until the restoration of all things. This saying does not mean that the Priesthood has come down from olden times by lineage from generation to generation, for there was a great apostasy intervening between the days of their fathers who held the Priesthood and these elders unto whom this revelation was given. But, since they were of the House of Israel, and therefore descendants of Abraham, they were lawful heirs to the Priesthood according to the covenant made with Abraham, and the Priesthood which they held had come down to them from them of old who held it. Then, again, we discover in section 84, verses 32-34, that all who are true to the Priesthood and the Church become the sons of Aaron and Moses and the seed of Abraham, and the Church and kingdom, and the elect of God. All souls coming into the Church become the seed of Abraham according to the promise, and there is a literal change which comes over them by which they are grafted into the House of Israel even if they are not literally of his lineage. Speaking of this change the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

"The * * * Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham." (D.H.C., June 27, 1839.)
