Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-SEVEN

The Great Prophecy on War

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1, 301-302.

Topics

1.The American Civil War Predicted. (See any United States History.)

a.The War of the Rebellion the beginning of modern warfare. (V. 1.) Note 1.

b.South Carolina first to declare war. (Vs. 1-3.) Note 2.

c.The Southern States arrayed against the Northern States. (V. 3.)

d.The Southern States and their call upon Great Britain. (V. 3.) Note 3.

e.The death and misery of many souls. (V. 1.)

2.The World War Predicted.

The alliance between nations

a.To lead to world war. (V. 3.) Note 4.

b.War, famine, plague, earthquake, etc. to cause inhabitants of the earth to mourn. (V. 6.) Note 5.

c.Inhabitants of earth to feel the wrath and indignation and chastening hand of God. (V. 6.)

d.Blood of Saints shall cease to come up to ear of the Lord. (V. 7.)

e.The saints commanded to stand in holy places until the Lord shall come. (V. 8.)

3.Slaves to Rise and the Remnant on This Land to Vex the Gentiles. (V. 4.) Note 6.

a.Slaves to rise against their masters. (V. 4.)

b.The Lamanites to become angry and vex the Gentiles. (V. 5.)

4.Authenticity of the Revelation. Note 7.

a.First published in 1851 in England.

b.Elders on missions used written copies of the revelation shortly after it was given.

c.Testimony of Orson Pratt.

Notes

"WAR REVOLUTIONIZED"

"There was, however, a distinguishing feature indicated for the Civil War of 1861-4. It was then (1862) that the machine gun was brought forth, the Gatling gun, as we know it, which soon was adopted by other civilized nations. It absolutely revolutionized warfare on land. This gun then had a capacity for firing 350 shots per minute, improved upon later; but it was the beginning of new and more destructive methods of war than were known theretofore.

"Another feature of that time was the invention of the revolving turret in connection with the ironclad warship, developed in the Monitor when that vessel had its engagement with the Merrimac, and subsequently adopted on all gunboats. The revolving turret revolutionized warfare on the sea. With the civilized world, it was then no more the class of warfare which had existed before, but new methods, a new art of war, with new weapons, armour and accessories to fit the revolving turret and the machine-gun. So, during the American Civil War there was introduced a new element in warfare upon land and sea, changing the whole method or course of war—a 'beginning' therein which made it so much more destructive both as to life and property that there was no comparison with that which had gone before.

"The first time the submarine was used in war was by the Confederates when they went out with the little submarine David and sank the Federal warship Housatonic.* * *

"Other mechanical devices and inventions, not before known and used in war also were introduced as methods of war at that time—the first use of military telegraphs, later extended in the telephone.

* * * The first extended use of military railways, and many other things, was in the Civil War."—The Present Time and Prophecy, pages 28-29.

There are many things now used and highly developed in warfare that had their inception in the Civil War; and therefore beginning at that place war has been poured out upon all nations. Let it not be forgotten that following the Civil War, the nations of the world were forced to scrap their wooden ships and useless armaments, and begin anew. Steel vessels and forts were built; greater cannon were manufactured, the rifled cannon shooting its great steel shell came into existence, and with greater power of penetration, thicker armor for defense was placed upon all boats and forts. Other inventions had to keep pace, and the nations from that day until now have been weighed down with the burdens and preparations for war according to these discoveries. The people have been unmercifully taxed to carry this great load, and each nation has endeavored to hold its own in the preparation for offense as well as for defense, in fear of conflicts, which may arise, and have arisen. What was all this preparation if it was not in reality placing upon the peoples of the earth the burdens of war? Moreover, since the Civil War there has scarcely been a year that somewhere upon the earth nations have not been engaged in deadly conflict; and who can deny that out of all this preparation and the accompanying ambitions, came the greatest struggle the world has ever seen—the World War.

"As the war proceeded the southern ports were successfully blockaded by the northern navy, and thus the import trade of the Confederacy suffered seriously, England depended upon the cotton from the South to keep her great cotton mills running. These circumstances gave high hope to the Confederacy that Great Britain would soon become an ally. In furtherance of these hopes, Messrs. Mason and Slidell were commissioned to France and England for the purpose of securing the friendly assistance of those two countries. The Trent affair has made this commission somewhat famous in history. Men conspicuous in the affairs of Great Britain freely expressed their sympathy for the southern cause.* * * The capitalists of the empire bought heavily of the Confederate bonds * * * England even went so far as to build battleships for the South. Two of these, the Florida and the Alabama, slipped away from Liverpool in March and July, 1862, and engaged themselves in the predatory pastime of preying on our commerce wherever it could be encountered on the high seas. Two more iron-clad rams were ready to leave the ways at docks for similar purposes. Our minister to England at this juncture curtly advised Lord Russel, the Foreign Secretary. 'It would be superfluous in me to point out to your Lordship that this is war.' This pointed note called a halt to British piracy and her collusion with the South."

"These ambassadors also sought the aid of France, and several European countries were invited by the emperor to join a demand that the United States grant the independence of the Southern States. Following the Civil War the nations, in their great alarm because of the new methods of warfare which were being developed and their fear of other nations, entered into alliances and secret agreements in order to protect themselves from other nations. At the outbreak of the World War, these alliances had reached proportions never before known, and during the war other alliances were made until nearly every nation on the earth had taken sides with the Triple Alliance or the Triple Entente. It was during the period of the World War, 1914-1918, Great Britain made her appeal to the nations to come to the defense of the standard of Democracy. Her pleadings were heard round the world. "And what is still more remarkable, the entire procedure conforms exactly to the prediction made by Joseph Smith, viz: 'they shall also call upon other nations in order to defend themselves against other nations.' A plurality of nations aligned and allied on both sides of the deadly conflict. It required the two contending groups to vindicate this very extraordinary prophecy." (Prophecies of Joseph Smith, pp. 81-82.)

The great conflict of 1939-1945, which spread such terror and bloodshed in all parts of the world, was not a new world war as so frequently stated, but in reality a continuation of the same conflict which commenced in 1914. The spell of comparative peace during the twenty-five year period before the conflict broke out again, was brought about simply because one side in the conflict became exhausted, and the other found itself in very little better condition, and in weariness was ready for the armistice which was offered. This period of time when there were no open hostilities was utilized by the central powers to prepare themselves to again renew the conflict. Surely the building of warships and armaments, and the development of new methods of destruction both on land, in the sea and under the sea and in the air, by the nations during those years, were warlike activities which could not result in anything other than open hostilities in the end. We have now passed through the second stage of this great world war, but the end is not yet. The prophecies will be fulfilled. War could be averted if the peoples of the earth would repent and live in accord with the principles of the Gospel, but this they will not do. Another conflict is bound to come because of the iniquities so prevalent throughout the world. The Lord has spoken and his words will be fulfilled and there will come speedily further destruction until the Lord has made an end of all nations, and all of this because "all flesh has corrupted its way upon the earth," as it had done at an earlier period in the history of the world.

There were many who thought, after the close of hostilities in 1918, that the conflict just brought to an end was so horrible that never again could nation take up arms against nation. Then because of wickedness, hostilities broke out again with a horror that surpassed an hundred fold all that had gone before. We now face the danger of a still worse and more destructive conflict when the nations feel themselves sufficiently recovered to commence it. All the horror and destruction of lives and property, have failed to cause people to humble themselves and seek the Lord. Iniquity abounds; Satan is raging in the hearts of the people and the Lord has been forgotten.

Some carping critic may arise and say that the whole world was not drawn into the great conflict either in 1914, or in 1939-1945. It is true that some of the nations did not take up arms, but they all suffered untold misery and no kindred or people anywhere on the face of the earth escaped the ravages of war.

"When I was a boy, I traveled extensively in the United States and the Canadas, preaching this restored gospel. I had a manuscript copy of this revelation, which I carried in my pocket, and I was in the habit of reading it to the people among whom I traveled and preached. As a general thing the people regarded it as the height of nonsense, saying the Union was too strong to be broken and I, they said, was led away, the victim of an imposter. I knew the prophecy was true, for the Lord had spoken to me and had given me revelation. I knew also concerning the divinity of this work. Year after year passed away, while every little while some of the acquaintances I had formerly made would say, 'Well, what is going to become of that prediction? It's never going to be fulfilled.' I said. 'Wait. the Lord has set his time.' By and by it came along, and the first battle was fought at Charleston, South Carolina. This is another testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Most High God." (J. of D. 18:224-225.)

Notwithstanding all of this evidence, after the war people ridiculed the revelation saying that any one could have predicted the rebellion of South Carolina and the Civil War. The fact remains, however, that no one except those who had faith in Joseph Smith and a testimony of the truth, believed that the portion predicting a world war would ever be fulfilled. We have lived to see two of the most terrible and destructive editions of that war come upon the entire world, and with anxiety we await another such conflict. Surely this great prophecy will be fulfilled literally in every other respect, and the day is not far distant when the Lord, as it has been decreed, will make a full end of all nations, preparatory to his coming.
