Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-EIGHT

Resurrection and Destiny of Earth and Man

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:302-312. (D. & C. 88.)

Topics

1."The Spirit and the Body Are the Soul of Man." (Vs. 14-17.) Note 1.

a.The resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul. (V. 16.)

b.The redemption of the soul is through Jesus Christ who quickeneth all things. (V. 17.)

2.The Destiny of the Earth. Note 2.

a.The poor and the meek to inherit the earth. (V. 17.) Matt. 5:5.

b.The earth must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness. (V. 18.) Psalms 37:11.

c.When the earth has filled the measure of its (temporal) creation it will be crowned with glory, even the presence of the Father. (V. 19.) D. and C. 77:6.

d.Celestial beings are to possess it forever, for it was created for this purpose. (V. 20.) D. and C. 38:20.

e.All who are not sanctified through the Gospel must go to some other kingdom. (V. 21.)

f.The earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, and it must die, but will rise again to celestial glory that the righteous may possess it. (Vs. 25-26.) D. and C. 29:23-25.

3.All Men Will Be Assigned to the Kingdom Which They Merit. Note 3.

a."He who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory." (V. 23.)

b."He who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory." (V. 23.)

c."He who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom, cannot abide a telestial glory." (V. 24.)

d.The same spirit and body to be united in the resurrection and all men quickened by the glory they have lived. (Vs. 28-31.) Alma 11:41-45; 34:34-35.

e.All who remain outside of the kingdoms will also be quickened, but will go again to their own place. (Vs. 32-33.) Rev. 20:5, 13-14.

4.The General Resurrection. Note 4.

a.Signs preceding the coming of Christ. (Vs. 86-91.) Matt. 24:29-45.

b.Angels shall fly, crying that the judgments are come. Luke 21:25-36. (Vs. 92-95.)

c.Saints living on the earth to be caught up to meet the Savior; the saints in their graves to come forth. (Vs. 96-98.)

d.The Redemption to come to those who have had place in the prison and who belong to the terrestrial order. (V. 99.)

e.Judgment of the telestial spirits to take place. (Vs. 100-102.)

f.Every knee shall bow, although some remain filthy still. (Vs. 103-104.)

g.The trumpets of the seven angels. (Vs. 105-110; Rev. Chapters 6, 8, 9.)

h.Satan loosed for a little season, and the final battle. (Vs. 111-116.)

i.The glory of the earth and the righteous to be celestial. (Vs. 19, 25, 26, 115, 116.)

Notes

"When shall we receive our inheritances so that we can say they are our own? When the Savior has completed his work when the faithful Saints have preached the Gospel to the last of the spirits who have lived here and who are designed to come to this earth; when the thousand years of rest shall come and thousands and thousands of Temples shall be built, and the servants and handmaids of the Lord shall have entered therein and officiated for their dead friends back to the days of Adam; when the last of the spirits in prison who will receive the Gospel have received it; when the Savior comes and receives his ready bride, and all who can be saved in the various kingdoms of God—Celestial, Terrestrial and Telestial, according to their several capacities and opportunities; when sin and iniquity are driven from the earth, and the spirits that now float in this atmosphere are driven into the place prepared for them; and when the earth is sanctified from the effects of the fall, and baptized, cleansed, and purified by fire, and returns to its paradisical state, and has become like a sea of glass, a urim and thummim; when all this is done, and the Savior has presented the earth to his Father, and it is placed in the cluster of the celestial kingdoms, and the Son and all his faithful brethren and sisters have received the welcome plaudit, 'Enter ye into the joy of your Lord,' and the Savior is crowned, then and not till then, will the Saints receive their everlasting inheritances. * * *

"The Latter-day Saints are believers in the atonement of the Savior, and I would like to have the Elders of Israel understand as far as they can all the points of doctrine in regard to the redemption of the human family, that they may know how to talk about and explain them. No one who believes in the Bible and in the mission of the Savior believes that the wicked are going to possess this earth; but they believe that when it is prepared it will be given to the Saints and they will inherit it."—J. of D., 17:117.

"And this world, so benighted at present, and so lightly esteemed by infidels, as observed by Brother Clements, when it becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state to a sea of glass." (President Brigham Young, J. of D. 10:175.)

"Are the wicked to receive the earth as an inheritance? No; for Jesus did not say, Blessed are the wicked, for they shall inherit the earth; this promise was made only to the meek. Who are the meek? None but those who receive the ordinances of the Gospel, and live according to them. * * * And after they have died as the earth will die, they will have to be resurrected as this earth will be resurrected, and then receive their inheritances upon it." (Orson Pratt, J. of D., 1:293.)

"The destiny of this globe is that it is to be fitted as a habitation for the righteous, and 'meek' of the earth, who will inherit it in the resurrected state. The Lord has revealed that 'The earth abideth the law of its creation,' and when it has fully filled the measure thereof, 'it shall be crowned with glory', even with the presence of the Father; that 'although it shall die, it shall be quickened again' and shall be inhabited by beings clothed with the celestial glory, that 'for this intent was it made and created.' (See Doc. and Cov., Sec. 88:17-26). There are many other particulars concerning the future of this planet, formed by the Eternal as a dwelling place for this branch of the great family of which He is the Head, but on these we will not discourse at present." (President Charles W. Penrose, Liahona, 6:999.)
