Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SIXTY-NINE

"Teach Ye Diligently the Doctrines of the Kingdom" (Part Two)

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:302-312. (D. & C. 88.)

Topics

1.The Power and Value of Prayer. Note 1.

a.A commandment to call the Lord while he is near. (Vs. 62-63.)

b.All shall be given that is expedient. (Vs. 64-65.)

c."He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be forsaken." (V. 83.) (Psalms 9:10.)

d."Pray always * * * until I come." (V. 126.) (Proverbs 8:17.)

e.If your eyes are single to glory of God, your bodies will be filled with light. (Vs. 66-68.) (James 1:5-7.)

2."Teach Ye Diligently the Doctrines of the Kingdom." Note 2.

a.The Elders to call a solemn assembly. (Vs. 70-75.)

b.The Elders to be sanctified, cease idleness, loud laughter, and the day will come when they shall see God. (Vs. 67-69.)

c.To teach each other the doctrines, and in prayer and fasting, purify themselves. (Vs. 74-79.)

d.This instruction, if followed, to prepare them to go forth and teach the world and prepare the Saints for the judgment which is to come. (Vs. 84-86.)

3.Judgments to Follow the Testimonies of the Elders. Note 3.

a.Wrath and indignation of the Lord. (Vs. 88.) (Joel 30-32.)

b.The Earth to reel and tremble and stars to become angry. (V. 87.)

c.The testimony of thunder, lightning, tempests, and all things in commotion. (Vs. 89-91.)

d.The Angels to cry with a loud voice. (V. 92; see Lesson 68.)

4.The School of the Prophets. Note 4.

a.The Elders to organize and have a teacher. (Vs. 117-122.)

b.Love, charity, diligence and cleanliness enjoined. (Vs. 123-125.)

c.Order of the house of the school. (Vs. 127-128.)

d.The presiding officer to set the example in all things. (Vs. 129-133.)

e.Only those who are found worthy to find place in the school. (Vs. 134-136.)

f.The house to be a sanctuary for the Holy Spirit and the members to be clean from the blood of this generation. (Vs. 137-141)

Notes

The other was the "School of the Prophets," and a very good description of this school and its purpose is given in this section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 117 to the end of the section. In a letter written by the Prophet Joseph to William W. Phelps in Zion, January 14, 1833, the following appears: "You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and established a school for the prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on conditions of our obedience he has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with his own presence." In an epistle written by commandment by Elders Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith they have this to say to the Saints: "We now close our epistle by saying unto you, the Lord has commanded us to purify ourselves, to wash our hands and our feet, that he may testify to his Father and our Father, to his God and to our God, that we are clean from the blood of this generation; and before we could wash our hands, and our feet, we were constrained to write this letter. Therefore, with the feeling of inexpressible anxiety for your welfare, we say again, Repent, repent, or Zion must suffer, for the scourge and judgment must come upon her." (D.H.C. 1:320.) The Prophet further writes: "This winter (1832-3) was spent in translating the Scriptures; in the School of the Prophets; and sitting in conferences. I had many glorious seasons of refreshing." (D.H.C. 1:322.) This School of the Prophets and the schools where the ordinary branches were taught continued in Kirtland until the exodus from that place. It was for this school that the lectures on Faith were prepared and which were delivered to the Elders. The idea has been expressed that Sidney Rigdon wrote these lectures, but they were compiled by a number of the brethren and the Prophet himself had the final revision of them. They contain a great deal of excellent teaching on the principle of faith.

The "School of the Prophets" is not something new to this dispensation. In ancient Israel, especially in the days of Samuel, Elijah and Elisha, there was such a school. We read in I Samuel, tenth chapter, that after Samuel had anointed Saul to be king of Israel he met a company of prophets and prophesied with them. In II Kings, chapter two, where we have the account of the translation of Elijah, we are told that a company of the sons of the prophets accompanied Elisha who was determined to follow Elijah. "And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood in view afar off, and they two (Elijah and Elisha) stood by Jordan," and when Elisha returned to them after the departure of Elijah, these sons of the prophets discovered that the power of Elijah was upon Elisha.

The object for which this school was organized is plainly stated in the revelation. None could join except he was clean from the blood of this generation. The only way he could be clean was to be obedient to the covenants of the Gospel and labor in behalf of his fellows for the salvation of their souls. Thus the preaching of the Gospel was a requirement made of those who desired to join this school. The School of the Prophets continued in Utah for several years under the administration of President Brigham Young, but after that time it was discontinued.
