Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY

Important Correspondence Concerning Zion

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:316-321.

Topics

1.The N. E. Seaton Letter. Note 1.

a.The Prophet's Anxiety over the sins of the world.

b.The Spirit of the Lord withdrawn from men.

c.Time for the wicked world to awake.

d.The promised gathering has commenced. Note 2.

e.The Lord's covenant.

f.Gentiles have provoked the Lord. Note 3.

g.The Lord to break the nations.

h.The requirements made of the nations.

i.The Book of Mormon.

2.A Prophecy of Destruction for the Wicked. Note 4.

a.War and bloodshed predicted.

b.Pestilence, earthquake and destruction to come.

c.The wicked to be swept off.

d.The Lost Tribes to return. Note 5.

3.Correspondence with Brethren in Zion. Note 6.

a.The blessing of the "Olive Leaf."

b.Work of the Lord to be accomplished.

c.A warning given to the elders in Zion.

d.A House of the Lord to be built in Kirtland. Note 7.

e.The School of the Prophets.

f.Prophecy of judgment to come if brethren do not repent.

4.Epistle of Orson Pratt and Hyrum Smith. Note 8.

a.Epistle written by conference appointment to brethren in Zion.

b.The warning voice to inhabitants of Zion.

c.Accusations against brethren in Zion.

d.Sidney Gilbert rebuked.

e.William W. Phelps also admonished.

f.Prophetic warning repeated.

Notes

"I think it is high time," the Prophet wrote, "for a Christian world to awake out of sleep, and cry mightily to that God, day and night, whose anger we have justly incurred." The condition of the world should be, he wrote, as a stimulant "to arouse the faculties, and call forth the energies of every man, woman or child that possesses feelings of sympathy for their fellows, or that is in any degree endeared to the budding cause of our glorious Lord." The Prophet was inspired to call upon the inhabitants to turn from their sins, and the Lord has called the weak to call upon the great to repent. This epistle was much like the calls to repentance by the prophets in ancient Israel, and without any questions was necessary to be given to the world shortly after the restoration of the Gospel and the Priesthood.

And now what remains to be done if the people refuse to hear the message of the gospel newly revealed? "I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people. high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to the fulness, and escape the judgments of God, which are most ready to burst upon the nations of the earth." They were to repent of their sins and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power. This is in accord with what is written in the Holy Scriptures and in the Book of Mormon; and the only way that man can enter into the celestial kingdom. These are requirements of the "new covenant." The Book of Mormon is the record of the inhabitants of the western hemisphere. The Indians are descendants of these people. Their record was revealed by the power of God, and they are descendants of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and they with many of the Gentiles, who will accept the truth, shall inherit this land and the tribe of Judah will eventually return to old Jerusalem. The city Zion, spoken of by David in the 102nd Psalm will be built upon this land. There will be an overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land, but the righteous shall be delivered and the Jews will find deliverance in Jerusalem, or Palestine. These things the prophets have declared.

When the Prophet received Mr. Seaton's paper he was greatly disappointed because that gentleman had published only a portion of his communication. On February 12th, he wrote to Mr. Seaton expressing his disappointment in which he said: "The letter which I wrote you for publication, I wrote by the commandment of God, and I am quite anxious to have it all laid out before the public, for it is of importance to them: but I have no claim upon you, neither do I wish to urge you, beyond that which is reasonable, to do it. I have only to appeal to your extended generosity to all religious societies that claim that Christ has come in the flesh; and also to tell you what will be the consequences of a neglect to publish it." The Prophet then called attention to the fact that some parts of the letter were very severe against the wickedness of sectarianism. "I lay the ax at the root of the tree, and I long to see many of the sturdy oaks, which have long encumbered the ground, fall prostrate. I now say unto you, that if you wish to clear your garments from the blood of your readers, I exhort you to publish that letter entire; but if not, the sin be upon your head." (D.H.C. 1:326.)

We have no evidence that Mr. Seaton ever published the full article. Neither do we know what the consequences were. This we do know, however, that it was then, and is now, difficult to have published any article that cries repentance and calls attention to the iniquities of the people. This fact does not in any way, nevertheless, relieve the Lord's appointed servants from the responsibilities of warning the world of its wickedness and from crying repentance. This is a requirement of us today which is just as great as it has ever been in the history of the world. The Lord said to his missionaries:

"Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are upon their own heads." (D. & C. 88:81-82.)

The Prophet commences his letter by stating that he was sending to the brethren in Missouri the great revelation known as the "olive leaf," so named because of the great truths revealed therein, but also, without doubt, intended to be an "olive leaf," or branch, to the Missouri brethren. Surely such great truths regarding the kingdom of God, his mercies and the plan of redemption and other matters should have touched the hearts of these brethren and caused them to rejoice, for there have been few greater manifestations of knowledge and wisdom than are found in this revelation.

The Prophet expressed regret that the brethren in Zion indulged in feelings towards the brethren in Kirtland, contrary to their covenant, yet he felt that the Lord approved of the Kirtland brethren. It was declared that if Zion would not purify herself then the name of the Lord in Kirtland would be held in remembrance for the salvation of the nations; "for the Lord will have a place whence his word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in his sight, he will seek another people; for his work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear his voice, must expect to feel his wrath." The brethren in Zion were admonished to repent and purify themselves, for the anger of the Lord would otherwise be kindled in fierceness. "Repent, repent, is the voice of God to Zion." The members of the Church in Zion were not to justify themselves until their character be past being redeemed, and their follies be exposed to the gaze of mankind. They were to heed the warning voice, less Zion fall, and the Lord in his wrath declare that the inhabitants of Zion should not enter into his rest.

The temple in due time, and in the poverty of the people, was built, and in it the Lord did reveal his presence and likewise the presence of his servants the prophets with their keys of authority. Of this we will consider more at the proper time. Elder A. S. Gilbert had to be taken to task for some of his evil acting and speaking. And the Prophet expressed great sorrow for the evil spirit that had crept in among the inhabitants of Zion. He warned the brethren that unless they repented of their evil ways the wrath of heaven would come upon them, and said, "It is vain to try to hide a bad spirit from the eyes of them who are spiritual, for it will show itself in speaking and in writing, as well as in all our other conduct." He admonished them also to publish more of the history of the Church in the Star and make it as interesting as possible or it also would fail.

In closing their epistle these brethren say that they were meeting with the conference again. where their words were to be read for approval, and they would kneel down before the Lord, and cry unto him with all their hearts, that this epistle and the Prophet's letter and the revelations, may have the desired effect, "and accomplish the thing whereunto they are sent, and that they may stimulate you to cleanse Zion, that she mourn not."

These epistles written in strong, but needed, language, did accomplish good with the brethren in Zion. However, the judgments did come upon Zion as they had been predicted and her inhabitants suffered extremely at the brutal hands of a ruthless mob. This came only six months later and will be considered in the proper place.
