Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-TWO

The Keys of the Kingdom

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:329-333. (D. & C. 90.)

Topics

1.A Revelation of Comfort. Note 1.

a.The Prophet's blessings.

b.Keys of the Kingdom restored for last time.

c.Keys never to be taken from the Prophet.

d.Oracles to be given to the Church. Note 2.

e.Warning to all who receive the oracles.

2.The School of the Prophets. Note 3.

a.Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams appointed assistants in holding keys.

b.The presidency of the school of the prophets.

c.Experience in preparation for ministry.

d.For salvation of Zion, Israel and Gentiles.

e.Arm of the Lord to be revealed.

f.Every man to hear in own tongue. Note 4.

g.Study of languages and peoples to be required.

h.The Prophet to preside in councils.

3.Counsel to Elders. Note 5.

a.Places to be provided for Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams.

b.Bishop to obtain an agent.

c.Debts to be paid.

d.Joseph Smith, Sen.'s family.

e.Vienna Jaques to be assisted.

f.The Prophet to preside in Zion as well as in Kirtland.

g.Brethren in Zion begin to repent. Note 6.

h.Zion to be chastened until she is clean.

4.The Apocrypha. Note 7.

a.No need to translate the Apocrypha.

b.It contains many errors.

c.Those with guidance of Spirit can discern the errors.

Notes

The Lord admonishes those who receive the oracles in these words: "And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they held them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descends, and beat upon their house." A warning of this kind is always in order to those who are vested with authority so that they may keep humble and not become proud and arrogant and boastful in their own strength. The utmost meekness and humility are essential to presiding office in the Church, whatever that office may be.

In order to obtain means to pay debts the Lord commanded that the bishop should search out an agent, a man of means, to take charge of the storehouse. He was to be a man of God, strong in the faith, "that thereby he may be enabled to discharge every debt; that the storehouse of the Lord may not be brought into disrepute before the eyes of the people. Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenants wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." (Vs. 23-24.)

From the time that Zion had been designated and many of the members of the Church had gone there to make permanent homes, it became necessary that they have an organization and a presidency was appointed. The Lord seeing the danger of a presidency in this place growing in authority to think that they were supreme in that place, the Lord declared that word should be sent to Zion and the elders presiding there that the Prophet was to say to them "in love greeting, that I have called you also to preside over Zion in mine own due time."
