Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-THREE

Commencement of Church Expansion

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:334-342. D. & C. 92.

Topics

1.Ordination of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams. Note 1.

a.The call of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams.

b.Their ordination and authority.

2.The Commencement of Church Expansion. Note 2.

a.Kirtland a Stake of Zion.

b.Affairs in Zion.

c.Purchase of French Farm.

d.Conference in Zion. Note 3.

e.World calamities. Note 4.

3.The Prophet's Correspondence to Brethren in Zion.

a.Revelation to come through proper authority. Note 5.

b.Lower officers do not direct higher.

c.How repentant transgressors are received. Note 6.

d.Duties of high priests.

e.Counsel on going to Zion.

f.Repentant spirit in Zion.

g.The new translation of the Scriptures.

4.First Assembly of the Mob of Zion.

a.Commencement of open hostilities against the Church. Note 7.

b.Threats of the mob to drive the Church from Jackson County.

Notes

This is the authority which was conferred upon Peter, James and John, in the dispensation of the Meridian of Time. There is no record which informs us definitely that these three apostles were organized as a quorum of Priesthood independent of the council of the twelve apostles in that dispensation. They may have acted as a First Presidency while still acting as members of the council of apostles. It may also be true that they were succeeded in that council by other brethren called to the apostleship. There is but meager information that has reached us in relation to the events in the history of the Church and its organization in those times. The fact remains, however, that the sealing power and "keys of the kingdom," comprising the power to direct, regulate and organize the Church, are vested in this presiding quorum, or council in the Church in this day as it was in that day.

On the 6th of April (1833) about eighty officials, together with some other members, assembled at the ferry on the Big Blue River, near the western limits of Jackson County, which then was the boundary of the United States, and spent. the day in prayer and testimony. They wrote that the day was beautiful, the leaves and blossoms enlivened and gratified the soul of man like a glimpse of Paradise. Their minds dwelt on the beauties of nature, the creation of the world and the time when the morning stars sang together, and the sons of God shouted for joy. Like the shepherds who were watching their flocks by night, when the angelic choir sang "Peace on earth, good will to man, they too felt to rejoice under such favorable conditions, and they said they felt that "the solemnities of eternity rested upon them." The time was near, however, when this glorious condition was to be rudely changed.

"While the Church was thus rejoicing, the news from abroad was, that 30,000 out of a population of 100,000 had died of starvation, in consequence of famine produced through drouth of three years." This was followed by flood, earthquake in divers places. War was raging between Turkey and Egypt and there were volcanic destructions, destructive fires in different sections. "Fireballs and fearful signs were seen in the heavens, with many other alarming appearances, which caused the hearts of the wicked to tremble, none of which were more awful than the continued spread of Asiatic cholera in Europe, which had already swept from the earth, in the short space of fifteen years, about sixty millions of inhabitants." This story is condensed from the "Evening and Morning Star." If the calamities in the days of Kirtland were such as to cause alarm and deep reflection, what should we be thinking of the destruction all over the world today?

"I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or anyone, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction; for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom."

Admonition was given for the guidance of the members in Zion and the Prophet rejoiced because of the repentant spirit in Zion.

A second communication was written April 21, 1833, to the brethren in Zion. In this communication the Prophet refers to the condition that had prevailed in Zion and that "the anger of the Lord was kindled against you, and nothing but repentance, of the greatest humility, would turn it away; and I will assure you that expressions of joy beamed on every countenance when they saw that our epistle and revelation had been received by our brethren in Zion, and had had the desired effect. He stated that Frederick G. Williams had been received by revelation." (Sec. 92.) into the United Firm, or order. He admonished Elder Gilbert to write plainly so that he could be understood, and with the spirit of contrition. He counseled against publishing any of the revision of the Scriptures in the Star; but said when it was published it was to go to the world with the Book of Mormon. Other counsel and information were given in this communication which closed with a commendation to God of all the brethren.

In those days it took many weeks for communications to travel between Kirtland and Missouri and before these letters were written, there were rumblings of hostilities coming from the citizens in Jackson County. In April 1833, the first gathering of the mob in Jackson County took place. Some three hundred men gathered to decide upon a plan of campaign for the removal of the members of the Church out of Jackson County. Being alarmed for their safety the elders in Jackson County met in solemn prayer and petitioned the Lord that the efforts of their enemies might fail. While praying we may well suppose that they were reminded of their disagreements and bitterness of spirit which had caused so much concern in the heart of the Prophet and the brethren in Kirtland. They surely had good reason to pray and seek protection from the Lord, for the wickedness in the hearts of their enemies was extremely bitter; not because of any wrong that had been committed against them, but because they hated the truth and were jealous of the members of the Church who were industrious, no matter what faults they had manifested. Nevertheless the Saints had failed to keep the commandments and the covenants given them in regard to the building up of Zion and their criticisms and jealousies had reached out in criticism of the Prophet himself. Some of them had failed to keep the law of consecration, and their humility had been forgotten. Now the dark clouds of opposition were gathering and with threats of mob force and personal injury and destruction of property, their enemies had met to perfect their wicked plans. However, their contemplated action was postponed for the time and the Lord extended to the saints a short spell of continued peace.
