Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-FOUR

Man Was in the Beginning with God—Intelligence Is the Light of Truth—Section 93

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:343-346. D. & C. 93.

Topics

1.The Record of John.

a.All who forsake sin and keep the commandments shall see God. (Vs. 1-2.) Note 1.

b.Jesus Christ is the Father and the Son. (Vs. 3-5.) Note 2. Mosiah 15:1-5.

c.The witness borne by John. (Vs. 6-18.) See Lesson 17.

d.Record given that we may know how to worship. (Vs. 19-20) Note 3. Hebrews 1:6. Romans 8:29.

e.Jesus Christ is the Firstborn. (Vs. 21-22.) Note 4.

2.Definition of Truth.

a.Man was in the beginning with God. (Vs. 23, 29.) Note 5.

b.Truth is knowledge of things as they are, were and are to come. (Vs. 24-25.) Note 6.

c.No man receives a fulness of truth unless he keeps the commandments. (Vs. 26-29.) Note 7.

d.All truth is independent in its sphere. (V. 30.)

e.Every man who receives not the light is under condemnation. (Vs. 31-32.)

3.Spirit and Element Inseparably Connected Receiveth Fulness of Joy

a.Man is spirit and the elements are eternal. (V. 33.)

b.When spirit and element (body) become inseparably connected man receives a fulness of joy, and when not so united man cannot receive fulness of joy. (Vs. 33-35.) Note 8.

4.The Glory of God. Note 9.

a.Intelligence is light and truth, and it is the glory of God. (V. 36.)

b.Intelligence, or light of truth, forsakes that evil one. (V. 37.)

c.Every Spirit was innocent in the beginning and all men in their infant state are innocent. (V. 38.) Note 10.

d.That wicked one takes away light and truth. (V. 39.)

e.The saints commanded to bring up their children in light and truth. (Verse 40.)

f.Rebuke administered to the Elders. (Vs. 41-50.)

g.Instruction given. (Vs. 51-53.)

Notes

"Scriptures embodying the ordinary signification—literally that of Parent—are too numerous and specific to require citation. The purport of these scriptures is to the effect that God the Eternal Father, whom we designate by the exalted name-title 'Elohim,' is the literal Parent of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the spirits of the human race. Elohim is the Father in every sense in which Jesus Christ is so designated, and distinctively He is the Father of spirits. Thus we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews:

'Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?' (Hebrews 12:9.) In view of this fact we are taught by Jesus Christ to pray: 'our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.'

"Jesus Christ applies to Himself both titles, 'Son' and 'Father.' Indeed, he specifically said to the brother of Jared: 'Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son,' (Ether 3:14.) Jesus Christ is the Son of Elohim both as spiritual and bodily offspring; that is to say, Elohim is literally the Father of the spirit of Jesus Christ and also of the body in which Jesus Christ performed His mission in the flesh, and which body died on the cross and was afterward taken up by the process of resurrection, and is now the immortal tabernacle of the eternal spirit of our Lord and Savior. No extended explanation of the title 'Son of God' as applied to Jesus Christ appears necessary.

"A second spiritual meaning of 'Father' is that of Creator e.g. in passages referring to any one of the Godhead as the 'Father of the heavens and of the earth and all things that in them are.' (Ether 4:7; see also Alma 11:38, and Mosiah 15:4.)

"God is not the Father of the earth as one of the worlds in space, nor of the heavenly bodies in whole or in part, nor of the inanimate objects and the plants and the animals upon the earth, in the literal sense in which He is the Father of the spirits of mankind. Therefore, scriptures that refer to God in any way as the Father of the heavens and the earth are to be understood as signifying that God is the Maker, the Organizer, the Creator of the heavens and the earth. * * *

"A third sense in which Jesus Christ is regarded as the 'Father' has reference to the relationship between Him and those who accept His Gospel and thereby become heirs of eternal life. * * *

"A fourth reason for applying the title 'Father' to Jesus Christ is found in the fact that in all His dealings with the human family Jesus the Son had represented and yet represents Elohim His father in power and authority. This is true of Christ in His pre-existent, antemortal, or unembodied state, in the which He was known as Jehovah; also during his embodiment in the flesh; and during His labors as a disembodied spirit in the realm of the dead; and since that period in His resurrected state. To the Jews he said: 'I and my Father are one,' yet He declared 'My Father is greater than I,' and further, 'I am come in my Father's name.' "

"Among the spirit children of Elohim the firstborn was and is Jehovah or Jesus Christ to whom all others are juniors. Following are affirmative scriptures bearing upon this great truth: Paul, writing to the Colossians, says of Jesus Christ: 'Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities. or powers; all things were created by him, and for him. And he is before all things and by him all things consist. * * For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell.' (Colossians 1:15-19.) From this scripture we learn that Jesus Christ was 'the firstborn of every creature' and it is evident that the seniority here expressed must be with respect to antemortal existence, for Christ was not the senior mortal in the flesh. He is further designated as 'the firstborn from the dead' this having reference to Him as the first to be resurrected from the dead, or as elsewhere written 'the first fruits of them that slept.' (1 Cor. 15:20.)

* * * The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms the status of Jesus Christ as the firstborn of the spirit children of His Father and extols the pre-eminence of Christ when tabernacled in flesh:

'And again, when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.'" (Hebrews 1-6.)

The Lord has defined intelligence, which is the glory of God, as light and truth, and says that "Light and truth forsake that evil one." Satan, of course, in his rebellion and hatred of all things righteous, desires to destroy the souls of men, therefore he tries to take from them light and truth that they may be left in spiritual darkness,
