Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-FIVE

A House for the Presidency in Kirtland

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1, 346-355. D.& C. Sec. 94, 95 and 96.

Topics

1.The House for the Presidency in Kirtland. Note 1.

a.The council of high priests in Kirtland.

b.The preparation of the elders.

c.The pattern for the house.

d.No unclean thing to come into it.

e.A building committee appointed.

f.The committee's appeal.

g.The House for Printing. Note 2.

2.The Command to Build the Temple. (D. & C. 95.) Note 3.

a.The elders rebuked for their delay.

b.Apostles to be prepared to prune the vineyard for the last time.

c.Many called—few chosen.

d.The command to fast and pray.

e.Endowment to be given.

f.It must be in the House of the Lord. Note 4.

g.Commandments must be kept. Note 5.

h.The transgression of the brethren.

i.House not to be after the manner of the world. Note 6.

j.How the Temple was to be used.

k.Appointment of the committee. Note 7.

3.The Building of the House of the Lord.

a.The committee commences its work. Note 8.

b.Corner stones are laid. Note 9.

4.The Case of "Doctor" Philastus Hurlburt. Note 10.

a.History and character of "Dr." Hurlburt.

b.Charged with unchristian-like conduct.

c.Action against him taken.

d.He appeals his case.

e.He is excommunicated.

f.His fight against the Church.

Notes

The committee according to their appointment issued a circular and sent it forth among the members of the Church in the different branches asking that they bring about the fulfillment of the command of the Lord concerning the establishing, or the preparation of a house, "wherein the elders, who have been commanded of the Lord so to do, may gather themselves together, and prepare all things, and call a solemn assembly, and treasure up words of wisdom, that they may go forth to the Gentiles for the last time. "This appeal went forth to the whole Church. It was a strong appeal and in their pleading they said: "And unless we fulfill this command, viz.: establish an house, and prepare all things necessary that the elders may gather into a school, called the School of the Prophets, and receive the instruction which the Lord designs they should receive, we may despair of obtaining the great blessing that God had promised to the faithful of the Church of Christ; therefore it is as important, as our salvation, that we obey this above-mentioned command, as well as all the commandments of the Lord." They then called attention to their appointment to superintend the business in building this house for the elders so they could attend this school. They appealed to the branches that someone in each branch be appointed to obtain subscriptions and thus help the general committee. This appeal was issued June 1, 1833.

"If a temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the presidency of the stake will lay the southeast corner stone; the Melchizedek Priesthood laying the corner stones on the east side of the temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side."—"Essentials in Church History," pp. 309-310.
