Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-SIX

The New Jerusalem or City Zion

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:357-371.

Topics

1.Revelation Pertaining to the New Jerusalem.

a.The Jerusalem in Palestine. Note 1.

b.Biblical references to the New Jerusalem, or Zion. Note 2.

c.The New Jerusalem on the American Continent. Note 3.

d.Enoch's City of Zion. Note 4.

2.The Prophet's Plat of the City of Zion.

a.Place where the city shall be built. Note 5.

b.The Plat of the City Zion. Note 6.

c.The temples in the city. Note 7.

d.Purpose of the temples. Note 8.

e.The Saints prevented from building. Note 9.

f.The plan for the building of Zion followed in Western development.

Notes

Ezekiel prophesied of the gathering of Israel and the building of the temple in Jerusalem after Israel has been gathered and cleansed. In that day the Lord will make an everlasting covenant with them, "And I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for ever more. My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore." After giving the account of the great battle of Gog and Magog and the destruction of the wicked, he gives a detailed description of the glorious temple which shall be built as this sanctuary. For this description see Ezekiel, Chapters 40-45.

In that day, when the Lord creates the "new heavens and a new earth" he will "create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy." He further says: "And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed." (Isa. 65:17-25.) In that day Jerusalem is redeemed and our Lord comes to reign, the Lord promised through Zechariah that Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. (14:11.) Moreover, when Jerusalem becomes one of the two capitals for the King of kings, "it shall come to pass that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles." (Zech. 14:16).

Without modern revelation we would be in complete ignorance, as is the outside religious world, concerning the New Jerusalem, Being without revelation and relying solely on what is written in the Bible, the world has erroneously interpreted the revelations and prophecies in the Bible regarding the New Jerusalem. They have confounded these prophetic sayings as having reference to the old Jerusalem. This is true also of the references to Zion. These terms, Zion and Jerusalem, are used frequently interchangeably and if the Lord had not given us light we would have been as badly confused as are other people. However, there are many references which point clearly to the fact that Zion and Jerusalem are two separate and distinct places. This is true of the prophecy in Isaiah so frequently quoted:

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

"And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:2-3.)

We have lived to see this partly fulfilled. There are to be two great capitals. One Jerusalem of old and the other the City of Zion, or New Jerusalem. The latter is to be on this continent. The one will be the Lord's headquarters for the people of Judah and Israel his companions; the other for Joseph and his companions on the Western Hemisphere, which was given to Joseph and his seed after him as an everlasting inheritance. Again Isaiah has said:

"O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!" Ch. 40:9.

Again: "Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away." (51:11.)

In speaking of the last days when the signs of the coming of the Lord shall be made known, Joel has said:

"And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call." (Ch. 2:32.)

These are a few of the passages of scripture which indicate the fact that there are to be two capital cities which will be established when the millennial reign shall come. Zion, the New Jerusalem in America and Jerusalem in Palestine which shall be rebuilt and become a city of magnitude and magnificence.

"And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be a New Jerusalem.

"And the Lord said unto Enoch:

Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other.

"And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest." (Moses 7:62-64.)
