Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-SEVEN

Preparations for Mob Violence in Zion

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:372-389.

Topics

1.The Rise of Mob Force in Jackson County.

a.The Prophet's warning. Note 1.

b.Reverend Pixley and others, circulate falsehoods. Note 2.

c.The saints attempt to contradict the falsehoods. Note 3.

2.The Manifesto of the Mob.

a.False accusations. Note 4.

b.Threat to drive the "Mormons" out of Jackson County. Note 5.

c.The mob ignores all constitutional rights. Note 6.

3.The Saints Refute the Accusations.

a.Statement of Elder Parley P. Pratt. Note 7.

b.Articles in the "Evening and Morning Star." Note 8.

Notes

"Most of the clergy acting as missionaries to the Indians, or to the frontier inhabitants, were among the most prominent characters that rose up and rushed on to destroy the rights of the Church, as well as the lives of her members."

No one need be familiar with the character of the Latter-day Saints in this present day to discern the spirit of hate and falsehood in these charges. So blinded were these people by their bitterness and the spirit of Satan which was in them that it is plain to see that they were determined to remove the Latter-day Saints by fair means or foul.

Here clearly and definitely these conspirators declare that they have no justification before the law, therefore, they will take the matter in their own hands and proceed by mob law. There were about one hundred names attached to this "manifesto."

"Article 4. That all men have a natural and indefensible right to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences; and that no man can be compelled to erect, support, or attend any place of worship, or to maintain any minister of the Gospel, or teacher of religion; that no human authority can control or interfere with the rights of conscience; that no person can ever be hurt, molested, or restrained in his religious professions, or sentiments, if he do not disturb others in their religious worship."

"Article 5. That no person, on account of his religious opinions, can be rendered ineligible to any office or trust or profit under this state; that no preference can be given, to any sect or mode of worship."

Speaking of this, the editor of the "Star" comments: "It shows a liberality of opinion of the great men of the west, and will vie with that of any other state. It is good; it is just, and it is the citizen's right." Yet never in the history of the United States has religious freedom been violated to a greater and more malicious intent than in the case of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri in the 1830's.

"I will briefly notice a few items of the foregoing bond of conspiracy, for I consider most of it as too barefaced to need any comment. In the first place I would inquire whether our belief as set forth in this declaration, as to gifts, miracles, revelations and tongues, is not the same that all the apostles and disciples taught, believed and practiced, and the doctrine of the New Testament?

"Secondly—I would inquire when the New Testament religion ceased, and a law revealed or instituted, which made blasphemy of the belief and practice of it? or what holy religion the Jackson mob were speaking of, which was thrown into contempt by the revival of the New Testament religion?

"Thirdly—They complain of our society being very poor as to property; but have they ever read in the New Testament that God had chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom of God? And when did poverty become a crime known to the law?

"Fourthly—Concerning free negroes and mulattoes. Did not the laws of Missouri provide abundantly for the removal from the state of all free negroes and mulattoes (except certain privileged ones)? And also for the punishment of those who introduce or harbor them? The statement concerning our invitation to them to become Mormons, and remove to this state, and settle among us, is a wicked fabrication, as no such thing was ever published in the 'Star,' or anywhere else, by our people, or anything in the shadow of it; and we challenge the people of Jackson or any other people, to produce such a publication from us. In fact one dozen free negroes or mulattoes never belonged to our society in any part of the world, from its first organization to this day.

"Fifthly—As a crime or vice, we solemnly appeal to all the records of the courts of Jackson County, and challenge the county to produce the name of any individual of our society on the list of indictments, from the time of our first settlement in the county, to the time of our expulsion, a period of more than two years.

"Sixthly—As respects the ridiculous report of our threatening that we would have their lands for a possession, it is too simple to require a notice, as the laws of the country guarantee to every man his rights, and abundantly protect him in their full enjoyment. And we hereby declare, that we settled no lands, only such as our money purchased, and that no such thing ever entered our hearts, as possessing any inheritance in any other way.

"Seventhly—We ask what public morals were in danger of being corrupted where officers of the peace could openly violate their several oaths in the most awful manner, and join with hundreds of others in murder, treason, robbery, house burning, stealing, etc."
