Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-EIGHT

The Expulsion from Jackson County

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:390-400.

Topics

1.Meeting of the Missouri Mob in Council.

a.The organizing of the council. Note 1.

b.Proceedings of this mob council. Note 2.

c.Demands made by the mob council. Note 3.

2.Vengeance of the Mob.

a.The Committee appointed to confer with the leading elders. Note 4.

b.The committee's pernicious demands. Note 5.

c.Fury of the mob turned loose. Note 6.

d.Destruction of the Printing plant.

e.Tarring and feathering of Bishop Partridge and Elder Allen.

3.Terms Offered the Saints by the Mob.

a.The second gathering of the mob. Note 7.

b.Terms given the members of the Church. Note 8.

c.Leading brethren offer themselves as a ransom for the Church.

d.The Prophet's comment. Note 9.

e.Laying of the corner stone of the Kirtland Temple.

Notes

"This meeting, professing to act, not from the excitement of the moment, but under a deep and abiding conviction, that the occasion is one that calls for cool deliberation, as well as energetic action, deem it proper to lay before the public an expose of our peculiar situation, in regard to this singular sect of pretended Christians; and a solemn declaration of our unalterable determination to amend it.

"The evil is one that no one could have foreseen, and is therefore unprovided for by the laws; and the delay incident to legislation would put the mischief beyond remedy."

In this manner they prepare the way for their violence and the taking of the law in their own hands. They complain that it was "little more than two years since the first of these people made their appearance on the Upper Missouri, and they now number some twelve hundred souls in this county." The number was increasing and this gave the enemy great alarm. Moreover they declare that, "we are daily told, and not by the ignorant alone, but by the classes of them, that we (the Gentiles) of this county are to be cut off, and our lands appropriated by them for inheritances. Whether this is to be accomplished by the hand of the destroying angel, the' judgment of God, or the arm of power, they are not fully agreed among themselves." It was very probable that some of the members of the Church had reported that they were to take possession of this land and they were obtaining inheritances, for here the City Zion was to be built. It would be strange, considering the revelations on this subject, if this doctrine was not circulated among these people and this helped materially to stir them up. With their natural hatred of the truth, this would be the finishing touch to their determination to force our people from the county. Wickedly and knowingly they declared falsely that articles had been published in the "Star" inviting "free brethren of color in Illinois" to come to the land of Zion. They express alarm because members of the Church were preaching through the east inviting members to come to Zion. Notwithstanding their great alarm and fear that their lands would be taken from them, they declared that "the fate that has marked the rise and fall of Joanna Southcote and Ann Lee, will also attend the progress of Joe Smith; but this is no opiate to our fears, for when the fabric falls, the rubbish will remain."

Another alarming thing which angered them to madness was the fact that the Church believed in direct revelation and communion with the heavens. They resented the doctrine of laying on of hands for the healing of the sick, and hypocritically declared that the Latter-day Saints "habitually profane the Sabbath, and which they dignify with the appellation of unknown tongues." For this great offense, they "have nothing to say; vengeance belongs to God alone." How wonderful! Could not vengeance for the other crimes also be left to God! In their minds, it seemed not, for to have revelation, to speak in tongues, to believe in the establishment of Zion, and to have a visitation from an angel, were crimes that could not wait for the Almighty to avenge; action upon these must be taken at once. Surely Satan raged in their wicked hearts.

(1) "That no Mormons shall in the future move and settle in this country."

(2) "That those now here, who shall give a definite pledge of their intention within reasonable time to remove out of the county, shall be allowed to remain unmolested until they have sufficient time to sell their property, and close their business, without material sacrifice."

(3) "That the editor of the Star be required forthwith to close his office and discontinue the business of printing in this county; and as to all other stores and shops belonging to the sect, their owners must in every case strictly comply with the terms of the second article of this declaration; and upon failure, prompt and efficient measures will be taken to close the same.

(4) "That the Mormon leaders here are required to use their influence in preventing any further emigration of their distant brethren to this county, and to counsel and advise their brethren here to comply with the above requisitions."

(5) "That those who fail to comply with these requisitions be referred to those of their brethren who have the gifts of divination, and of unknown tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them."

When the committee returned and made their report it was received as the hypocritical mobocrats expected. "Whereupon," it was recorded in their minutes, "it was unanimously resolved by the meeting that the 'Star' printing office should be razed to the ground; the type and press secured." With the understanding that they would meet three days later, the horde of wretches went forth on their mission of destruction. They took steps to advertise their wickedness, "that the Mormon brethren may know at a distance that the gates of Zion are closed against them—that their interests will be best promoted by remaining among those who know and appreciate their merits."

The Prophet writes: "In the course of this day's wicked, outrageous, and unlawful proceedings, many solemn realities of human degradation, as well as thrilling incidents, were presented to the saints. An armed and well organized mob, with the Lieutenant Governor (Lilburn W. Boggs) the second officer in the state, calmly looking on, and secretly aiding every movement." "* * *Surely this was a time for awful reflection; man, unrestrained, like the brute beast, may torment the body; but God will punish the soul!" While Bishop Partridge and Elder Charles Allen, covered with tar and feathers departed from the scene, some unnamed sister cried to the mobbers: "While you, who have done this wicked deed, must suffer the consequences of God, they, having endured persecution, can rejoice, for henceforth for them, is laid up a crown eternal in the heavens." For further description see the Documentary History, vol. 1, page 393.

"The foregoing is copied entire to give one sample of hypocritical bombast and current falsehoods, with which the country was flooded in the early days of the Church. The declaration of the mob, by which they pledged to each other their lives, their bodily powers, fortunes, and sacred honors to remove the Church from Jackson County, is a very good climax for all the arguments used, falsehoods set forth, and even a full interpretation of the sublime admission that 'vengeance belongs to God alone.' The events that followed from this time till November, explain the modus operandi much more clearly than the publication in the 'Monitor,' or other papers that generally were so willing to give the western missionaries, the doctors, lawyers, judges, justices, sheriffs, constables, military officers, and other distinguished personages a fair chance against the Mormons."

The same day, July 23, 1833, while the saints in Missouri were preparing to leave Jackson County, because of the inhuman and vicious treatment they had received by the inhabitants of Jackson County, the corner stones of the temple in Kirtland "after the order of the Holy Priesthood," were laid with thanksgiving and rejoicing.
