Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON SEVENTY-NINE

Zion the Pure in Heart—Forgiveness and Retribution

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:400-406. (D. & C. 97-98.)

Topics

1.The Will of the Lord Concerning Zion. (See D. & C. 97.) Note 1.

a.Brethren in Zion humbled and seeking wisdom.

b.The Mercy of the Lord extended to the meek.

c.The school in Zion. Note 2.

d.Parley P. Pratt commended.

e.Ax laid at the root of fruitless trees. Note 3.

f.Brethren accepted by sacrifice.

2.A House to Be Built in Zion.

a.House to be built according to the pattern.

b.To be by the tithing of the people.

c.To be for the salvation of Zion.

d.No unclean thing to come into it.

e.Glory of the Lord to rest upon it.

3.Zion the Pure in Heart. Note 4.

a.Zion the city of God.

b.The pure in heart.

c.The wicked to mourn.

d.The Lord's scourge to come like whirlwind. Note 5.

e.Zion to escape if she is faithful. Note 6.

f.Zion to suffer if not repentant.

4.Prayers of Saints Heard in Heaven. (See D. & C. 98.) Note 7.

a.Saints to wait patiently on the Lord.

b.Their petitions shall be granted.

c.Afflictions shall work out for their good.

5.Constitutional Law to Be Observed. Note 8.

a.The constitutional law approved by the Lord.

b.When the wicked rule the people mourn. (D. & C. 58:21-22; 101:76.)

6.Saints Commanded to Forsake Evil. (See D. & C. 84:44.)

a.Saints to forsake evil and cleave to the good. Note 9.

b.Who layeth down his life, shall find it. Note 10.

7.Commandment to Renounce War. Note 11.

a.Duty to proclaim peace.

b.Seek to turn hearts of children to the fathers.

c.And the Jews unto the prophets.

d.And prophets to the Jews.

e.Lord displeased with the unfaithful.

f.A promised blessing through obedience.

8.Patience and Forgiveness Enjoined. Note 12.

a.Duty of Saints when smitten by enemies. (D. & C. 98:29, 32.)

b.Their testimonies shall stand against enemies.

c.The ancient law of battle. (D. & C. 98:33-37.)

d.This is an example of the saints now.

e.The law of forgiveness. (D. & C. 98:39-48.)

Notes

"In the latter part of the summer and in the autumn, I devoted almost my entire time in ministering among the Churches; holding meetings; visiting the sick, comforting the afflicted, and giving counsel. A school of elders was also organized, over which I was called to preside. This class, to the number of about sixty, met for instruction once a week. The place of meetings was in the open air, under some tall trees, in a retired place in the wilderness, where we prayed, preached and prophesied, and exercised ourselves in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Here great blessings were poured out, and many great and marvelous things were manifested and taught. The Lord gave me great wisdom, and enabled me to teach and edify the elders, and comfort and encourage them in their preparations for the great work which lay before us. I was also much edified and strengthened. To attend this school I had to travel on foot; and sometimes with bare feet at that, about six miles. This I did once a week, besides visiting and preaching in five or six branches a week." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt. Chapter 13.)

Notwithstanding the fact that their enemies had come upon them but a few days before, and the Lord knew this fact, yet he promised the saints that his purposes would be accomplished if they would faithfully trust in him and abide in his word. In their weakness they were not prepared. The Lord impressed upon them that Zion was the pure in heart, and unless they were pure in heart, these blessings could not be accomplished. However, if they would be true, then Zion would rejoice while all the wicked should mourn.

We have seen these destructions coming "as the whirlwind," and they are continuing to come, and the hand of no man can stay them. There is only one remedy against these destructions and that is repentance and acceptance of the truth by the people, and this they refuse to do. Since they will not be stayed until our Redeemer comes to cleanse the earth of all its iniquity, we, the Latter-day Saints, should heed the warnings and be prepared.

When we abide in the law which the Lord has approved, then we are free. It was his mighty hand which directed the founders of the government of the United States and gave this nation the constitution in the beginning. "Nevertheless when the wicked rule," saith the Lord, "the people mourn." (V. 9.) Even if the wicked rule, the saints do not have the right to take matters in their own hands in violation of the constitution in order to redress their wrongs. The constitutional law was given by inspiration for the purpose of protecting the rights of the citizens of the country. The Lord delights in freedom. Salvation is based upon this principle. There can be no compulsion in the kingdom of God. In the very beginning the Lord gave to man his freedom to act for himself to be an agent unto himself with the privilege, but not the right, to choose evil if he so desired, or to accept the truth which would make him free. In our government, we are taught to "choose good and wise men" to hold office, and when they are chosen we should uphold them in their callings. As a people we have not lived up to this counsel. We have not always sought diligently and in prayer to know and choose wise and good men, but have turned from this course blindly because of political affiliation. Yet, when we do not seek humbly for wise and good men, "whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil." In the day of the Missouri persecution wicked men ruled. They were morally weak and feared the vengeance of mob rule even if they were not in sympathy with that kind of rule. Many of the officials connived with the mob and their hearts were filled with the same kind of bitterness. The members of the Church sought redress from the State Government, but without avail; for the officers who had sworn to uphold the constitutional law of the land, feared the mob or sympathized with it. Under such circumstances the cause of the Saints was hopeless, unless the Lord should intervene. This condition of bitter hatred continued until finally, by the united action of the mob and the officers of the State, the order came from the Governor for the members of the Church to leave Missouri or be exterminated.

The saints were commanded to renounce war and proclaim peace, and seek diligently to turn the hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children; and the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews; lest the Lord come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all flesh be consumed before him." It is the duty of the elders to endeavor to get the Jews to understand the prophets which they profess to believe, but do not understand; and to believe in Christ, of whom the prophets of old have spoken. Moreover, to prepare themselves for that which was yet to come when Elijah should come to restore his keys of sealing.
