Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON EIGHTY

Expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County—1

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:407-433. D. & C. 100.

Topics

1.The Contract Broken by the Mob. Note 1.

a.The edict of the mob.

b.Agreement of elders under compulsion.

c.The agreement broken by the mob.

2.The Saints Appeal to Governor Dunklin. Note 2.

a.Oliver Cowdery reports to First Presidency.

b.Orson Hyde and John Gould sent with instructions to Missouri.

c.Appeal for redress to Governor Dunklin.

d.The Governor's reply. Note 3.

e.Futility of the advice from the Governor. Note 4.

3.Counsel Employed by the Saints. Note 5.

a.The Saints appeal to legal counsel.

b.Terms on which counsel were willing to take the case.

c.Terms accepted by the Saints.

d.Notes given to cover expenses of trial.

4.Increased Activities of the Mob.

a.The appeal for legal aid angered the mob. Note 6.

b.Mob violence on the Big Blue River.

c.The Battle of the Big Blue. Note 7.

Notes

The brethren pointed out the fact that they were citizens of the United States and legal holders of property in Missouri, and of Jackson County. They were members of the Church of Jesus Christ, "vulgarly called Mormons," believing in God, and worshipping him according to his revealed will in the Holy Bible and the fulness of the Gospel in the Book of Mormon." Having purchased these lands with the intention of improving them and maintaining their rights, their immunities and religion, according to the constitutional law of the state and the nation, they felt entitled to protection; yet they had suffered by the hands of their enemies. As early as the spring of 1832, their peace had been disturbed, their homes "brick-batted," windows broken and threats against their peace and safety constantly made. Haystacks had been burned and shooting into some of their homes had commenced. About the middle of July 1833, open violence took place, their property, as previously described, was destroyed; some of their number brutally beaten and under threats of death and torture, they were forced to sign an agreement to leave. There follows in the petition a detailed description of some of the unlawful deeds. The forced agreement with the mob was a portion of the petition. It was also stated that the damage to property was incalculable. Members had been deprived of their employment by the destruction of their property. They were also denied the privilege of being employed by the threats of the mob. Being forced from their homes the Saints endeavored to make a new location in Van Buren County, but the citizens there, largely because of the wicked reports circulated by the Jackson County mob, refused to receive them and threatened to shoot their cattle, destroy their labor and drive them from that county. Therefore they were forced to return to their former possessions. Since the papers in other parts had spoken censuring the actions of the mob, the leaders of this wicked band began to threaten the Saints with greater violence, and they had endeavored to put their violence in action. In the spirit of prayer the petitioners appealed to the governor of the State.

There must have been some misgivings on the part of the leading elders as to the outcome under such conditions, but they decided to submit their case, and notes for the amount required were given by William W. Phelps and Bishop Partridge and endorsed by Gilbert, Whitney and Co. Subsequent results, however, prevented any benefits coming from this action.

Attacks were also made on other settlements, and in Independence a number of houses were demolished and the goods of the store of Gilbert. Whitney and Co., were scattered in the street. Richard McCarty, a mobber, was caught in the act of breaking into the store and demolishing property. He was taken before Samuel Weston, justice of the peace and a complaint made against him, but Judge Weston refused to consider the complaint and turned McCarty loose. The next day this McCarty caused the arrest of the witnesses who had captured him in his unlawful destruction of their property and had them tried for false imprisonment. The same justice, on the testimony which this fiend gave alone, found the witnesses, Gilbert, Morley and Corrill, guilty and committed them to jail. "Although we could not obtain a warrant against him for breaking open the store," said John Corrill, "yet he had gotten one for us for catching him at it." With such officers to enforce the law, the case of any member of the Church was hopeless. He was in danger of being tried and condemned, with or without witnesses, for any attempt to defend himself against the ravages of such bandits and thieves.

These attacks were continued without interruption. The mobbers felt absolutely secure in their depredations for the judges and state officials not only closed their eyes against these unlawful acts but at times were guilty of taking part in them. Many times the elders of the Church attempted to obtain warrants, but no justice would issue them for fear of the mob; and most likely because they were members of the mob. The same night of the raid in Independence long poles were thrust through the shutters and windows into the rooms of defenseless women and children, the husbands and fathers having been driven from their homes by the dastardly mobbers, the attacks being made by ten, fifteen or twenty men upon each house one at a time. Saturday, November 2nd, all the families of the Saints in Independence moved with their goods, such as they could take, half a mile out of town and organized to the number of about thirty for the preservation of their lives and personal effects. The same night a party of mobbers from Independence met another party from west of the Big Blue River and tore the roof from one dwelling and broke open another where David Bennett lay sick and beat him unmercifully, swearing that they would blow his brains out. They did discharge a pistol at him and the ball cut a gash across the top of his head. In the skirmish a young man of the mob was shot in the thigh, but by whom he was shot was not known.

When Monday came a large party of mobbers gathered at the Big Blue. They took a ferry boat belonging to the Church and threatened the lives of any who interfered, but they soon abandoned the ferry and went to a store about one mile west of the Big Blue River where they were destroying property on the east side of the river. The suffering Saints sent for help. Nineteen men volunteered, and started for their assistance; but discovering that fifty or sixty of the mob bearing arms had gathered at Wilson's, the brethren turned back. The mob learning of this attempt to give aid immediately went in pursuit of the nineteen brethren who fled in various directions for safety. About thirty more of the brethren from the prairie armed with seventeen guns approached and a battle commenced. With hideous yells and blasphemous oaths the mob commenced to fire, which fire was returned by the brethren. Finding this resistance which they did not expect the mob retreated immediately leaving some of their horses in the Whitmer cornfield and two of their number, Hugh L. Brazeale and Thomas Linville, dead on the ground. Among the defenders Andrew Barber received a mortal wound and died the following day. Philo Dibble also received a severe wound in the abdomen. He was examined by a surgeon of great experience who said he had never known a man to live who was wounded in such manner. Newel Knight relates in his journal that the next day he went to see Brother Dibble and found the house surrounded by the mob. "I managed," he said, "to get in, and went to the bed; two men came and seated themselves at the door; as I looked upon Brother Dibble lying there in extreme agony, I drew the bed curtains with one hand and laid the other on his head, praying secretly to our Heavenly Father in his behalf. I then left as I did not want to put myself into the power of the mob; and the next day business took me some ten miles from the place, where I met Brother Dibble making his escape from the county. He told me that as soon as I placed my hand upon his head, the pain and soreness seemed gradually to move as before a power driving it, until in a few minutes it left his body. He then discharged about a gallon of putrid matter, and the balls and pieces of clothing which had passed into his body." In this miraculous manner he was healed. (For full particulars see the Documentary History, Vol. I, pages 407-433.)
