Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON EIGHTY-ONE

Expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County—2

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:433-440.

Topics

1.Gathering of the Mob-Militia. Note 1.

a.The gathering of the mob.

b.Wickedness of Lieutenant-Governor Boggs.

c.Confidence of the Saints misplaced.

d.Organization of the mob into the militia.

e.Governor Dunklin's responsibility.

2.The Demands of the Mob-Militia. Note 2.

a.The one hundred defenders,

b.Members of the Church accused of murder.

c.Arms of Saints demanded.

d.Enemies of Saints appointed to receive arms.

e.Mob permitted to retain arms.

f.Arms of members delivered to the mob.

3.Plight of the Exiled Saints. Note 3.

a.Saints forced to flee from the mob.

b.Their attempt to seek redress.

c.Farcical effort to enforce the law.

d.Algernon S. Gilbert's confidential letter to the governor. Note 4.

e.Petition to Governor Daniel Dunklin. Note 5.

Notes

This contemptible state official placed this band of thieves and murderers under the command of Colonel Thomas Pitcher. Among this militia, so-called, "were included the most conspicuous characters of the mob; and it may truly be said that the appearance of the ranks of this body was well calculated to excite suspicion of their horrid designs." In this group were a number of so-called divines—ministers who had shown their hatred against the Church by violence on the previous occasions. It was soon made apparent that the confidence of the Saints in the lieutenant-governor was misplaced. After his perfidy had been revealed and his bitterness had brought to pass the banishment of the members of the Church from Jackson County, the Prophet in writing of the demands made by these mobbers contrary to the hypocritical promises made by Lieutenant-Governor Boggs, said the saints would have cheerfully shed their blood in defense of their rights, the liberties of their country and of their wives and children, but the fear of violating law, in resisting this pretended militia, and the flattering assurances of protection and honorable usage promised by the lieutenant-governor, in whom, up to this time, they had reposed confidence, induced the Saints to submit, believing that he did not tolerate so gross a violation of all law as has been practiced in Jackson County. "But as so glaringly exposed in the sequel, it was the design and craft of this man to rob an innocent people of their arms by stratagem, and leave more than one thousand defenseless men, women and children to be driven from their homes among strangers in a strange land to seek shelter from the stormy blast of winter. All earth and hell cannot deny that a baser knave, a greater traitor, and a more wholesale butcher, or murderer of mankind ever went untried, unpunished, and unhung—since hanging is the popular method of execution among Gentiles in all countries professing Christianity, instead of blood for blood, according to the law of heaven."

The governor of the state, Daniel Dunklin, although sitting at ease in the capital in Jefferson City, cannot be cleared from all responsibility in these mobbings. He knew what was going on. Without any doubt the reports of the raids by these robbers and bandits had reached him from reliable sources. Moreover, he had been appealed to by the leading elders in Jackson County for redress. They had told in some detail of their sufferings and had clearly stated the facts in regard to these outrages, and he answered that they had recourse in the courts, which he knew were unfriendly and afraid of the mob. It is strange to see how the militia could be called out, which was merely a pretext so that the enemies of the Church could continue their persecutions and murders under the apparent sanction of the state, without the approval of the governor as well as the approval of the lieutenant-governor. There was no safety or protection in appealing to any officer in Missouri in such critical days.

It was soon discovered on seeking information from Col. Pitcher, that there was no course open to the Saints except to leave the county forthwith. He also demanded that certain men be delivered into his hands whom he accused of murder, said to have been committed by them in the battle, as he called it, of the previous evening. The arms of the Saints were also demanded. Among the committee sent to receive the arms were several of the most unrelenting and vicious of the July mob, namely, Henry Chiles, Abner Staples, Lewis Franklin and' others, who had not ceased to pursue the Saints relentlessly with the most bitter feelings of opposition. In regard to the demand for the Saints to be disarmed, Lyman Wight wrote: "I here agreed that the Church would give up their arms provided the said Colonel Pitcher would take the arms from the mob. To this the colonel cheerfully agreed, and pledged his honor with that of Lieutenant-Governor Boggs, Owens (Samuel C.) and others. This treaty entered into, we returned home resting assured on their honor, that we should not be further molested; but this solemn contract was violated in every sense of the word. The arms of the mob were never taken away and the majority of the militia, to my certain knowledge, were engaged the next day with the mob, Colonel Pitcher and Boggs not excepted, going from house to house in gangs of from sixty to seventy in number, threatening the lives of women and children if they did not leave forthwith."

The men who were accused of being in the battle the evening before, also gave themselves up for trial; but after detaining them one day and a night on a pretended trial for murder, in which time they were threatened and abused, Colonel Pitcher, after taking a watch from one of the prisoners, to satisfy, he said "costs of court," took them out to a corn field and said to them, "clear!" meaning that they were to clear out.

The testimony on good authority by eye witnesses is to the effect that the weapons taken from the saints were later distributed to members of the mob. At no time were the members of this wicked band asked to surrender their arms and they continued to use them in further depredations and mobbings of the Saints.

Through their attorneys, as directed by Governor Daniel Dunklin, the Saints sought to repossess their property in Jackson County through an appeal to the courts. The governor seemingly acknowledged the justice of their cause and expressed a willingness to furnish an "adequate force" to effect that object, but he added that he had no power to protect them after they were once returned to their lands. Attorney General R. W. Wells declared that the governor was also willing to organize them in companies of militia that they might aid in their restoration. The Saints knew that such a thing would only arouse their enemies to greater fury, and as no protection was guaranteed them when once restored, such an offer could not be accepted.

Whether the state officials at first felt to restore the exiled to their lands or not, it was evident that they lacked the courage to cope with the lawless element so bitterly and wickedly opposed to the saints. A number of leading elders were subpoenaed in behalf of the state to appear at the February (1834) term of court to be held in Independence. But there was little hope for justice at that place. From a statement in a petition to Congress at a later date, it was said "that houses of the Mormons in the county of Jackson, amounting to about two hundred, were burned down or otherwise destroyed by the mob, as well as much of their crops, furniture, and stock." The damage done to the property of the Mormons by the mob in the county of Jackson, as above related, as near as they can ascertain, would amount to the sum of $175,000.00. "The number of members of the Church thus driven from the county of Jackson amounted to about twelve hundred souls." (See D.H.C. Vol. 1:438.)

In a letter from Attorney General Wells to Attorneys Doniphan and Atchison, Nov. 21, 1833, Mr. Wells said that after conversations which he had with the governor, he could say if the Mormons desired to be replaced in possession of their property, an adequate force would be sent, as stated above. The Mormons could organize themselves into regular companies as volunteers and he thought they could be supplied with public arms. They would have to apply for this. A volunteer company would have to be accepted by the colonel and at his discretion. "If the colonel should refuse to order an election of company officers, after they have reported themselves to him for that purpose, he would, I presume, be court-martialled, (on a representation) to the governor of the facts."

Judge Ryland wrote to Amos Reese, Circuit Attorney, in relation to the exiles in which he said:

"The governor had requested him for information about the outrageous acts of unparalleled violence in Jackson County." He asked if the Mormons were ready to take legal steps against the citizens of Jackson County; whether they wished to return or not. The military force would repair to Jackson County to aid the execution of any order he might make. He was willing to go any, time to Jackson, for the purpose of holding a court of inquiry and binding persons to keep the peace. He rightfully stated that it was a disgrace to the state for such acts to happen within its limits, and a disgrace if the state neglected to take proper means to ensure the punishment due such offenders. He wished to know why certain writs were not heeded which he made against certain ringleaders of the mob on the sixth of the month. He said Mr. Reese was in a better position to know the nature of the outrages than he was, and he sought for information.

"An immediate court of inquiry called while our people are thus situated, would give our enemies a decided advantage in point of testimony, while they are in possession of their own homes, and ours also; with no enemy in the county to molest or make them afraid,"

The attorney, Amos Reese, added this note to Brother Gilbert's petition:

"To his Excellency Daniel Dunklin, Jefferson City, Mo."

"I have seen and read the above letter, and on reflection, I concur entirely in the opinion therein expressed. I also think that at the next regular term of the court, an examination of the criminal matter cannot be gone into without a guard for the court and witnesses.

(Signed) "Amos Reese." December 5, 1833, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to Bishop Partridge and other brethren expressing his sympathy and giving counsel to the stricken saints in Missouri. He called attention to the fact that tribulations would come. His letter was based upon the report of Elders Hyde and Gould who had returned to Kirtland. The Prophet requested the brethren to collect every bit of evidence concerning the mob and send it to him so that he could give the public correct information. He stated that the inhabitants in Ohio were also making threats against the Church and he knew not how soon they might follow the example of the Missourians. We must, however, maintain our integrity, and the grace of the Lord will attend us. This full communication is on pages 448-451, in the Documentary History and may be read with profit.

William W. Phelps wrote the following letter which accompanied this petition:

"Liberty, December 6, 1833."

"Dear Sir:—Your Excellency will perceive by the petition, bearing date with this letter, that we intend to return to Jackson County as soon as arrangements can be made to protect us after we are reinstated in our possessions.

"We do not wish to go till we know that our lives are not in danger from a lawless mob. Your Excellency will understand that at this inclement season it will require time to restore us, and troops to protect us after we are there, for the threats of the mob have not ceased.

"Your obedient servant,

W. W. Phelps."

"To Daniel Dunklin, Governor of Missouri."
