Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON EIGHTY-TWO

Important Correspondence on Jackson County Mobbings

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:453-493.

Topics

1.The Prophet's Sympathy for the Exiles. Note 1.

a.Correspondence from Missouri.

b.The Prophet's plea that saints may not shed blood.

c.Zion's claims not forfeited.

d.Works of disobedience to be made manifest.

e.Zion will be redeemed.

f.Cause of suffering not fully known.

g.A plea for humility.

h.Sympathy of Kirtland brethren.

i.Every lawful means to be employed.

j.All who maintain inheritances will be blessed.

2.The Prophet's Prayer. Note 2.

a.A plea to the Lord to return saints to their possessions.

b.That the House of the Lord might be built.

c.That the saints may prosper.

3.Algernon Sidney Gilbert's Letter to Governor Dunklin. Note 3.

a.Desire to write impartially.

b.Reason for asking for arms explained.

c.Difficulties confronting court inquiry.

d.Hurlburt's perfidy.

e.Suggestion that violent leaders be bought out.

4.The First Presidency to Scattered Saints. Note 4.

a.Duty of the governor.

b.Intention to petition the President of the United States.

c.The need of type metal.

d.Hurlbert's perfidy.

5.Governor Dunklin's Message to Elders in Missouri. Note 5.

a.Expression of knowledge of injuries to saints.

b.Keeping military force transcends power of the state.

c.Urgency of the case.

d.Need of guards to protect the court. Note 6.

e.Under guard saints may return.

f.Elder Roberts' Comment.

Notes

These things he wished to know that were withheld from him: "Why God has suffered so great a calamity to come upon Zion, and what the great moving cause of this great affliction is; and by what means he will return her back to her inheritance, with songs of everlasting joy upon her head." Perhaps it was that the redemption of Zion, of necessity, was to be postponed "for a little season," until conditions could be prepared. Later the reason in part was revealed in the fact that there had been contention and a violation of covenants that had brought punishment. Unfortunately, as in most every case, the righteous had to suffer as well as the transgressors. Yet, when he contemplated all things he realized that there were some things that had incurred the displeasures of the Almighty. However, he did not feel to murmur, for the Lord is good, but he sorrowed that the innocent had to suffer for the iniquities of the guilty. We know, said he, that when any member of the body is disordered, the whole body is caused to suffer. He pled for humility. While it was hard for him to restrain his feelings when he thought of the happy days, "in heavenly places in Christ Jesus," and of the purity of the motives of the brethren, and now to see them suffer as strangers and pilgrims on the earth, exposed to hunger, cold, nakedness, peril, sword; and it was difficult to keep from murmuring against this dispensation (i.e. generation); "but I am sensible that this is not right, and may God grant that notwithstanding your great afflictions and sufferings, there may not anything separate us from the love of Christ." The sympathy of the brethren in Kirtland went out to those in Missouri, and their hearts were weighted down and they could not hold back their tears. The brethren in Kirtland would have gladly shared the dangers with their brethren, and, said the Prophet, "I myself would have been with you, had not God prevented it in the order of his providence, that the yoke of affliction might be less grievous upon you. The Lord had pointed out to him that his presence and the presence of Oliver Cowdery would not have been any benefit but would have added to the bitterness and ravages of the mob. He was thankful that no more had denied the faith, and he prayed that they all might keep the faith to the end. In the eyes of the Lord it would be better for them to die, no matter how, than to give up the land of Zion and their inheritances which they had purchased with their money, for every man who holds his inheritance shall stand up with Job in the flesh and see God.

By every lawful means they were to labor to retain their holdings, "and when the judge fail you, appeal unto the executive; and when the executive fail you, appeal unto the president; and when the president fail you, and all laws fail you, and the humility of the people fail you, and all things else fail you but God alone, and you continue to weary him with your importunings, as the poor woman did the unjust judge, he will not fail to execute judgment upon your enemies, and to avenge his own elect that cry unto him day and night." This was a prophetic utterance. The judges failed them, the executive failed them and when they appealed to the President of the United States, he also failed to heed their cause. The Almighty will not fail them although they may have felt deserted even by him at that time, but the reward is sure, for the Lord does not measure in man's reckoning of time. The saints were admonished to take oil in their lamps, for the day would come when the Lord would appear with ten thousand of his saints and all his adversaries would be destroyed with the breath of his lips. The Prophet hoped that the people of Liberty might feel more kindly and that the Lord would soften their hearts.

"Now hear the prayer of your unworthy brother in the new and everlasting covenant: 'O my God! Thou who hast called and chosen a few, through Thy weak instrument, by commandment, and sent them to Missouri, a place which Thou didst call Zion, and commanded Thy servants to consecrate it unto Thyself for a place of refuge and safety for the gathering of Thy Saints, to be built up a holy city unto Thyself; and as Thou hast said that no other place should be appointed like unto this, therefore, I ask Thee in the name of Jesus Christ, to return Thy people unto their houses and their inheritances, to enjoy the fruit of their labors, that all the waste places may be built up; that all the enemies of Thy people, who will not repent and turn unto Thee, may be destroyed from off the face of the land; and let a house be built and established unto Thy name; and let all the losses that Thy people have sustained, be rewarded unto them, even more than fourfold, that the borders of Zion may be enlarged forever; and let her be established no more to be thrown down; and let all Thy saints, when they are scattered as sheep, and are persecuted, flee to Zion, and be established in the midst of her; and let her be organized according to Thy law; and let this prayer ever be recorded before Thy face. Give Thy Holy Spirit unto my brethren, unto whom I write; send Thine angels to guard them, and deliver them from all evil; and when they turn their faces towards Zion, and bow down before Thee and pray, may their sins never come up before Thy face, neither have place in the book of Thy remembrance; and may they depart from all their iniquities. Provide food for them as Thou doest for the ravens; provide clothing to cover their nakedness, and houses that they may dwell therein; give unto them friends in abundance, and let their names be recorded in the Lamb's book of life, eternally before Thy face. Amen.' "

"Finally, brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all until His coming in His kingdom. Amen."

While waiting for the time to come when the court would convene in Independence, considerable correspondence passed between the elders of the Church and the governor and others. The saints who had settled in Van Buren County, after fleeing from Jackson County, were expelled from that county, after they had prepared houses and carting their winter store of provisions forty or fifty miles. The influence of the Jackson mob had penetrated the hearts of those in Van Buren, which was a newly organized county. It seemed that about the only place of refuge for the saints was in Clay County and there the main body of the Church congregated. December 14, 1833, Elder Phelps wrote to the Prophet telling him of the serious plight of the members of the Church. They were in Clay, Ray, Lafayette, Jackson, Van Buren and other counties, and could not hear from each other. He made this comment. "I know it was right that we should be driven out of the land of Zion, that the rebellious might be sent away; but, brethren, if the Lord will, I should like to know what the honest in heart shall do?" Their clothes were worn out, they lacked the necessities of life, food to eat, but they declared they wanted to do the will of God. He thought the governor was willing to restore them, but the constitution gives him no power to guard them when back, and under such conditions they were not willing to go. He felt that the militia "in the upper counties" were in readiness to guard a court-martial and a court of inquiry, but the expense stood in the way of the members of the Church.

Monday night, the 24th of December, four aged families living near the town of Independence, whose penury and infirmities, incident to old age, forbade a speedy removal, were driven from their homes by a part of the mob. Their homes were destroyed. One, Brother Jones, served as a life guard to General George Washington, but this did not prevent him being beaten and turned from his own door.

This answer by Governor Dunklin appears to be purely subterfuge. A careful reading of that portion of the law on which he relied, seems to point clearly to the fact that even in Missouri a downtrodden people abused by mob violence, were entitled to state protection until they could be rightfully, permanently and peacefully reinstated in their rights.

That the case of the Saints was clear and that an emergency existed, the governor admitted. But he tried to make it appear that this was a war against a small portion of society, and not a war against the whole state. "The public has no other interest in it," he said, "than that the laws be faithfully executed; thus far I presume the whole community feel a deep interest; for that which is the case of the Mormons today, may be the case of the Catholics tomorrow, and after them, any other sect that may become obnoxious to a majority of the people of any section of the state."

Elder B. H. Roberts commenting on the statement that the saints could return to their homes has said: "It required no great wisdom, however, to foresee that for the saints to return to their homes, and then be left there without protection—left to the mercy of human wretches, in whose veins ran none of the milk of human kindness—would not be far removed from suicide, as the mob greatly outnumbered the saints. To return under these circumstances would only be laying the foundation for a greater tragedy than the one already enacted; and the brethren wisely concluded not to attempt to regain possession of their homes, until some measure was adopted to protect them when there—until 'God or the Priesthood ruled out the mob'."
