Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON EIGHTY-FOUR

Justice Yields to Mobocracy

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:478-493.

Topics

1.The Elders Appeal for Help. Note 1.

a.Elder Gilbert's letter to Attorney Leonard.

b.A petition for a change of venue.

c.Expected help from "Liberty Blues."

d.The appeal to Judge Ryland.

e.The appeal to Attorney Reese.

f.The request for copy of proceedings against Col. Pitcher.

2.Intimidation of Attorneys and Court. Note 2.

a.Brethren subpoenaed as witnesses.

b.The "Liberty Blues."

c.Crossing of the river.

d.Camping in the cold.

e.The request for more troops.

f.The march to Independence.

g.Interview with Reese and Wells.

h.Menace of the mob.

i.Hope of a trial at an end.

j.Captain Atchison withdraws his troops.

k.The withdrawal by order of the court.

l.Witnesses also withdraw with troops for safety.

3.Mob Violence without Restraint. Note 3.

a.Savage acts of the mob.

b.Testimony of Abigail Leonard.

c.Burning of houses.

d.Historical comment.

4.Petitions to President of the United States. Note 4.

a.Brethren set before the President their wrongs.

b.A. S. Gilbert's accompanying letter.

c.Appeals to the governor and others.

d.The governor's reply.

e.Reply from Washington.

Notes

Elder Gilbert also wrote to Mr. Amos Reese, enclosing an order on the captain of the Liberty Blues, a company from Liberty, Clay County, requiring the captain of that company to comply with the requisition of the circuit attorney to be on hand to protect the court and officers at the trial, It is certainly a sad reflection when an appeal has to be made for troops from a more friendly part of the state to come to protect the court and its officers against the threats of a mob. If there were threats against the court, it is obvious that the feeling against the witnesses for the state indicated that they were in greater need of protection, which was truly the case.

Five of the brethren, Elders Partridge, Gilbert, Phelps, Corrill and John Whitmer, also wrote to Judge Ryland, judge of the fifth circuit, appealing to him for protection and praying that he would avail himself of every means in his power to execute the law and make it honorable, they realized that the testimony of members of the Church was important, and deeming it unsafe for these members to risk their lives in Jackson County, without a guard, therefore they appealed for such a guard for their protection at the trial.

Elders Phelps, Partridge and Gilbert, also wrote to Judge Woodward asking for a copy of the proceedings in his court in the trial of Thomas Pitcher, who had been brought before the court for his wicked treatment of the brethren and depriving them of their weapons while permitting the mob to retain theirs, The trial of Thomas Pitcher for abusing and disarming the brethren and permitting the mob to retain their arms, leaving the saints at the mercy of the mob, was held in Liberty, Clay County, in February 1834. From the facts brought out in the trial, the governor decided that Col. Pitcher was not justified in dispossessing the "Mormons" of their arms. He ordered Samuel D. Lucas, colonel of the thirty-third regiment to deliver the arms taken away to William W. Phelps, John Corrill, Edward Partridge and A. S. Gilbert, or on their order. Lucas answered that he had resigned his position and had moved to Lexington, Missouri. The governor then called upon Col. Pitcher to restore the arms he had unlawfully and wickedly taken away, but the arms were never returned to their owners. The arms had been distributed to members of the mob and they declared that they would not give them up even on the order of the governor. Neither was Col. Pitcher ever punished for his misdeeds.

At the appointed time the court in Independence convened. Some twelve or more brethren were subpoenaed as witnesses in behalf of the state. Elder William W. Phelps in writing to the Prophet gave an account of the events preceding the time of the trial. The witnesses were assembled on the bank of the Missouri River opposite Independence with Captain Atchison's company of Liberty Blues, "nearly fifty rank and file," which company had been called into service to protect the witnesses and guard them into Jackson County for the trial. Also, these troops were to be the protectors of the court and the officers of the court during the trial, The soldiers were well armed with the best muskets available at that time, with bayonets fixed. This small company of fifty men was not sufficient protection against the horde of savages who formed the mob. The governor, had he desired justice to be dealt out to the offenders, would have had more troops and would have shown greater determination to see the law protected and justice prevail, for he was fully aware of the seriousness of the case. Elder Phelps writes: "To me the scene was 'passing strange,' and long to be remembered; the martial law in force to guard the civil! About twenty-five men crossed over to effect a landing in safety, and when they came near the warehouse they fired six or eight guns, though the enemy had not gathered to witness the landing."

After crossing the river it was deemed advisable for the company of soldiers with the witnesses not to proceed to Independence that night and therefore they made their camp in the woods; part of the company with the witnesses marched nearly one mile towards Independence where they built night fires, being without tents, and the weather extremely cold. The quartermaster with his aides went into the town for the purpose of securing quarters for the men, and sent back word that the town did not present a very "pacific appearance." Captain Atchison requested of Colonel Allen two hundred drafted militia, and also sent to Liberty for more ammunition, and says Elder Phelps, "the night passed off in warlike style, with the sentinels marching silently at a proper distance from the watch fires." Evidently there was no disposition on the part of Colonel Allen to furnish more troops. Army officers and state officials lacked the disposition to uphold the integrity and good name of the State of Missouri by coming in open conflict with a determined but lawless mob bent on seeing that justice was not done.

"Early in the morning," says Elder Phelps, "we marched, strongly guarded by the troops, to the seat of war, and quartered in the blockhouse, formerly the tavern stand of S. Flournoy; after breakfast we were visited by the district attorney, Mr. Reese and the attorney general, Mr. Wells. From them we learned that all hopes of criminal prosecution were at an end. Mr. Wells had been sent by the governor to investigate, as far as possible, the Jackson outrage; but the bold front of the mob, bound even unto death (As I have heard), was not to be penetrated by civil law, or awed by executive influence. Shortly after, Captain Atchison informed me that he had just received an order from the judge that the company's service was no longer wanted in Jackson County; and we were marched out of town to the tune of Yankee Doodle, in quick time, and soon returned to our camp without the loss of any lives. This order was issued by the court, apparently, on account of the speedy gathering of the old mob, or citizens of Jackson County, and their assuming such a boisterous and mobocratic appearance. Much credit is due to Captain Atchison for his gallantry and hospitality, and I think I can say of the officers and company, that their conduct as soldiers and men, is highly reputable; so much the more so, knowing as I do, the fatal results of the trial had the militia come or not come. I can add that the Captain's safe return refreshed my mind, with Xenophon's safe retreat of the Ten Thousand! Thus ends all hope of 'redress,' even with a guard ordered by the governor for the protection of the court and witnesses.

Brother Phelps then proceeds to express his feelings that with this victory over right and justice, the mob of Jackson County would proceed with greater boldness than ever before in their depredations, mobbings and murders of the Latter-day Saints. Following this miscarriage of justice and intimidation of the court, aided by the weakness of the governor and other officials to enforce the law, the lawless element committed some of the foulest and most savage acts ever witnessed by mortal man. One aged brother, Father Lindsay, had his house destroyed after he had been driven from it. His goods were piled up and fire put to them, but the mob retired to let them burn when Father Lindsay's sons returned and put the fire out. Lyman Leonard, was beaten severely and had two chairs broken upon him, he was then dragged out of his house and beaten with clubs until the mob thought him dead, but he finally recovered. Josiah Sumner and Barnet Cole were severely beaten at the same time. The mob then proceeded to burn several houses, hay stacks to mutilate and destroy other property. Sister Abagail Leonard tells her pitiful story, how her husband was whipped and then dragged out of the house. She was threatened also with guns pointed at her, but she continued to defend herself and her husband who had been tramped on and beaten nearly to death. Her full story is given in the Documentary History, page 480. Of these dreadful scenes, Elder Phelps writes:

"Such scenes as are happening around us are calculated to arouse feelings and passions in all, and to strengthen the faith and fortify the hearts of the saints for great things. Our Savior laid down His life for our sakes, and shall we who profess to live by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God—shall we, the servants of the Lord of the vineyard, who are called and chosen to prune it for the last time—shall we, yea, verily we, who are enlightened by the wisdom of heaven—shall we fear to do at least this much for Jesus who has done so much for us? No; we will obey the voice of the Spirit, that God may overcome the world."

Writing of the effort to obtain justice from an intimidated and hostile court, Elder B. H. Roberts has made the following comment:

"Thus ended the only effort that was ever made by the officers of Missouri to bring to justice these violators of the law. One class of citizens had conspired against the liberties of another class, and being the stronger had, without the authority of the law, or shadow of justification, driven twelve hundred of them from their possessions, and there was not virtue enough in the executive of the state and his associates to punish the offenders. The determination of the mob to resist the law was stronger than the determination of the state officers to execute it and make it honorable. And yet the constitution of the state made it the imperative duty of the executive to take care that the laws are faithfully executed; and the laws of the state empowered the commander-in-chief of the militia (the governor) in case of * * * insurrection, or war, or public danger, or other emergency, to call forth into actual service such portion of the militia as he might deem expedient. With the power placed in his hands by the laws of the state, Governor Dunklin permitted mobs to overawe the courts of inquiry he himself had ordered, and allowed them to continue unchecked in their unhallowed deeds of devastation and violence. And while the mobocrats triumphed over law and order the governor's letters to the leading elders of the Church contained many pretty patriotic sentiments, but he lacked the moral courage to execute the law of the state."

While it was definitely manifest that there was no hope within the state, for the executive officer of the state had been repeatedly informed and appealed to for an investigation and for justice in regard to these continuous outrages against a large portion of the citizens of his state, yet the saints did not at that stage give up all hope. The Lord had instructed them to appeal for redress to the officers of the law, to the courts, to the governor of the state, and finally, if these refused to hear, they should appeal to the President of the United States. This they endeavored to do. Petitions were sent to Washington. The brethren in Missouri laid their difficulties in candor and truthful petitions at the feet of the powers in Washington, hoping that some action might be taken by the federal government, wherein the state had failed; or that there might be cooperation between the state and the national government, if the power of the state of itself could not master the difficulties. But even the appeals to Washington fell on deaf ears. The Governor declared that he was without some powers in the matter of re-instating the exiles to their homes, but the federal government might furnish the means by which this could be done. The government declared that this was a state matter and by the state should be settled, so the poor saints found themselves deserted by all the mortal powers that be, in their appeal to justice. These communications covering this period of time, from the summer of 1833, to the spring of 1834, are given in the closing pages of the Documentary History, Volume one.

May 2, 1834, Lewis Cass, wrote from the War Department of the Federal Government saying that the President of the United States had referred the matter to the war department, and he gave the following answer:

"In answer, I am instructed to inform you, that the offenses of which you complain, are violations of the laws of the state of Missouri, and not of the laws of the United States. The powers of the President under the constitution and laws, to direct the employment of a military force, in cases where the ordinary civil authority is found insufficient, extend only to proceedings under the laws of the United States.

"Where an insurrection in any state exists against the government thereof, the President is required, on the application of such state, or of the executive, (when the legislature cannot be convened), to call forth such number of the militia, as he may judge sufficient to suppress such insurrection.

"But this state of things does not exist in Missouri, or if it does, the fact is not shown in the mode pointed out by law. The President cannot call out a military force to aid in the execution of the state laws, until the proper requisition is made upon him by the constituted authorities."

This communication was addressed to "Messrs A. S. Gilbert, W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and others, Liberty, Clay County, Missouri.

In case of insurrection within a state, wherein citizens dominating an entire county, and abetted and strengthened in their mobbings and murders of other citizens, by officials in the county and also in the state, the central government declaring itself powerless on appeal to take measures to correct the wrongs, certainly seems to be a very strange interpretation of the law. Here we find a sovereign state, by its sworn officials, declaring itself impotent to protect a portion of its citizens in their rights constitutionally guaranteed, against the unlawful acts of other citizens acting as a murderous mob. It, seemingly, mattered not that thousands of citizens were driven from their homes, their homes burned, their property stolen and themselves whipped and murdered, and this in the dead of winter wherein they were left without food or shelter to perish even if they had escaped the mob, and both the state and the nation declare they are helpless to correct this condition and takes steps to punish the guilty and restore the oppressed. Surely at that day our boasted democracy had utterly failed!

Elders Gilbert and Phelps writing to the governor (Daniel Dunklin) May 7, 1834, and again appealing to him in behalf of the stricken exiles, had this to say:

"Since our last of the 24th ultimo, the mob of Jackson County have burned our dwellings; as near as we can ascertain, between one hundred and one hundred and fifty were consumed by fire in about one week; our arms were also taken from the depository (the jail) about ten days since, and distributed to the mob. Great efforts are now making by said mob to stir up the citizens of this county (Clay) and Lafayette, to similar outrages against us; but we think they will fail of accomplishing their wicked designs in this county. We here annex a copy of the petition to the President, signed by about one hundred and twenty."

Since there is a just law of retribution, as fixed and eternal as are other laws of the Almighty, the day must come when there shall be adjustments made before a Just Magistrate who will not be cowed by the threats of mobs.
