Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FORTY-FIVE

Return of Brethren from Missouri—How Zion Is to Be Obtained—The Resurrection

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:206-214. D.&C. Sec. 63.

Topics

1.The Return From Missouri.

a.The journey to Kirtland. Note 1.

b.The saints seeking knowledge. Note 2.

c.Ordination of Oliver Cowdery. Note 3.

2.Without Faith No Man Pleaseth God. Note 4.

a.The anger of the Father is kindled against the wicked. D. & C. 63:1-3.

b.All life in the hands of the Creator. D. & C. 63:3-5.

c.The day of wrath shall come as the whirlwind. D. & C. 63:6; Jer. 23:19-20.

d.Signs of faith, and signs not unto Salvation. D. & C. 63:8-10.

e.Faith essential to Salvation. D. & C. 63:11, 2, 13; Heb. Ch. 12.

3.Immorality A Sin of Death. Note 5.

a.Many turned from Church because of sin of adultery; others who remain to be revealed. D. & C. 63:14-15.

b.He that looketh upon a woman to lust, shall deny the faith, D. & C. 63:16.

c.All who are unclean to taste the second death. D. & C. 63:17-19.

d.He who overcometh shall have inheritance in the earth. D. & C. 63:20; Gen. 15:7; Abraham 2:6.

4.The Transfiguration of the Earth. Note 6.

a.The earth in the beginning. D. & C. 63:21.

b.The effect of the fall on the earth.

c.The earth to be renewed; at coming of the Lord.

5.The Land of Zion—The Gathering Place of the Saints, Note 7.

a.The Lord grieved at failure of many to keep His commandments. D. & C. 63:22-23.

b.The will of the Lord that Zion be settled, and obtained by purchase. D. & C. 63:23-27.

c.The saints to gather not in haste, which brings pestilence. D. & C. 63:24.

d.Satan seeks destruction of saints. D. & C. 63:28-30.

e.Shedding of blood forbidden. D. & C. 63:30-31.

f.Spirit of the Lord withheld from wicked. D. & C. 63:32.

g.Destruction of the wicked decreed and saints shall hardly escape. D. & C. 63:33-36.

h.Saints commanded to warn the world. D. & C. 63:37-46.

i.The faithful shall overcome the world. D. & C. 63:37-46.

6.The Resurrection of the Just.

a.Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord." D. & C. 63:49-50.

b.Children shall not die until they reach the age of man, and then to be changed suddenly. D. & C. 63:51-52. Isaiah 65:17-25.

c.The time near at hand, according to the Lord's manner of reckoning. D. & C. 63:53.

d.Foolish Virgins. D. & C. 63:54

e.A day of warning. D. & C. 63:58.

f.The taking of the name of the Lord in vain brings condemnation. D. & C. 63:60-63.

g."All that cometh from above is sacred." D. & C. 63:64-66.

Notes

The following day, August 28th, was Sunday and an inspirational meeting was held. During the meeting the word of the Lord was received by the Prophet commanding that Oliver Cowdery be ordained to the office of high priest. (Far West Record, Aug. 28th.) This has seemed a very strange thing to many members of the Church due to the fact that Oliver Cowdery received the Aaronic Priesthood with the Prophet under the hands of John the Baptist, and the Melchizedek Priesthood under the hands of Peter, James and John, and in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 27, it is stated that under the hands of Peter, James and John, the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery had been ordained apostles and special witnesses to bear the keys of their ministry. The question is raised: If they were ordained apostles by Peter, James and John, then why in 1831 should they be ordained high priests?

This is made plain when we understand the order of the Priesthood. Peter, James and John conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Melchizedek Priesthood, out of which all the offices come. They did not hold any more Priesthood when ordained high priests, for the offices are appendages to the Priesthood. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained elders at the organization of the Church in 1830. This was the first office which they held, although they held the fulness of the Priesthood. In June 1831, when the first high priests were ordained, Joseph Smith received the ordination to that office under the hands of his brethren whom he had ordained to that office a few minutes before. Oliver Cowdery was not present at that conference in June but was in Missouri, and now, on August 28th, when he returned the Lord commanded that he also receive the office of high priest and he was therefore ordained. Later he was recognized as a member of the First Presidency holding the keys with the Prophet Joseph Smith. When the Prophet ordained him he said: "In the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified for the sins of the world, I lay my hands upon thee and ordain thee an assistant-president to the High and Holy Priesthood, in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (D.H.C. Vol, 2:176.) In explaining the nature of his calling the Prophet said:

"The office of Assistant President is to assist in presiding over the whole Church, and to officiate in the absence of the President, according to his rank and appointment, viz. President Cowdery, first; President Rigdon, second, and President Williams, third, as they were severally called. The office of this Priesthood is also to act as spokesman, taking Aaron for an example. The virtue of the above Priesthood is to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven or of the Church Militant."—Essentials in Church History, pp. 179-180. See also Conference Reports, Oct. 1918, p. 57.

We have learned that signs are for the believer and are to follow faith, not to precede it, or to bring to pass conversion to the Gospel. It is a contrite spirit and a broken heart which bring the blessings of the Father. It is the duty of man, through obedience to the Gospel principles, humility and prayer, to worship God, and these bring faith. Without faith it is impossible for man to please God, and faith is not given to those who are rebellious or unbelieving.

One of the outstanding evidences of the truth of this latter day work is the fact that those who are unclean and guilty of immoral conduct will, if they repent not, in time deny the faith. It is this class also which seeks after signs. The Lord said to the Jews who sought a sign: "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas." (Matt. 12:39; see also I Cor. 6:9.) This sin stands in the sight of God second only to murder (Alma 39:5) and denying the Holy Ghost. Those who are guilty and do not repent in a short time become fault-finders, criticizing their brethren, then the principles of the Gospel, and finally become bitter in their souls against the work and those who are engaged in it. The most bitter opponents of the Church and the Gospel many times have been proved to be immoral and leading unclean lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said: "Whenever you see a man seeking after a sign you may set it down that he is an adulterous man." (D.H.C. 3:385.)

"Wherefore, I the Lord, have said that the fearful, and the unbelieving, and all liars, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, and the whormonger, and the sorcerer, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. (Sec. 63:17.)

"Nevertheless, he that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same shall overcome, and shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of transfiguration shall come.

"When the earth shall be transfigured, even according to the pattern which was shown unto mine apostles upon the mount; of which account the fulness ye have not yet received."

While the Lord has not revealed to us the fulness of the glorious vision which he gave to the three apostles on the mount, yet he has made known to us many things bearing upon that day. We have taught that we are living in the day of restoration, in which all things are to be brought back to a similar condition to that which was in the beginning; the day spoken of, as stated by Peter, was prophesied of by all the Prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:21.) Paul taught this doctrine to the Ephesian Saints (Eph. 1:8-10.) and the Savior told his disciples that Elias should come to bring to pass the restoration of all things. Moreover in the Articles of Faith (10th Art.) the Prophet declares that there will be such a restoration in which the earth shall be "renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." All of this is to take place in the Dispensation of the Fulness of times, in which we live. When this is accomplished this earth will again appear as it did in the beginning. The sea will be driven back to the north; the islands will be joined to the main land and the lands will be brought together as they were before the earth was divided. (D. and C. 133:22-24.)

We know that when Adam was placed on the earth it was pronounced "good," and he, as well as the earth, was not subject to death. There was no "curse" on the earth. There was no blood in his body, but he had a spiritual body until it was changed by the fall. A spiritual body is one which is not quickened by blood, but by spirit. Before the fall Adam had a physical, tangible body of flesh and bones, but it was not quickened by blood. The partaking of the forbidden fruit caused blood to exist in his body and thus the seeds of mortality were sown and his body then became temporal, or mortal, subject to the vicissitudes of mortal change. The Lord created all things upon this earth physically and immortal, or free from the seeds of death. The fall of Adam brought the change upon the earth and all things upon its face partook of the conditions imposed upon Adam in the fall. (2 Nephi 2:22.)

The transfigured earth, seen in vision, evidently was this earth in its renewed condition as described by the Prophet Isaiah (ch. 65:17 to end.) as it will appear when it is prepared for the millennial reign.

We are told that Zion is to be purchased. This fact was taught the early members. They were warned against creating antagonism among their neighbors, many of whom were extremely bitter towards the members of the Church. The Lord said the land could not be obtained by the shedding of blood. Those who had the privilege of assembling there should not go up to Zion in haste, but gradually. The reason for this advice is apparent, for haste would lead to confusion, unsatisfactory conditions and pestilence, and then, also, it creates consternation and fear in the hearts of their enemies and arouses greater opposition. Satan desired to destroy them and in his anger endeavored to stir them up to strife and contention as well as the older settlers in Missouri. The destruction of the wicked is decreed. Once more the Lord declared it; but the wicked were to destroy the wicked, and the saints were to avoid bloodshed. These warnings were repeated frequently and the members of the Church were told that wickedness shall cease. Judgments shall be poured out without measure; destruction shall come like the whirlwind when the cup of iniquity is full.

We, ourselves, too often fail to understand. The word of the Lord shall not fail, and even now we have seen many of these dreadful judgments come upon the peoples of the earth. We have not seen the end, for these conditions will continue until our Lord comes to cleanse the world and change it to its paradisiacal condition.

Until that great and dreadful day the Lord declares there shall be foolish virgins among the wise. However, the day will come when the Lord will "pluck out" of his Church the wicked, "and cast them into unquenchable fire." This unquenchable fire is, of course, the torment which comes to the wicked who do not repent and who have failed to keep the covenants and commandments. It will be the torment of the mind and soul.

Have the class discuss Isaiah 65:17-25 and compare this with D. & C. 101:23-31.
