Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FORTY-SIX

The Keys of the Kingdom—The Law of Forgiveness

Reference

Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 1:211-216.

Topics

1.The Keys of the Kingdom. Note 1.

a.The Prophet preparing to move to Hiram.

b.The renewal of the translation of the Bible.

c.Keys of mysteries given to the Prophet.

2.The Law of Forgiveness. Note 2. D. & C. Sec. 64.

a.Man commanded to forgive all men.

b.The Lord to forgive whom he will.

c.Rebuke to disobedient brethren.

3.Kirtland to Be Inhabited For Five Years. Note 3.

a.Isaac Morley to sell his farm.

b.Frederick G. Williams to retain his farm.

c.After five years all members free to move to Zion.

4.A Day of Sacrifice and Tithing. Note 4.

a.All members to be tithed.

b.Those not tithed to be burned in day of burning.

c.All commanded to labor while it is today.

d.The Lord's right to take as he pleases. D. & C. 64:28.

e.The Lord's errand. D. & C. 64:29-34.

f.The rebellious to be cut off. D. & C. 64:35-36.

5.The Church Like a Judge to the Nations. Note 5.

a.Inhabitants of Zion to judge.

b.Liars and hypocrites to be made known.

c.Zion to be an ensign to the nations. D. & C. 64:41-43.

d.Nations to tremble.

Notes

There were at this time certain brethren who are named in the revelation (Sec. 64), who had sinned and the Lord administered to them a deserved rebuke. Some of them repented and showed forth sorrow and were forgiven, but some rebelled and turned away. (See verses 15-17.) The Lord administered a rebuke to these men that they might repent and turn from their evil.

The Lord commanded that Isaac Morley should sell his farm that he might not be tempted beyond What he could bear. The contrary counsel was given to Frederick G. Williams, he was to retain his farm, and others as well were counseled to remain in Kirtland and not go up to Zion at that time, for the Lord said: "I, the Lord, will to retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of five years, in the which I will overthrow the wicked, that thereby I may save some. And after that day, I, the Lord, will not hold any guilty that shall go with an open heart up to the land of Zion; for I, the Lord, require the hearts of the children of men."

There were very significant reasons why the Lord desired to retain a strong hold upon Kirtland and its vicinity for five years. It was in that land where the first temple in this dispensation was to be built. In that Temple the essential keys of restoration were to be revealed. It seems apparent that had all the people moved to Zion in Missouri at that time, the building of a temple would have been frustrated by the enemies of the people. Opposition against them in Missouri was made known as soon as members of the Church began to arrive there. In 1833, they were driven from their homes and the persecution against them raged until, in 1838, it had reached such a stage that the members of the Church, who had been driven first from Jackson County, and then from Ray and Clay counties, and finally from Caldwell where they endeavored to build up their own community, had to flee from the borders of the State. The restoration of the keys of the Priesthood held by the ancient prophets was essential to the progress of the Church. The Lord decreed that a house to his name should be reared in Kirtland where he could come and where he could send his messengers with these keys of power. The building of such a temple required time, and while the elders went to work with their might this house was not ready for dedication until March 27, 1836. It was on the third day of April 1836, that the Lord appeared in that house and where Elias, Moses and Elijah appeared and conferred the keys of their dispensations and authorities. How many other messengers came at that time we do not know. We know, however, that it was necessary that every key and authority should be revealed. Some were revealed, of necessity, before there was a temple to which these messengers could come, but it was according to the divine plan that keys of this nature should be revealed in a house built to the name of the Lord. The revelation in which the Lord called upon the Saints to keep a strong hold in Kirtland, was given Sept. 11, 1831. It was in March 1836, that the house of the Lord was dedicated and the following April when these holy keys were bestowed. After this glorious event, the members of the Church were at liberty to remove to Zion. In fact there followed a few months later an apostasy, and many turned away from the Church, but some were saved, and they were under the necessity of fleeing from the place. However, the Spirit of the Lord prevailed until his work in that place was accomplished and the appointed time had passed.

Again, it is not a figure of speech that is meaningless, or one not to be taken literally when the Lord speaks of the burning. All through the scriptures we have the word of the Lord that at his coming the wicked and the rebellious will be as stubble and will be consumed. Isaiah has so prophecied. Malachi is very definite when he says: "Behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." Surely the words of the Lord are not be received lightly or considered meaningless.

We are all commanded to labor "while it is called today." None shall be spared from this burning who "remain in Babylon." Babylon is the world, those who remain in Babylon are those who follow the practices of the world, and who do not accept in their hearts the word of the Lord. He has said that he will send his angels in that day and they "shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity." Matt. 13:41.

The members of the Church were commanded not to get into debt to their enemies. Whenever this is done we weaken our hands. At the time this revelation was given such a condition as debt to the enemies of the Church would have proved to be fatal to the cause. We are agents "on the Lord's errand; and whatever ye do according to the will of the Lord is the Lord's business." This is true today as it was then. The saints in that day were taught to seek for an inheritance in Zion. We should be seeking just as earnestly today for that inheritance by our righteous living.

Because these great events do not come as rapidly as we think they should, yet we should "not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great." The Lord requires of us an obedient heart, a willing mind and a contrite spirit. He has declared that the rebellious shall not inherit the land of Zion, for they are not of Ephraim. The inhabitants of Zion are to judge the world; the Church is like a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations, and to judge all things pertaining to Zion. The time will come when liars and hypocrites shall be made known, and those who profess to be apostles and prophets, who have endeavored to lead the people astray, shall be made known and their punishment will be sure. In the due time of the Lord, Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her, and out of every nation shall come those who are willing to receive her covenants, and the nations shall tremble. All of these things which have been promised shall come in the due time of the Lord, for he has spoken it.
