Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FORTY-SEVEN

The Keys of the Kingdom

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:217-221. D. & C. 66.

Topics

1.The First Church Publication. Note 1.

a.The purchase of a printing press.

b.The press taken to Missouri.

c.The Evening and Morning Star. D.H.C. Vol. 1:217-221.

2.Revision of the Bible. Note 2.

a.When the revision commenced.

b.Sidney Rigdon as scribe.

c.Purpose of the revision.

d.The revision not completed. References: D.H.C. Vol. 1:219.

3.The Keys of the Kingdom. Note 3.

a.Keys committed unto man. Vs. 1-4.

b.Kingdom on earth to go forth. Vs. 5-6.

c.Kingdom in heaven to come.

d.What the kingdom is. References: D.H.C. Vol. 1:218. D. & C. Sec. 65.

4.The Conference of October 11th and 25th. Note 4.

a.Business transacted.

b.Testimonies borne.

c.Explanation concerning coming forth of Book of Mormon.

d.Not expedient to tell all the particulars of the coming forth. References D.H.C. Vol. 1:218.

5.Revelation to William E. M'Lellin. Note 5.

a.His blessing for receiving the Gospel.

b.Pronounced clean, "but not all." V. 3.

c.His commandment to preach the Gospel. Vs. 4-7.

d.Samuel H. Smith to travel with W. E. M'Lellin.

e.W. E. M'Lellin warned against adultery. Vs. 10-13.

Notes

When Oliver Cowdery was assigned to other work the keeping of records and other responsibilities in the early days of the Church, another was appointed to write for the Prophet in the revision of the Bible. Shortly after Sidney Rigdon joined the Church the Lord gave a revelation for him and said: "And I have given unto him (Joseph Smith) the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if he abide in me, and if not another will I plant in his stead."

"And a commandment I give unto thee (Sidney Rigdon) that thou shalt write for him; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect." (D. & C. 35:18-20.)

In February 1831, the Lord said: "Thou shalt ask, and my scriptures shall be given as I have appointed, and they shall be preserved in safety. And it is expedient that thou shouldest hold thy peace concerning them, and not teach them until ye have received them in full." (D. & C. 42:56-57.) It was for the purpose of correcting these scriptures, in large part, that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon moved to Hiram where they could be at peace and able to pursue their work. It was also their intention to prepare for publication the revelations which had been given up to this time, as soon as the printing press was ready in Independence, Missouri. The revision of the Bible had been delayed by command of the Lord, while the Prophet was in Fayette, because of the pressure of other duties.

It has been the thought of some, that the Prophet went through the Bible beginning with the first chapter of Genesis and continued through to the book of Revelation, but this was not the case. He went through the Bible topic by topic, and revising as the Spirit of the Lord indicated to him where changes and additions should be made. There are many parts of the Bible that the Prophet did not touch, because the Lord did not direct him to do so. Therefore, there are many places in the Scriptures where errors still are found. This work was never fully completed, but the Prophet did as much as the Lord commanded him to do before the days of Nauvoo. February 2, 1833, he finished the revision of the New Testament, and on the second day of July that same year, he finished the Scriptures, as far as the Lord permitted him to go at that time. (D.H.C. Vol. 1:324-368.) It was his intention to make other corrections in Nauvoo, but it seems that the Lord did not permit him so to do. Perhaps the reason for this is given in 3 Nephi, wherein the Lord forbade Mormon to write more than he has given us, because the people are not prepared to receive it. (3 Nephi 26:6-9.)

The purpose for this revision is explained by Nephi in writing of the coming forth of the record of the Nephites, (1 Nephi chapter 13), and by the Lord to Moses, as given in the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. (Moses 1:40-41.) The Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price is a part of this revision revealed to the Prophet.

"Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.

"For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.

"The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

"For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.

"And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all."

This great event will bring the mortal world and earth to their end. Joseph Smith holds the keys of this great dispensation which must endure until all things are finished. This Gospel is decreed to "roll forth" until it shall eventually fill the earth. When Christ comes the wicked shall be destroyed, and righteousness will follow until it will cover the earth as the waters do the sea. (Isaiah 11:9). In that day the kingdom in heaven will come down and will be joined to the kingdom of God on earth, and they will be united in one kingdom. Therefore we are taught to pray: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." It seems that there has been confusion in the minds of some members of the Church over the expression in Section 65, to the effect that the Kingdom of heaven is in heaven, and the kingdom of God, is on the the earth. It is all the same kingdom. It has been set up on the earth to remain until it is joined by the Church membership which is in heaven, after the earth is cleansed of its evil. The kingdom of God on the earth is the Church, and the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

"Some say the kingdom of God was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost, and John the Baptist did not preach the baptism for repentance for the remission of sins. But I say, in the name of the Lord, that the kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time. Where there is no kingdom of God there is no salvation. What constitutes the kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives his oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not." (Essentials in Church History, p. 334. D.H.C. Vol. 5:256-257.)

Through his repentance and the sincere desire to do right, the Lord declared that he was clean, "but not all." There had come to him forgiveness, but still there lingered in some manner, evidently in his mind and thoughts, some thing from which he had not cleansed himself by full repentance. The Lord read his soul. He was commanded to go forth and preach the Gospel "from land to land, and from city to city in the regions round about where it has not been proclaimed." He was instructed not to go up to the land of Zion at that time, and he was to think more of the work of the Lord than of his property. In his preaching he was to have as a companion Samuel H. Smith, brother of the Prophet. This was a wonderful revelation to William E. M'Lellin and should have been a great blessing and incentive to him to remain faithful. One besetting sin, so the Lord revealed, was the temptation of sexual sin. He was not accused of committing such a sin, but the dangers, because of his failings, which lay in this direction.
