Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FORTY-EIGHT

The Book of Commandments

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:221-236.

Topics

1.The Important Conference of November 1831. Note 1.

a.Reason for the conference.

b.Mission of Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer.

c.The compilation of revelations to be published.

d.Size of the edition.

e.Important revelations given at the conference.

f.The Lord's acceptance of the revelations.

2.Testimonies of the Elders. Note 2.

a.Brethren bear testimony that the revelations are true.

b.Criticism by some of the brethren.

c.The Lord's Challenge. D. & C. Sec. 67.

d.William E. M'Lellin's folly.

3.Preparation for the Publication of the Revelations. Note 3.

a.Personal supervision given by the Prophet.

b.Some revelations not included in the collection.

c.The revelations dedicated by prayer.

d.Esteem in which the conference held the revelations.

Notes

"The revelation of last evening were read by the moderator, (Oliver Cowdery). The brethren then arose in turn and bore witness to the truth of the Book of Commandments; after which Brother Joseph Smith, Jun, arose and expressed his feelings and gratitude concerning the commandments and preface received yesterday."

However there were a few of the brethren present who felt because of their superior education that there should be some improvement in the language of the revelations. Considerable time was spent in discussion concerning the language as it had been given, whereupon the Prophet through prayer received a revelation in which the Lord submitted a challenge to these learned brethren. It appears that this revelation silenced the critics, all except one. William E. M'Lellin who was given to some boasting in his own strength, and evidently who had forgotten the word of the Lord given to him at his request at the conference of October 25th, accepted the challenge.

In this revelation (Sec. 67) the Lord acknowledged the prayers that had been offered, and he declared that he knew the hearts of those who were there assembled. "Behold and lo, mine eyes are upon you, and the heavens and the earth are in mine hands, and the riches of eternity are mine to give.

"Ye endeavored to believe that ye should receive the blessing which was offered unto you; but behold, verily, I say unto you, there were fears in your hearts, and verily this is the reason that ye did not receive.

The Lord then offered them a testimony of the truth of the commandments which were lying before them, and he said:

"Your eyes have been upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun, and his language you have known, and his imperfections you have known, and you have sought in your hearts knowledge that you might express beyond his language, this you also know;

"Now seek ye out of the Book of Commandments, even the least that is among them, and appoint him that is the most wise among you;

"Or, if there be any among you, that shall make one like unto it, then ye are justified in saying that ye do not know that they are true;

But if ye cannot make one like unto it, ye are under condemnation if ye do not bear record that they are true;

"For ye know that there is no unrighteousness in them, and that which is righteous cometh down from above, from the Father of lights;

"And again, verily I say unto you, that it is your privilege, and a promise I give unto you that have been ordained unto this ministry, that inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am; not with the carnal, neither natural mind but with the spiritual."

These complaining brethren could not help but know what the Lord said in this revelation to them was true.

He also impressed upon them the fact that if they were sufficiently humble and converted to the work, he would manifest himself unto them, "for no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God. Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God; neither after the carnal mind."

Because of their shortcomings they were unable to abide the presence of God at that time, even as it was with the children of Israel at Sinai. The promise was made that if they would continue, and not turn back, the time would come when they would see and know that what had been given by Joseph Smith was true.

After this revelation was received William E. M'Lellin, because he felt he had superior learning, and as the record reads, "as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Jesus Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the Gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality; and the elders signified a willingness to bear testimony of their truth to all the world."

It is an erroneous thought to believe that the Prophet selected all of the revelations he had received and placed them in the collection which was to become The Book of Commandments. Each of the revelations selected for that volume was placed there because the Prophet considered that it had some value to the Church in regard to its teachings. There are some revelations still in possession of the Church which were not included. Some of these we can readily believe were not included because the inspiration of the Prophet was that it was not necessary, or because some of them had an application which was not intended for publication and to be sent to an unbelieving world.

The preparation for the printing was soon completed, but this took a great deal of the Prophet's time from the first of November to the twelfth, and in that time there had been held four special conferences. However, the revelations were ready for delivery to Oliver Cowdery and his companion by the fifteenth of that month. Before they were sealed and delivered the Prophet dedicated them by prayer and after he had done this he inquired of the Lord and received the revelation known as Section sixty-nine.

In this commandment the Lord declared that it was not wisdom that Oliver Cowdery should make the journey alone. The journey was about one thousand miles and through a sparsely settled country. There were many dangers on the way. The revelations were considered to be priceless and then, besides, Oliver carried with him sums of money to assist in the work in Missouri. John Whitmer was therefore appointed to accompany Oliver. This was not to relieve him, however, of his duty to write history, for he had been called to keep the historical record of the Church. He was to observe and make a record of all the important things which he should observe and know concerning the Church. John Whitmer was also to receive counsel from Oliver Cowdery and others. The word was also declared that the accounts of the stewards were also to be carried up to Zion, "For," said the Lord, "the land of Zion shall be a seat and a place to receive and do all these things." John Whitmer was also appointed to travel "many times from place to place, and from church to church, that he may the more easily obtain knowledge." What the Lord said to him, in large measure, should be noticed by others who are appointed to keep the history of the Church, in wards and stakes and organizations.

The esteem in which these revelations were held by the elders and members of the Church is expressed in a revelation to the Prophet, which was accepted by the brethren. It is as follows: (D.H.C. 1:226.)

"The testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's commandments, which he gave to his Church through Joseph Smith, Jun, who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby. (See note, page 226, D.H.C. Vol. 1.)

In a conference held at the home of Brother John Johnson in Hiram, the matter of the revelations were presented on the 12th of November after they were ready for delivery to Oliver Cowdery. The Prophet writes, "After deliberate consideration, in consequence of the book of revelations, now to be printed, being the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man; and the riches of eternity within the compass of those who are willing to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God—therefore the conference voted that they prize the revelations to be worth to the Church the riches of the whole earth, speaking temporally. The great benefits to the world which result from the Book of Mormon and the revelations, which the Lord has seen fit in his infinite wisdom to grant unto us for our salvation, and for the salvation of all that will believe, were duly appreciated." (D.H.C. Vol. 1:235-236.)
