Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FORTY-NINE

The Lord's Preface to the Book of His Commandments

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:222-224.

Topics

1.When and Why the Preface Was Given. Note 1.

a.That the will of the Lord might be made known.

b.That the revelations might carry divine endorsement.

2.The Command by Warning to the Church and to the World. Note 2.

a.Woe proclaimed against the world. D. & C. 5:5-8, and 29:8-11.

3.The Lord's Preface. Note 3. D. & C. 1:6-7.

4.Power to Seal the Rebellious. Note 4. D. & C. 1:8-10.

Additional references: D. & C. 24:15-16; 60:15; 68:12; 75:19-20.

5.The Anger of the Lord Kindled. Note 5. D. & C. 1:2-16.

a.The coming of the Lord is nigh.

b.The Arm of the Lord to be revealed.

c.Heeding his word required.

6.The Call of Joseph Smith and Other Servants. Note 6.

a.D. & C. 1:17-34; 20:1-10.

b.The Lord's word from the

c.The weak things to break down the mighty. D. & C. 1:19-23.

d.Faith to be increased. D. & C. 1:21.

e.The Everlasting Covenant to be established. D. & C. 1:22.

f.The Commandments are of God. D. & C. 1:24-29.

g.The Only True Church. D. & C. 1:30.

h.No allowance made for sin.—D. & C. 1:31.

i.He who repents, forgiven; the unrepentant to lose the light they have. D. & C. 1:32-33.

j.The Lord willing to teach all flesh. D. & C. 1:34.

7.The Lord No Respecter of Persons. D. & C. 1:35-46. Note 7.

Additional references: Alma 16:14; Moroni 8:12.

a.Peace to be taken from the earth. D. & C. 1:35.

b.Satan to have power over his own dominion. D. & C. 1:35.

c.The Lord to reign over his saints. D. & C. 1:36.

8."Search these Commandments." D. & C. 1:37-39. Note 8.

a.The prophecies and promises to be fulfilled.

b.Condemnation to come to all who refuse to hearken..

Notes

This revelation known as section one, was given at the wonderful conference held in Hiram, November 1 and 2, 1831, when the publication of the commandments was under consideration. The Lord here gives approval to the publication of his word for he is desirous that his will might be made known. The Gospel had been restored and the elders of the Church had been sent forth to proclaim salvation to an unbelieving world that once again men might find their way into the kingdom of God. This preface stamped the revelations with divine endorsement and therefore the revelations went forth with greater power than otherwise would have been the case, and should impress all who read them, especially members of the Church, with their responsibility to keep the commandments which the revelations contain. They come to us in fulfillment of the promises made by the Lord to Jeremiah:

"Behold, the day comes, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

"Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt which my covenant they break, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

"But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

"And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor , and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." Jer. 31:31-34.

We have not, up to this time, proved ourselves worthy and ready for this blessing to be granted us in full, because we have not eliminated all the selfishness and unbelief from our hearts; but this day will come when the Lord cleanses the earth of its iniquity.

The Lord guarded these revelations with the greatest care. After the Prophet Joseph Smith had made copies and had compiled them for publication, he and Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon and William W. Phelps were called by revelation to be "stewards" over the revelations and commandments, and the Lord said that "an account of this stewardship will I require of them in the day of judgment." (Sec. 70:3-4.) This indicates the importance with which the Lord held his divine word. Precautions were taken in forwarding these revelations to Zion, which was the "seat and a place to receive and do all these things." (i.e. publish the revelations and do the printing for the Church. (See Sec. 69:6.)

The reason for such jealous care is due to the fact that the heavens had been sealed for ages by man's rebellion and rejection of the Gospel as it was delivered by the apostles in the Meridian of Time. Again, the Lord was prepared to make known his covenants and commandments. This work contains all that it purports to be.

Eventually this message is to be carried to every soul, so that there shall be no eye that shall not see; no ear that shall not hear; no heart that shall not be penetrated. With all the energy at our command and all the diligence we can put forth it is impossible for the Church to reach every soul in this mortal world. Our duty is, however, to do our best. The Lord has revealed his plan, which we shall discuss in later lessons, which will bring to pass the fulfillment of this prediction. Every soul that is deprived of hearing in this mortal world, shall have the privilege of hearing in the world of spirits where the Gospel also is declared. Therefore it is a just sentence that the "rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow," and, in case they refuse to hear in this life the warning voice they shall have poured out upon them without measure the wrath of God. The elders shall go forth and none shall stay them until the Lord declares it is enough. We have all been witnesses to some of the terrible destructions which have been poured without measure, because men have rejected divine truth.

When the Gospel has been proclaimed to the satisfaction of the Lord, he will give power to his servants to "seal up the testimony" and bind up the law, and the rebellious shall be "delivered over unto darkness," (Sec. 133:73.) The Elders of Israel, under divine inspiration, shall be given power to "seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious." It is well, however, for us to remember it is our duty to exercise patience and longsuffering in the proclamation of truth, until the time comes when the Lord shall pour out his wrath and give the command that this action shall be taken. In the day of the Lord, when judgment is given, there will come a recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure he has given his fellows. This will be when Christ comes as spoken of by Malachi, when he shall be "a swift messenger against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those who oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless."

The Lord's ways are not man's ways, and he cannot choose those who in their own judgment are too wise to be taught. Therefore he chooses those who are willing to be taught and he makes them mighty even to the breaking down of the great and mighty. In his mercy and justice he gives all men the means of escape from the dominion of Satan and the bondage of sin. Therefore he sent the Gospel and his Priesthood before the great and dreadful day should come. "Surely," said Amos, "the Lord God will do nothing until he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." This restoration came that faith might increase, that the everlasing covenant, which had been broken might be established. When we think of our missionary system, we can see how the weak have gone forth among the strong ones and have prevailed. The mighty and strong ones have been broken down by the humble elders of the Church.
