Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-ONE

The Appendix—The Second Coming—The Restitution

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:229-234. (D. & C. Sec. 133.)

Topics

1.Send Forth the Elders Unto the Nations. Note 1.

a.The Lord shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all nations. (Vs. 1-3.) Matt. Ch. 24. Mark Ch. 13. Luke Ch. 21.

b.The Lord's people called on to sanctify themselves and come out of Babylon. (Vs. 4-7.)

c.The Elders to be sent to warn the nations—first the Gentiles and then the Jews. (Vs. 8-9.)

d.The Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him.

e.The Gentiles to flee to Zion, the Jews to Jerusalem. (Vs. 12-15.)

f.The inhabitants of the earth commanded to heed the voice of the Lord. (V. 16.)

g.The angel hath gone forth in the midst of heaven. (V. 17. Rev. 14:6-7.)

2.The Appearing of the Bridegroom. Note 2.

a.The hour of his coming is nigh. (V. 17. Rev. 15:6-7.)

b.Christ shall stand upon Mount Zion and on the Mount of Olives and speak from Zion and Jerusalem. (Vs. 18-22. Zech. 14:4-5).

c.His voice shall break down the mountains. (V. 22.)

d.The Land of Zion and the land of Jerusalem shall be turned back into their own place and the sea be driven back to the north, and the earth be as it was before it was divided. (Vs. 22-24. Isaiah 40:4; 54:10. Rev. 16:18-20.)

e.The Lord shall be in the midst of his people. (V. 25.)

3.They Who Are In the North Countries Shall Come In Remembrance Before the Lord. Note 3. (Jer. 16:15-16.)

a.The Prophecy of Moses in the Kirtland Temple to be fulfilled. (See 110:11.)

b.b. "Lost" Israel will hear the voice of the Lord and shall not longer stay themselves. (Vs. 26-29.)

c.They shall bring their rich treasures to the children of Ephraim. (Vs. 30-31.)

d.They shall be crowned by the children of Ephraim. (Vs. 32-34.)

4.The Tribe of Judah to Return and Be Sanctified. Note 4.

a.Judah to be forgiven and find favor with the Lord. (Vs. 35.) See Sec. 45:48-54; Zech. 12:10-13; 13:6-9; 14:3-9.

b.The Gospel to be preached to every nation. (Vs. 36-40.)

5.The Answer of the Lord to the Ungodly. Note 5.

a.The presence of the Lord shall be as the melting fire. (Vs. 41-44.)

b.Since the beginning of the world men have not heard or seen such great things. (Vs. 45-46.)

c.The Lord shall be red in his apparel. (Vs. 47-55.)

d.The graves of the saints shall be opened. (V. 56.)

e.The Lord sent the fulness of the Gospel by the hands of the weak who have confounded the wise, and the commandments have been given to all flesh. (Vs. 57-61.)

f.All who hearken not shall be cut off from among the people. (Vs. 62-63.)

g.The Lord's answer to the ungodly. (Vs. 64-74.)

Notes

The elders were commanded that they were to go forth unto the nations and to the islands of the sea, and to send forth unto foreign lands calling upon the Gentiles to repent and receive the Gospel. After the Gospel had gone to the Gentiles it was to be taken to the Jews. The Gentiles and those of the tribes other than Judah were to flee to Zion for safety and the Jews were to flee to Jerusalem, or Palestine, according to the prophetic promises made by the Lord to Israel in ancient days. The inhabitants of the earth were also called upon to heed the warning, for the Lord would call upon them everywhere to repent for the hour of his coming is nigh. The Lord here also bears witness that the words revealed to John have been fulfilled for he has sent forth the angel crying through the midst of heaven saying: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh."

When that day comes great changes shall take place upon the earth. We believe this is a day of restoration, and that the earth is to be renewed. (Tenth Article of Faith; Lesson 40.) In this renewal we are informed that the Lord "shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north country, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." (Gen. 10:25.) The notion prevails quite generally that the dividing of the earth in the days of Peleg was a division politically among the people, but from this word of the Lord we gain the idea that the earth itself was divided and that when Christ comes it will again be brought back to the same conditions physically as prevailed before this division took place. The sea is to be driven back into the north. The land is to be brought back as it was originally and the lands of Zion (America) and Jerusalem (Palestine and all the land pertaining unto it) will be restored to their own place as they were in the beginning. The Savior will stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh. We have discovered in our study that the wicked, or all things that are corruptible (Section 101:23-25), will be consumed and therefore will not be permitted to be on the earth when this time comes.

When these Israelites come to Zion they will bring their rich treasures to the children of Ephraim, and the children of Ephraim will give unto them the blessings of the fulness of the Gospel. This also is according to the predictions. Ephraim received the birthright in Israel and in these last days he stands in his place at the head of the tribes of Israel. It will be his duty, therefore, to crown the tribes of Israel when they come to Zion. We are also promised that their enemies will be a prey to them when the Lord brings them on their journey. An highway will be thrown up in the midst of the great deep. Barren deserts shall then become fruitful with springs of water, and the parched ground shall not longer be a thirsty land.

"Wherefore, this shall be the answer of the Lord unto them:

In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you were driven out.

When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver.

Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their fish stink, and die for thirst.

I clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering.

And this shall ye have of my hand—ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not.

Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were delivered over unto darkness.

These shall go away unto outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Behold the Lord your God hath spoken it." Amen. (Vs. 65-74.)
