Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-TWO

The Lord's Challenge to His Enemies—Consecration—A Bishop Called

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:236. D. & C. Sections 70, 71, 72, 73.

Topics

1.Stewards Over the Revelations and Commandments. Note 1.

a.Proclamation to inhabitants of Zion. (D. & C. 70:1.)

b.Stewards over the revelations appointed. (D. & C. 70:2-4.)

c.Brethren who consecrated their time worthy of inheritance in Zion. (D.H.C. Vol. 1:236.)

d.Substance more than is needful to be given into the Lord's storehouse. (Vs. 6-8.)

e.None exempt from the law; all shall give account of stewardship. (Vs. 9-11.)

f.Those appointed in spiritual things worthy as well as those who labor temporally. (Vs. 12-13.)

g.In temporal things there should be equality. (Vs. 14-18.)

2.Labors Among the Enemy. Note 2.

a.Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon called to meet their enemies.

b.Translation of Scriptures discontinued for a season. (Sec. 71.)

c.Reason for the call.

d.Enemies to be confounded.

e.No weapon formed against them to prosper.

f.The journey taken.

3.The Call of a Bishop. Note 3. (D.H.C. 1:239. D. & C. Sec. 72.)

a.Meeting with the elders.

b.A Bishop in Kirtland needed.

c.Elders to give account of their stewardships.

d.Accounts to be handed over to Bishop in Zion. (V. 6.)

e.Duties of the bishop to be made known. (V. 7.)

f.Newel K. Whitney called.

4.The Lord's Storehouse. Note 4. (D.H.C. 1:239-240. D. & C. Sec. 72.)

a.Means consecrated to the use of the poor and needy. (V. 12.)

b.Debts of spiritual workers to be met.

c.Every man going to Zion to lay all things before the bishop. (V. 15.)

d.Certificates to be given. (V. 17.)

e.Importance of literary concerns. (V. 20.)

f.Revelation to be published and go to ends of the earth. (Vs. 21-23.)

g.Those going up to Zion to carry certificates. (Vs. 25-26.)

h.Duties of elders—to preach until next conference. (D. & C. Sec. 73. D.H.C. Vol. 1:241.)

Notes

The Prophet commenting on the word of the Lord and the commission which had been given, says: "Brother Oliver had labored with me from the beginning in writing, etc. Brother Martin had labored with me from the beginning and Brother John Whitmer and Sidney Rigdon also for a considerable time, and as these sacred writings are now going to the Church for its benefit, that we may have claim on the Church for recompense—if this conference think these things worth prizing to be had on record to show hereafter—I feel that it will be according to the mind of the Spirit, for by it these things were put into my heart which I know to be the Spirit of truth. It was voted that the Prophet dedicate and consecrate these brethren and the sacred writings and all they have entrusted to their care, to the Lord, which was done accordingly. It was also approved that "in consequence of the diligence of our brethren, Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer and Sidney Rigdon in bringing to light by the grace of God these sacred things, (they) be appointed to manage them according to the laws of the Church and the commandments of the Lord. And also that in consequence of the families of Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Hiram Page and David Whitmer, administering to their wants in temporal things and also (because of) the labors of Peter Whitmer, Jun., William Smith and Don Carlos Smith," it was voted and carried that these brethren be remembered to the bishop in Zion as being worthy of inheritances among the people of the Lord according to the laws of the Church.

It was stated in the revelation that none was exempt from the law of consecration, "who belong to the church of the living God. Neither the bishop, neither the agent who keepeth the Lord's storehouse, neither he who is appointed in a stewardship over temporal things." We learn from this and other revelations that all who went up, or who contemplated going up, to Zion, were bound by the law of consecration by which Zion was to be built. They were also commanded to be equal in temporal things, and not enter into the covenants grudgingly. To be equal did not mean that all should have the same amount of food, but each should have according to his needs. For instance, a man would receive in proportion to the number in his family, not according to the nature of his work. He was to have, "for food and for raiment; for an inheritance; for houses and for lands, in whatsoever circumstances, I the Lord, shall place them, and whithersoever I, the Lord, shall send them."

In obedience to this call Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left Kirtland December 3, 1831, and went forth in Kirtland, Shalersville, Ravenna and other places preaching boldly the truth and calling on their traducers to meet them and face their falsehoods. This was rather an unusual condition. Quite generally the Lord counsels his servants not to engage in debates and arguments, but to preach in power the fundamental principles of the Gospel. This was a condition that required some action of this kind, and the Spirit of the Lord directed these brethren to go forth and confound their enemies which they proceeded immediately to do, as their enemies were unable to substantiate their falsehoods and were surprised by this sudden challenge so boldly given. Much of the prejudice was allayed and some friends made through this action.

According to this plan the labors of those who gave their time "in spiritual things, in administering the Gospel and the things of the kingdom unto the church, and unto the world," were to be counted worthy, but they like all others were to give an account to the bishop in Zion. It was the command—"Every man that cometh up to Zion, must lay all things before the bishop in Zion." Likewise, those in Kirtland and its vicinity were to give an accounting to the bishop in Kirtland, who in turn was to report to the bishop in Zion. A certificate from the judge or bishop in Kirtland was to be made and it would "render every man acceptable and answereth all things, for an inheritance, and to be received as a wise steward, and as a faithful laborer; otherwise he shall not be accepted of the bishop in Zion."

From the very beginning of time the Lord has taken pains to see that proper records have been kept. This was one of the first commandments to the Church in 1830. The jealous care pertaining to the word of the Lord and other publications and documents, is shown forth in a number of revelations. Here (V. 20.) the Lord gives instruction that his servants "who are appointed as stewards over the literary concerns of my Church, (shall) have claim for assistance upon the bishop or bishops, in all things." These brethren, previously named, had the charge of the literary matters of the Church, the publication and care of the revelations which were to be published, and which were to go forth unto the ends of the earth. Funds from this source were also to be obtained through the sale of the publications. It seems a strange thing that many good brethren in the Church seem to think that the Lord never intended that the Book of Mormon, and more especially the Doctrine and Covenants, should go forth to the world. We hear the expression from time to time, that these, and especially the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are intended solely for members of the Church, but the Lord in his instructions has counseled otherwise. They were intended to be a warning to all the world.

All who were to go up to Zion from other parts of the Church, were required to carry with them certificates, showing that they were in full fellowship and worthy to obtain the blessings which, in Zion, awaited the obedient.
