Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-THREE

The Teachings of Paul—The Amherst Conference—The Missionary Call

References

Documentary History of the Church. Vol. 1:242-245. (D. & C. Sections 74 and 75.)

Topics

1.The Writings of Paul. Note 1.

a.The inspiration in Paul's epistles.

b.Paul's personal views.

c.Need for the spirit of discernment to understand some teachings.

d.The Lord's explanation of (1 Cor. 7:14.)

e.Difficulty for Jews to forsake the Law.

2.The Amherst Conference. Note 2.

a.Business transacted.

b.Joseph Smith ordained President of the High Priesthood.

3.Revelation to the Elders. (D. & C. 75.)

a."Alpha and Omega." Note 3.

b.Counsel to the laborers in the vineyard. (Vs. 2-5.) Note 4.

c.William E. M'Lellan's commission revoked. (Vs. 6-8.)

d.Luke Johnson's commission.

e.Call to Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith. (V. 13.)

f.Call to Lyman Johnson and Orson Pratt. (V. 14.)

g.Call to other elders. (Vs. 15-17.)

4.General Instructions to the Elders

a.Urgency of the Missionary call.

b.Elders to visit from house to house. Note 5. (Vs. 18-22.)

c.To travel two by two.

d.A blessing or a cursing.

e.To be judges against the people.

5.The Church to Support Families of Missionaries. Note 6.

a.Places for their families to be found.

b.Those who have means to support their own.

c.The idler not to have place in the Church. (V. 29.)

Notes

It is very fortunate that so many of the epistles of Paul have been preserved. We are forced to rely upon his teachings and admonitions for the greatest portion of knowledge which has come down to us in relation to the conditions and doctrines in the Primitive Christian Church. We may well suppose that the other apostles did considerable writing of epistles, but few of them have been preserved. To Paul, therefore, we turn for information historically, doctrinally and concerning the customs of his time. It is true, however, that many of Paul's sayings have been grossly misinterpreted and misunderstood, and from these facts the modern Christian world has been led into many grievous errors, and based upon such interpretations, sects and churches have been established. We do, nevertheless, owe a deep debt of gratitude to Paul for his diligence and his prophetic and doctrinal expressions.

There are in his writings, mixed revelations and expressions which set forth his own opinions. In some of these writings he frankly declares that he speaks of himself and in others he definitely states that the Lord commanded him. Some of his own opinions are found in his counsels to the Corinthian members of the Church. In order that we, today, may understand these instructions it is necessary that we be given divine inspiration. We are living many hundreds of years since the days of Paul. It is difficult for us, therefore, to get the proper setting in relation to the customs and manners prevailing among the people and which called forth some of his remarks. Some of his instruction will not fit into the picture of today, but it may have been in perfect order in his day as we would see if we had lived in his time. For instance his counsel that women should "keep silence in the churches." (meetings) and if they wished to obtain knowledge they were to "ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the church." Again, his counsel that in the meetings the women's heads should be covered, else the hair should be shorn. (1 Cor. 14:34-36.) What would we think today, when the Lord revealed to the Church the contrary, and gave to us a woman's organization and commanded them to teach and expound scriptures, if some brother advocated such doctrines? So likewise consider his teaching on marriage. It appears that he wished those in the ministry, if they were single, to remain in that state, rather than to marry, for "He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife." (1 Cor. 7:32-33.) Perhaps this was true among the Greeks.

Some of these teachings, evidently, are the views of Paul the man, but when he spoke by the inspiration which the Lord placed upon him, he commanded that certain officers in the Church must by all means be married men. (1 Tim. 1:2; 12. And Tit. 1:6.) Then how truly he declared that" nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.) It was while studying these teachings of Paul that the elders were led to inquire of the Prophet as to Paul's meanings in 1 Cor. 7:14. The Prophet asked the Lord and got the answer. In this saying: "For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they holy."—Paul spoke not by commandment, but of himself. His intent, as explained in Section 74, being that where there were mixed families in the Church, the teachings of the Law of Moses and the doctrines which were fulfilled, should not be maintained. Male children in such families were not to be circumcised, and they would be holy. It was the doctrine of the Jews that unless this were done children were unholy. This Paul wished to correct. It was very difficult for the Jewish members of the Church to forsake all of their traditions and turn from the Law of Moses, and from circumcision which were fulfilled. Even Peter hedged somewhat on these points when among the Jews and the Lord had to give him the vision of the unclean beasts to open his understanding.
