Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-FOUR

The Vision (Part One) Blessing for the Righteous and Punishment of the Second Death

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:245-252.

Topics

1.Introduction to the Vision. (Vs. 1-10.)

a.Sublimity and magnitude of the introduction. Note 1.

b.The wisdom and greatness of God. (Vs. 1-4.)

c.His mercy and grace made manifest to all who serve him. (Vs. 5-6.)

d.Mysteries to be revealed to the righteous. (Vs. 7-8.)

e.The wisdom of the just to increase and the understanding of the worldly wise to perish. (Vs. 9-10.) Note 2. (1 Cor. 1:19-31.)

2.Why the Vision was Given. (Vs. 11-19.) Note 3.

a.Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon inquire of the Lord concerning the resurrection. (Vs. 14-18.)

b.Their eyes opened by the Spirit. (V. 12.)

c.They saw the beginning before the world was. (V. 13.)

d.They testify, "last of all," that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God, and that he lives. (Vs. 13-23.)

e.By him the worlds were and are created, and their inhabitants are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (V. 24.) (II Pet. 2:4; Jude 6.)

3.The Fall of Lucifer. (Vs. 25-28.)

a.The vision of the rebellion in heaven. (Vs. 25-27.) Note 4.

b.The command to write the vision. (V. 28.)

c.Punishment of those who kept not their first estate. (D. & C. 29:36-39; Moses 4:1-4; Abraham 3:27-28.)

4.Punishment of Sons of Perdition. (Vs. 29-39.) Note 5.

a.Satan's war against mortals. (V. 29; see also II Nephi 2:17-18, 29-30.)

b.Before a man can become a son of perdition he must know the power of God and then defy it. (Vs. 31-32, 35-36.) Note 6.

c.Sons of perdition are vessels of wrath doomed to punishment with the devil in eternity. (Vs. 33-34.) II Nephi 9:15-16; I Nephi 15:33-34; Mormon 9:13-14.

d.The only ones on whom the second the death has full power. (V. 37.)

e.All the rest of the children of the Father to be redeemed, after the suffering of his wrath. (Vs. 38-39 and 43-44.)

f.The mission of Jesus to bear the sins of all who will repent, and to cleanse the earth from all unrighteous—(Vs. 40-42.)

g.Extent of punishment of sons of perdition known only by those who partake of it. (Vs. 44-49.)

Notes

Speaking of this revelation the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

"Nothing could be more pleasing to the Saints upon the order of the Kingdom of the Lord, than the light which burst upon the world through the foregoing vision. Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the Scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, go to show the perfection of the theory (of different degrees of glory in the future life) and witness the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the idea; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God!'" (D. H. C. 1:252-3.)

It should be apparent to all that such soul-stirring and exalting sentiments and the consistency of the story told, could not come from the mind of man. God alone could make known such a revelation. President Charles W. Penrose has said:

There is nothing in the book called the Bible that can compare with it. It is full of light; it is full of truth; it is full of glory; it is full of beauty. It portrays the future of all the inhabitants of the earth, dividing them into three classes or divisions—celestial, terrestrial, and telestial, or as compared to the glory of the sun, the glory of the moon, and the glory of the stars. It shows who will be redeemed, and what redemption they will enjoy; and describes the position the inhabitants of the earth will occupy when they enter into the future state." (J. of D. 24:92.)

In his rebellion, Lucifer led away one-third of the spirits who otherwise would have been entitled to take bodies on this earth had they been faithful, but because of their rebellion were deprived of that privilege and became angels to the devil, or sons of perdition. The Prophet said, May 21, 1843: "The punishment of the devil was, that he should not have a habitation like men. The devil's retaliation is, he comes into this world, binds up men's bodies, and occupies them himself. When the authorities come along, they eject him from a stolen habitation."

"Lucifer, a Son of the Morning, a personage of authority, offered himself as a candidate for the exalted position of redeemer, and requested that the glory of the Father be given him. He likewise insisted upon an amendment to the plan—that all should be saved without exception or condition.

"Jesus Christ held that the Eternal Father should have the glory and that his will should be done!

"The result was that Christ was chosen, the vote being overwhelmingly in his favor.

"Lucifer revolted and drew after and with him a large proportion of the spirits. Then followed what must have been a mighty struggle, the immensity and character of which must be far beyond even the faintest conception by the mind of man.

"Lucifer and his rebel army were routed and ejected from heaven, their 'former habitation' and came down to earth to continue the warfare in another form, their object being to defeat the carrying out of the plan of the Father to save and uplift man from his fallen condition to the attainment of everlasting peace and glory.

"The rebels, by their act or revolt, failed to keep their first estate, and thus forfeited their right to take bodies, this being a privilege resultant from faithfulness in the first estate of spiritual existence." (Elder John Nicholson, Era 2:915-916.)

"Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants—there is one of the grandest revelations that I ever saw in my life in any book; there is nothing in the Bible that compares with it; there is nothing in any book that I ever read, that compares with it, for glory, for perfection, for detail, for a revelation of the plans of the Father for the salvation of his children. Now, in that revelation, we are told what the gospel is, and we are told for what it was designed, and that the name of Jesus Christ was given to the Savior of the world, and that the time will come when he will save all except certain ones that are named here.* * * Now Jesus will bring forth all these in the resurrection from the dead, even the malefactors and the extortioners and those who love and make a lie—the wickedest kind of people, after they have suffered the penalty of the wrath of God, so that Justice is satisfied, will be brought forth into some degree of glory. Those who get into the celestial kingdom have to attend to certain ordinances that are explained, and those who get into the terrestrial kingdom are to have certain qualities that are explained; there are several degrees in that glory; and so in the telestial world, the worst kind of humanity, all except those few that are called 'sons of perdition.'

"The meaning of that is made very plain. There was an angel in the presence of God, of great authority and power, and he was called a Son of the Morning, a bright luminary among the spirits in the celestial world, and he rebelled against the Father and tried to get the glory that belonged to the Son, and he was turned away and cast down with those who followed him, and he was called Perdition, and the heavens wept over him when he was cast out. Then those, who, by his power, while they are in the flesh, after receiving the testimony of Jesus Christ, the spirit of prophecy; after receiving the Holy Ghost, turn away from its light altogether and deny the Holy Ghost and deny the Father and the Son; when they thus turn away, they come under Satan's power and his dominion and are called sons of perdition, and these are the exceptions to the rule spoken of in that revelation. All the rest are brought forth by the resurrection of the dead into some degree of glory, as explained, not in this single verse, as some people think it ought to have been, but through the whole revelation, and we learn clearly that those who are eventually saved, redeemed, brought out of darkness, brought out of punishment, they are brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, into one of these degrees of glory, all but these exceptions. He says he saves all except them; they shall go away with the devil and his angels into everlasting punishment.

"Now then, some of our brethren have taken a notion in their heads that when he says all except them, it means they will not be resurrected. I would like briefly to refer you to the 88th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, in which this subject is elaborated; that is, the things revealed in the 76th section in regard to these three different degrees of glory into which all these persons are brought forth to salvation, are congregated and arranged and organized with these exceptions. * * * It says: "They who remain—who are they that remain? It tells us there are the exceptions, these who go away with the devil and his angels and are called sons of perdition; and they who remain shall also be quickened; but they shall return to their own place, because they would not receive that which they might have had, but frittered away their time and season for repentance, and they go away into everlasting punishment with the devil and his angels. Read Section 29 of the Doctrine and Covenants, particularly 26-30; also 88:32-33." (Charles W. Penrose, Conference Pamphlet, April 6, 1922, pages 29-31.)

"What is the penalty? Second death, What is that? After you have been redeemed from the grave, and come into the presence of God, you will have to stand there to be judged; and if you have done evil, you will be banished everlastingly from His presence—body and spirit united together; this is what is called the second death. Why is it called the second death? Because the first is the dissolution of body and spirit, and the second merely a banishment—a becoming dead to the things of righteousness; and as I have already remarked, whenever a being is placed in such a condition, there perfect misery reigns: I care not where you place them; you may take any of the celestial worlds, and place millions of beings there that are dead to righteousness, and how long will it be before they make a perfect hell of it? They would make a hell of any heaven the Lord ever made. It is the second death—the penalty attached to the commandment given to the posterity of Adam, viz, 'you shall cease to do evil.' (Orson Pratt, J. of D. 1:288.)

"The contention in heaven was—Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he would save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him.

"All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost, for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes opened to the truth of it; and from that time he beings to be an enemy. This is the case with many apostates of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." Teachings, p. 358.
