Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-FIVE

The Vision (Part Two)—The Degrees of Glory

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:245-252.

Topics

1.The Celestial Kingdom and Requirements of Those Who Enter There. (Vs. 50-70.)

a.Those who come forth in the first resurrection. (Vs. 50-51.) Note 1. I John 3:1-3.

b.They are they who are just and true. (Vs. 52-53.)

c.They who overcome by faith and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise. (V. 53.)

d.They are they who are members of the Church of the First Born. (V. 54.) Note 2. D. & C. 84:35-38.

e.They are Priests and Kings and receive of the fulness for all things are theirs. (Vs. 55-60.) Rev. 1:6; 5:10.

f.These dwell in the presence of God, and have part in the first resurrection. (Vs. 61-70.) D. & C. 88, 96-98.

g.These are equal in power, might and dominion, and their glory excels in all things, for it is celestial. (Vs. 92-96.)

2.The Terrestrial Kingdom. (Vs. 71-80.) Note 3.

a.Classes in the terrestrial kingdom.

b.All these receive the presence of the Son, but not the fulness of the Father, and "they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (Vs. 77-79.)

c.These are ministered to by those of the celestial. (V. 87.)

d.The terrestrial excels the telestial in all things. (V. 91.)

3.The Telestial Kingdom. Note 4.

a.The telestial kingdom composed of innumerable degrees, or glories. (V. 81.) I Cor. 15:40-42.

b.Classes who inherit the telestial kingdom.

c.Yet these, after they pay the price of their sinning, shall all bow the knee and become heirs of salvation, (V. 88.) But where God and Christ are they cannot come worlds without end. (V. 112.)

d.Even those of the telestial receive blessings beyond the understanding of mortals. (V. 89.)

e.These suffer the wrath of God and vengeance or eternal fire until through suffering and repentance they are purged. (Vs. 104-109.)

f.They of the telestial are as countless as the sands of the seashore and the stars of heaven. (V. 109.)

g.No man comprehends the fulness of these glories for they surpass all understanding. (Vs. 114-119.)

Notes

The following vision was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple, January 21, 1836:

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of the kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. * * * Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me saying—

"All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who should have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desires of their hearts.

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D.H.C. 2:380-381.)

As eternal beings we all have to stand before Him to be judged; and he has provided different degrees of glory—the celestial, the terrestrial, and the telestial glories—which are provided according to certain unchangeable laws which cannot be controverted. What will he do with them? For those who are ready to listen to him and be brought under the influence of the Spirit of God and be led by the principles of revelation and the light of heaven, and who are willing to yield obedience to his commands at all times and carry out his purposes upon the earth, and who are willing to abide a celestial law, he has prepared for them a celestial law, he has prepared for them a celestial glory, that they may be with him for ever and ever. And what about the others? They are not prepared to go there anymore than lead is prepared to stand the same test as gold or silver; and there they cannot go. And there is a great gulf between them. But he will do with them just as well as he can. A great many of these people in the world, thousands and hundreds of millions of them, will be a great deal better off through the interposition of the Almighty than they have any idea of, but they cannot enter into the celestial kingdom of God; where God and Christ are they cannot come." (Salt Lake Stake Conf., Jan. 6, 1879.)

"We hold the salvation from sin is obtainable only through obedience, and that while the door to the kingdom of God has been opened by the sanctified death and by the resurrection of our Lord, Jesus Christ, no man may enter there except by his personal and voluntary application expressed in terms of obedience to the prescribed laws and ordinances of the Gospel. Christ 'became the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.' (Heb. 5:9.) And further: God 'will render to every man according to his deeds.' * * *

"Mormon philosophy holds that salvation, thus made accessible to all through faith and works, implies no uniformity of condition as to future happiness and glory, any more than does condemnation of the soul mean the same state of disappointment, remorse and misery to all who incur that dread but natural penalty. We reject the unscriptural dogma that for resurrected souls there are but two places or states of eternal existence—heaven and hell—to the one or the other of which each shall be assigned according to the record of his deeds, whether good or bad, and however narrow the margin may appear or the balance sheet of his mortal life. * * *

"The life we are to experience hereafter will be in righteous strictness the result of the life we lead in this world; and as here men exhibit infinite gradations of faithful adherence to the truth, and of servility to sin, so in the world beyond the grave shall gradations exist. Salvation grades into exaltation and every soul shall find place and condition as befits him." (James E. Talmage, Era, 18:955-6.)

"They of the telestial glory are such as receive not the gospel (and hence, we may infer, not baptism), neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant. They will not be gathered with the saints to be caught up unto the Church of the Firstborn. They will suffer the wrath of God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and perfected his work. Then shall all these bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne for ever and ever; and they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions of the telestial kingdom of glory. They shall be servants of the Most High, but where God and Christ dwell, they cannot come, worlds without end." (President Joseph F. Smith, Era, 6:786.)

The inhabitants of the terrestrial world will have part in the first resurrection, but not until after the "morning of that resurrection" when those who are Christ's at his coming are raised. (D. and C. 88:96-99.) The inhabitants of the telestial kingdom, who have been the unclean, the liars and filthy of the earth, will not be resurrected until the close of the millennium. (D. and C. 88:101-102; Rev. 20:4-6; 22:15.) When they are released from the prison and prepared to enter their glories, they will gladly bow the knee and confess Jesus Christ, as will all the other of the children of God, but this does not imply that they are entitled to receive all the blessings and ordinances of the Gospel. The First Presidency of the Church has said that all of the ordinances of the Gospel pertain to the celestial kingdom of God, and he has not told us what ordinances, if any, he will require of those who enter other kingdoms. President Brigham Young in one of his discourses informed the Elders that they were not sent out to preach a salvation for the terrestrial or telestial kingdom, but to bring people to repentance and into the celestial kingdom of God, and that is our mission and responsibility to the people of the earth. Every soul will receive a reward according to the law he obeys. If it is the celestial law, he will receive a celestial glory; if it is a terestrial law, he will receive a terrestrial glory, and if it is a telestial law, he will receive a telestial glory. Those who remain after their resurrection, shall go away to their own place with the devil and his angels.
