Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-SIX

Key to John's Revelation (Part One.)

References

D. H. C. Vol. 1:253-254 (D. & C. Sec. 77.)

Topics:

1.The Destiny of the Earth. Note 1.

a.The sea of glass. (Rev. 4:6; 15:2; 21:1.)

b.The Lord's story of creation. (Gen. 1, 2, 3. Moses 1, 2, 3, 4. Abraham 3, 4, 5.)

c.Immortality before the Fall. (2 Nephi 2:22.)

d.President Smith and Orson Pratt on immortality. (See paragraph in lesson.)

e.The Fall came through transgression. (Moses 6:57-58. 2 Nephi 9:6.)

f.President Brigham Young on the fall. (Discourses pp. 157-158.)

2.The Temporal Existence of the Earth. Note 2.

a.The seven thousand years of temporal existence. (Vs. 6 and 12.)

b.The earth's telestial condition.

c.The six days of creation.

d.The work of sanctification and preparation for Christ's coming.

e.Now it is a day of restoration.

3.The New Heavens and New Earth. Note 3.

a.Isaiah's Prophecy. (Isa. 65:17-25.)

b.All things corruptible to be consumed. (D. & C. 101:24.)

c.The earth to be restored. (D. & C. 133:21-24.)

d.The enmity of man and beasts to cease. (D. & C. 101:26.)

e.Infants will not die; the rebellious to be punished. (Isa. 65:20. D. & C. 101:29-30.)

f.Christ will reign.

4.The Earth Shall Pass Away. Note 4.

a.The little season. (D. & C. 29:22-24; 43:30-35.)

b.The earth shall pass away. (D. & C. 43:31-32; Peter 3:10; Isa. 24:4; Luke 21:33.)

c.The resurrection of the earth. (D. & C. 88:18-20, and Vs. 25-26.)

d.The righteous only will possess it. (D. & C. 88:20-29.)

e.Redemption of the earth and all creatures, based on the atonement.

f.President Brigham Young on the celestialized earth.

g.Other scriptural references.

Notes

Answer: "It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state."

The story of the earth as given by the Lord is an interesting one. It is needless to say that his story does not conform to the story told by the uninspired voices of the "wise and prudent" men of the earth. The story of creation as it is given by revelation to Moses certainly has been greatly misinterpreted and misapplied by those who endeavor to square it with the teachings of the modern educational world. The account of creation is, I repeat, a most interesting and instructive study. First, then, we are taught that when the earth was finished and man was placed upon it, the Lord pronounced everything "good." This being true, then the Lord did not create anything that was bad, or not prepared in its nature to endure forever. Man was placed on the earth and was given dominion over every living creature. Lehi has declared that in that day there was not only absence of evil, but, "Behold had Adam not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the Garden of Eden." In other words Adam was not subject to death when placed in the Garden of Eden. President Joseph F. Smith and Elder Orson Pratt, (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 343-344. J. of D. Vol. 1:58.) and other brethren, have said that Adam and Eve were immortal beings. We use the term "immortal" meaning that they could have lived forever in that state in which they were created if they had not fallen. The term "immortal" does not mean that they had passed through a resurrection and thus become immortal, for we are taught that a resurrected being cannot die again. (Alma 11:44-45. D. & C. 63:49. John 11:26.) Moreover, this is not all. Not only would Adam and Eve endure forever under those conditions, but Lehi further says: "And all things which were created must have remained forever, and had no end." (2 Nephi 2:22.) Adam did transgress the law under which he was living and the consequences were that he brought death into the world, and death through him passed upon every creature, including the earth, and the Lord said: Cursed is the ground for thy sake; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return to the ground; for out of it was thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. (Gen. 3:18-19.) To Enoch the Lord said: "That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death." * * * This is the Lord's explanation for the coming of death in the world.

President Brigham Young has said: "How did Adam and Eve sin? Did they come out in direct opposition to God and to his government? No! But they transgressed a command of the Lord, and through that transgression sin came into the world. The Lord knew they would do this, and he had designed that they should. Then came the curse upon the fruit, upon the vegetables, and upon our mother earth, and it came upon the creeping things, upon the grain in the field, the fish in the sea and upon all things pertaining to this earth, through man's transgression." (Discourses pp. 157-158.)

Answer: "We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence.

By the seven thousand years of temporal existence is meant the time of the earth's duration from the fall of Adam to the end of time, which will come after the Millennium and "a little season" which will follow. The earth and all on it were in a spiritual condition before the fall, for mortality had not come bringing temporal conditions. We are now living in the second period of the earth's history, which is referred to as being a telestial condition. In other words, a condition where wickedness and all the vicissitudes of mortality endure. It is the earth and its inhabitants in the fallen state which Adam brought through his transgression. This condition will continue until Christ comes.

The twelfth question is: "What are we to understand by the sounding of the trumpets, mentioned in the 8th chapter of Revelation?"

Answer: "We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparation and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming."

In this instruction the Lord sets days against thousand years, as days, in speaking of the creation and the continuance of the earth during its mortal existence. At the close of the sixth thousand years and at the opening of the seventh, since the fall, the earth and all that remain upon its face will be changed from the telestial condition of wickedness to the terrestrial condition of peace and order. This is the day when the earth "will be renewed and receive its paradisical glory," as declared in the tenth Article of Faith. We are now in the great day of restoration of all things, and the renewal of the earth is the bringing of it back to a comparable condition to that which existed before the fall.

We have more revelation concerning this wonderful change in other revelations. In Section 101, the Lord declares that when the seventh seal is opened, or when the time has come for the new heaven and earth to appear, the veil that covers the temple and hides the earth, "shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together." Then will come the cleansing of the earth of its iniquity, "And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beast of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth shall be consumed; and also that of element (i.e. corrupt element) shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth." The enmity of man will depart; Satan shall be bound, and "there shall be no more death." That is to say, death will be postponed so that the infant shall not die until it is old, and when death comes it will be by sudden change and there shall be no graves. This will be the condition under the renewed earth. Moreover, the promise is made, that when Christ shall come to reign, "He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land." This was the condition in the beginning. Jerusalem and Zion also shall be brought back when the continents unite, and Christ shall reign over his people.

Then will the earth receive its resurrection, for it, as well as man and all other living creatures, was redeemed by the atonement of Jesus Christ from the fallen state. When that day comes, the earth will become the sea of glass spoken of in John's Revelation. This is a figure of speech typifying the earth in its celestial form. The Lord has said that the earth abides the law of a celestial kingdom, "for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—wherefore it shall be sanctified; yea, not withstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it."

When this time comes and the earth is celestialized it will become immortal. All of this comes about through the atonement of Jesus Christ, for he has redeemed not only man and the living creatures on the face of the earth but through his atonement he has also redeemed the earth from its fallen state. Again we read: "As effected by Jesus Christ, it (the atonement) signifies the deliverance, through his death and resurrection, of the earth and everything pertaining to it, from the power which death has obtained over them through the transgression of Adam." (Compendium, Art. "The Atonement," p. 8.)

Also speaking of this condition, President Brigham Young has said: "When it (the Earth) becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compares it, in its celestial state to a sea of glass." (J. of D. 7:163.) He also said: "When the earth is sanctified, cleansed, and purified by fire, and returns to its paradisiacal state, and becomes like a sea of glass, a urim and thummim; when all this is done, and the Savior has presented the earth to his Father, and it is placed in the cluster of the celestial kingdoms, and the Son and all his faithful brethren and sisters have received the welcome plaudit, 'Enter ye into the joy of the Lord,' and the Savior is crowned, then and not till then, will the saints receive their everlasting inheritance." (J. of D. 17:117.)

We discover from the word of the Lord that the earth, like mankind upon it, is passing through various stages of development, or change. It was created and pronounced good. It partook of the decree of mortality coming through the fall. It is now passing through the telestial condition, in which telestial beings predomiante and rule. It will then pass into the "renewed," or restored state, for a thousand years as a terestrial earth and the abode of terrestrial inhabitants. Then comes the end. The earth like all creatures living on it must die. Then it will, like all creatures, receive its resurrection and be celestialized because it obeys its law. Isaiah speaks of the earth's passing as follows:

"Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished." (Isa. 51:6.)

The Psalmist also has written: "I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are throughout all generations.

"Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands.

"They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed." (Ps. 102:24-26. Compare Matt. 24:35; and Luke 21:33; Matt. 5:18.)
