Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, vol. 2 ( 1947)

LESSON FIFTY-SEVEN

Key to John's Revelation (Part Two.)

References

D.H.C. Vol. 1:253-254. (D. & C. Sec. 77.)

Topics

1.The Interpretation of the Beasts (D. & C. 77:2-4. Rev. 4:6-9.)

a.Symbols describing heaven and living creatures. Note 1.

b.The body in the likeness of the spirit.

c.The glory of immortal beings.

d.Meaning of the eyes and wings. Note 2.

e.The four and twenty elders. (D. & C. 77:5; Rev. 4:10-11.) Note 3.

2.The Sealed Book. Note 4.

a.Contents of the book.

b.The opening of the seals.

3.The Mission of the Angels. Note 5.

a.Their power to save and destroy.

b.The keys of the Gospel.

c.The Elias to come. Note 6.

d.The restoration of all things.

4.The Opening of the Sixth Seal. Note 7.

a.The 144 thousand. D. & C. 77:10; 133:18. Rev. 14:1.)

b.The sounding of the trumpets. (D. & C. 88:92-110. Rev. 8-9.)

5.The Mission of John. Note 8.

a.The little book.

b.The gathering of Israel.

6.The Two Witnesses. Note 9.

a.Prophets to be raised up.

b.Testimony and power of the prophets.

c.Their martyrdom.

d.They are caught up to heaven.

Notes

Answer: "They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created."

There are many in the world who have accepted a theory to the effect that man has descended from lower forms of lie; that animals do not have spirits, and that the "ancestors" of man did not have spirits. According to this theory it was not until the evolutionary development of the creature had reached the point where the Lord could put into it a spirit, that the creature could be called a human being, or man. These people teach that the first human being, having just evolved from some lower form, was also a very low type of savage and from this man has developed the highly organized man of today. Those who believe this doctrine and teach that there is a spirit in man postulate the doctrine that the Lord placed the spirit in this man just as soon as he was sufficiently developed to be human. The Lord has taught us that Adam was the first man on the earth; and that he was a very highly intelligent being, even Michael the Arch-angel, who stands next to Jesus Christ in the holding of authority on this earth. He was entitled to come to earth to stand at the head of the human family because of his intelligence and faithfulness in the spirit existence. Moreover, from this revelation (Sec. 77) we discover that every creature has a spirit, and that it existed in the spirit before it was on the earth; the spirit of every creature is in the form of its temporal, or mortal, body. Since this is true, and all forms of life partook of the effects of Adam's fall, therefore they are entitled to the resurrection and shall live again. "And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost for it is the workmanship of mine hand," said the Lord. (D. & C. 29:25.) Likewise the earth, which is a living body, must die "in like manner" as to all other mortal things, and then receive the resurrection. (Isa. 51:6.) The fact that the spirit of every animal, every fish, every fowl of the air, is in the likeness of its body, and that also it was created in the spirit in the beginning, is a contradiction of these unscientific theories which man has inflicted upon a fallen world.

The third question is: "Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes or orders?"

Answer: "They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity."

We are to understand that there will be beasts of various kinds, after the resurrection, in each of the kingdoms, telestial, terrestrial and celestial. It would be a very strange thing for any of the kingdoms to be devoid of animal and plant life. These kingdoms will be very beautiful in their immortal state. Even the telestial will surpass the comprehension of mortal man. They are the creations of the Almighty and therefore they will be perfect in their own sphere, for the Lord creates no imperfections and it is his purpose, according to the divine plan, to make all of his creatures as happy as it is possible for them to be under the conditions of their immortal states.

Answer: "Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge that is, they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc."

These beasts here represented are of course symbolical; so likewise is the description of their eyes and wings. The Lord has promised those who obtain the exaltation that they shall possess great wisdom, and knowledge and power shall be given unto them. The righteous in the kingdom of God, shall be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ as sons and daughters of God, and the fulness of his kingdom will be given to them. We also learn from this revelation and the word of the Lord in other revelations that in the eternities the animals and all living creatures shall be given knowledge, and enjoy happiness, each in its own sphere, in "their eternal felicity." These creatures will not then be the dumb creatures that we suppose them to be while in this mortal life.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "I make this broad declaration, that whenever God gives a vision of an image, or beast, or figure of any kind, he always holds himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure, if God has not given a revelation or interpretation of the subject.

John saw curious looking beasts in heaven; he saw every creature that was in heaven,—all the beasts, fowls and fish in heaven—actually there, giving glory to God. How do you prove it? (See Rev. 5:13.)

"And every creature which is in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever." (Teachings, p. 291.)

The fifth question is: "What are we to understand by the four and twenty elders, spoken of by John?"

Answer: "We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches, and they were then in the paradise of God. It will be recalled that the fore part of John's Revelation contains a charge to the seven churches, or branches of the Church, in Asia Minor. We may judge from what is written that these seven branches were all that were considered worthy of a standing in the Church at that time, indicating that the apostasy had at that time, indicating that the apostasy had at that day become extensive, and each of these branches received a deserved rebuke. The seven candlesticks and the seven stars also have reference to these seven branches of the Church and the seven angels spoken of had to do with these churches, or branches.

Answer: "We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh." (See D. & C. Sec. 88.)

These seven thousand years are the periods of time since the fall of Adam, or the temporal existence of the earth." (v. 6.)

Question eight: "What are we to understand by the four angels spoken of in the 7th chapter and 1st verse of Revelation?"

These angels seem to fit the description of the angels spoken of in the parable of the wheat and the tares, (Matt. 13:24-43 and D. & C. 86:17), who plead with the Lord that they might go forth to reap down the field. They were told to let the wheat and the tares grow together to the time of the end of the harvest, which is the end of the world (Matt. 13:38-39). There are some very interesting prophetic discourses on this by President Wilford Woodruff, delivered on several occasions shortly before his death, in which he proclaimed by revelation that the time had now come when these angels had been loosed and sent on their mission. A portion of his remarks follow:

"What are the signs of the time? Do the Latter-day Saints comprehend them? This is a fast age. The Lord is going to cut his work short in righteousness. Read these revelations, for they contain the history of what is going to pass in the earth. The Lord said to Joseph Smith in the beginning of this Church," (he then quoted verses 5-7 of Sec. 86and then continued), "What is the matter with the world today? What has created this change that we see coming over the world? Why these terrible judgments? What is the meaning of all these mighty events that are taking place? The meaning is, these angels that have been held for many years in the temple of our God have got their liberty to go out and commence their mission and their work in the earth, and they are here today in the earth. I feel bold in saying this to the Latter-day Saints. There is a meaning in these judgments. The word of the Lord cannot fall unfulfilled. If you want to know what is coming to pass, read the revelations of St. John; read the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and these things are at our doors. What is the matter with this nation? Thousand of men striking, mobs rising up and destroying property, and tribulation prevailing! I want to say that you will all find before you are many years older that Utah is a pretty good place to live in.

"So far as temporal matters are concerned, we have got to work and provide for ourselves. The day will come when, as we have been told, we shall all see the necessity of making our own shoes and clothing and raising our own food, and uniting together to carry out the purposes of the Lord. We will be preserved in the mountains of Israel in the day of God's judgment. I therefore say to you, my brethren and sisters, prepare for that which is to come." (M.S. 56:643-644.)

These angels have been given power over the four parts of the earth and they have the power of committing the everlasting Gospel to the peoples of the earth. The fulness of the Gospel was not restored by any one messenger sent from the presence of the Lord. All the ancient prophets who held keys and came and restored them, had a hand in this great work of restoration. There are, we learn from this revelation, four angels unto whom the power has been given, to shut up the heavens, to open them and with power unto life and also unto death and destruction. These are now at work in the earth on their sacred mission.

Answer: "We are to understand that the angel ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the everlasting Gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things."

As previously stated, the restoration of the Gospel did not come through just one messenger, but there are several who came and bestowed their keys of authority and power. The name Elias, is a title. This we have been taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Teachings, p. 355.) Is it not possible, therefore, since so many ancient prophets had a hand in the restoration, that in speaking of the Elias who was to come and restore all things, do we not have a composite picture of several Eliases, rather than one single individual? The angel with the seal directs the four angels holding the destiny of the world in their hands, not to hurt the earth until the servants of the Lord have been sealed. This could not be accomplished until the Gospel was restored and proclaimed to the nations of the earth.

Answer: "They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the sixth seal."

In the period preceding the Millennium, these things are to be accomplished. The seals of the seven periods of time cannot be opened by any other than the Son of God—"the Lamb slain from the foundation of the earth." He alone has the power to open this book and reveal its secrets concerning the history of the earth by each thousand years, since time began. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88, verses 92-116, is more in detail of this time, but we will consider this in this revelation in a later lesson.

Question eleven: "What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel—twelve thousand out of every tribe?"

Answer: "We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angel to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn."

This certainly is a great honor to be one of the 144 thousand who are specially called by the power of "the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth," to bring souls unto Christ. John the Apostle, had the great desire to bring souls to Christ. The three Nephite Disciples likewise sought this great honor and it was granted to them. It is one of the noblest desires that a man can have. It will be a wonderful blessing to those who are called in this great group. This 144 thousand will not be the only ones who worship the Father and the Son, for after speaking of the twelve thousand out of each of the tribes, John records: "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; And cried with a loud voice, saying: Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God." (Ch. 7:9-11.)

Question thirteen: "When are the things to be accomplished, which are written in the 9th chapter of Revelation?"

Answer: "They are to be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ."

These terrible events pictured in the ninth chapter of Revelation are now being fulfilled. Part of this we have witnessed, the rest will shortly come to pass. This is, and will be, in the nature of the cleansing process to prepare the earth and its inhabitants, those who will be fortunate enough to remain, for the coming of our Savior when he shall commence his reign for a thousand years upon the earth. The reading of this chapter with the knowledge that the time of its fulfillment is at hand, should cause all men some thoughtful sober thinking.

Answer: "We are to understand that it was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who as it is written, must come and restore all things."

John as an Elias with power of restoration is yet to come. The little book is symbolical of his great mission in preparing Israel for its return in these last days. At the conference of the Church held in June 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith said "that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." ("Essentials," p. 126.)

Answer: "They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers."

For a very excellent treatise on the mission of these two prophets, attention is called to Parley P. Pratt's "Voice of Warning." See also this chapter of Revelation.
