What Muslims Believe Holy Scriptures apostles and a vision of the end times called the

“Revelation.”

The Only Trustworthy Scripture Inspiration The Christian view of inspiration is that God According to Muslims, there is only one

trustworthy Holy Scripture, the Quran (“a text “breathed” his Word through many people

to recite”). Many prophets before Muhammad (mostly inspiring, rarely dictating). Therefore

were also given Allah’s Word, among them: the Bible reflects cultures as diverse as Abraham’s

Musa (Moses) given the Taurat (Torah), nomadic lifestyle to the royal court of King

Dawud (David) given the Zabur (Psalms), and David. The result is a book of beautiful human

Isa (Jesus) given the Injil (Gospel). However, diversity interwoven with divine unity.

Muslims are taught that all these writings How to Correct were corrupted. Allah appointed Muhammad

corruption. to receive the Quran in order to correct this Misunderstandings

How Muslims Got the Quran The Misunderstandings

( In ad 610, Allah sent the archangel Gabriel Muslims feel sorry that Christians follow a

Jibrail in Arabic) to Muhammad in Mecca, corrupted book and most Muslims avoid the

Saudi Arabia. Over the next 22 years, Allah “sent Bible. Even among Western-educated Muslims,

down” revelations to Gabriel who dictated them the great diversity of Bible versions and

to Muhammad with the command to recite it to translations adds to their belief that the Bible is

others. Shortly after Muhammad’s death in corrupted.

ad 632, his followers gathered the texts of Sura in Correcting the Misunderstandings

different lengths into 114 chapters ( Muhammad did not question the accuracy

Arabic). The third caliph, Uthman, had scholars of the Bible; he criticized contemporary

compile an official Quran, in written form, and Jews and Christians for misinterpreting or

had all other variant texts burned.

The Quran Today The Quran is considered divine in its original not obeying their existing Scriptures. The accusation that the text of the Bible had been

Arabic form, and Muslims memorize and recite it corrupted came centuries after Muhammad,

at a time when Muslim scholars realized there

only in this pure language.

were contradictions between the Quran and

What Christians Believe the Bible. Yet the Quran points to the Bible as truth to obey many times. The text of the Bible is

How Christians Got the Bible better preserved than the writings of any ancient

Followers of Jesus believe the Bible is the author. Furthermore, the discovery of the Dead

authoritative, inspired word of God, composed Sea Scrolls confirmed the reliability of the Bible.

of 66 different books, transmitted through at least

40 prophets, apostles, and holy men. The first 39

books, written before the coming of Christ, are

called the Old Testament. The Old Testament

was written over many centuries by various

authors in diverse cultures using the Hebrew and

Aramaic languages. The remaining 27 books after

Christ are called the New Testament. They were

written in Greek, the dominant language of the 1st

century. The New Testament contains collections

of eyewitness reports of the life and teachings

of Jesus, followed by a history of his disciples

over the next 50 years, including letters from his

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet 3 ISBN 9781890947675. © 2014 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Islam & Christianity

The full-color, glossy pamphlet is a short pamphlet that can be read in 30 minutes or less but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your and compares the basic beliefs of Christians and Muslims. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

coupon code: www.rose-publishing.com . Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com © 2013 Rose Publishing, Inc. Bible Study Made Easy

Permission granted to the original purchaser to print out. It is illegal to sell, email, replicate, duplicate, or post any part of this on the Internet. More than 70 Bible reference charts and PowerPoints® available. Download catalog and sign up for Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com

Christianity, Cults And Religions DVD Bible

Study-Complete Kit

This Christianity, cults, and religions video curriculum

is a sampler kit that includes everything you need to

lead a Bible study or adult Sunday school class on

the beliefs and history of some highly visible religious

groups: Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormonism, Eastern

Religions, such as Buddhism, and Islam.

DVD............9781596364134............$99.99

Also available as a Pamphlet, Book, and PowerPoint®.

Christianity, Cults & Religions

Christianity, Cults & Religions contains a side-by-side

comparison of more than 40 world religions, cults

and sects. Christianity, Cults & Religions is a well-

researched introduction on comparative religions from

a Christian viewpoint.

Book ................... 9781596362024 ...........$14.99

Also available as PDF, and eBook.

Islam & Christianity

Islam & Christianity is a short pamphlet that can be read in 30 minutes or

less and compares the basic beliefs of Christians and Muslims (followers

of Islamic faith) on eight different topics. Using an easy-to-follow, fold-out

Christianity, Cults & Religions

chart format, this bestselling pamphlet helps believers understand the key

Nearly 1,000,000 copies sold! The #1 Cults and

differences between Muslims and Christians. It looks at key issues and

asks, “What Muslims Believe,” “What Christians Believe,” and addresses

Cults & Religions Religions comparison chart on the market. Christianity,

, which can be read in 30 minutes or

“How to Correct Misunderstandings.” With this knowledge, you can reach

less, compares the beliefs of 20 world religions, cults,

out to Muslim, without offending cultural sensitivities.

and new religious groups.

Pamphlet ....................9781890947675 ................$3.99

Pamphlet ............ 9789901981403 ...........$3.99

Also available PDF, Spanish, eBook, Wall Chart and PowerPoint®. Quantity discounts

Also available as a PDF, Spanish Pamphlet, and

available.

PowerPoint®.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
