No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

"It Is Better to Give Than to Receive"

George D. Durrant

George D. Durrant is the author of many books and cassette tapes, including Love at Home-Starring Father; Someone Special-Starring YOUth; The Art of Raising Parents; Get Ready! Get Called! Go!; Fun and Names, or How to Dig Your Family History without Really Prying; Don't Forget the Star; Mother, Our Heavenly Connection; and Tom Trails: A New Beginning (coauthored with Wayne B. Lynn). With his son Matthew he has coauthored two novels: There's an Enemy Sub in Potter's Pond and Keeping Score. A popular speaker, he is currently an institute teacher in the Church Educational System.

Christmas was coming, and each of us first graders in Miss Booth's class had drawn the name of another boy or girl to whom we were to give a Christmas gift. It was to cost no more than fifty cents.

On the day when the gifts were to be brought to school, I arrived early and put my gift for Walt under the Christmas tree. Then I sat in my seat waiting to see who would put a gift for me under the tree.

Bob came in with a big box wrapped in red paper with a large white ribbon. Each of the children hoped that this gift, which was by far the largest one, would be for him. Then Bob shouted, "This big present is for George."

I had never been so happy. The biggest present under the tree was for me! All the other children in the class wished that they were as lucky as I was. I could hardly wait for the end of the day, when the gifts would be opened. Many times that day a boy or girl would say to me, "You are so lucky. I wish I was you. I wish that the big present was for me."

Finally the time came. Miss Booth said, "All right, boys and girls, it is time to open the gifts. We are all so excited to see what is in that large present Bob got for George. So let's start with that one. Bob, would you come up and take your gift to lucky George?"

My heart pounded with excitement. All eyes were upon me. I could tell that everyone else wished they were me.

Bob placed the large red box in front of me. I began to tear the paper away. Then I opened the box. I could see much crumpled-up newspaper. I pulled each of the papers from the box. Then, down at the bottom of the box, I saw a book. I pulled it out and saw it was a coloring book.

Suddenly all of my happiness changed to sadness. I didn't like coloring books.

Then everyone said, "I hope I don't get a coloring book. I hope I get something more exciting than what George got."

Now, instead of feeling like I was the happiest person in the world, I felt that I was the saddest. I didn't even want to watch to see what the other boys and girls received for their gifts. I even felt that I didn't like Bob, because Bob had made me feel unhappy.

Finally the teacher said, "Now for our last gift. It is the gift that George brought for Walt. George, please come up and get your gift and give it to Walt."

As I walked to the front I felt sad. Everyone in the class had received a better gift than I had received. I took the gift to Walt and then I sat down.

A minute later Walt shouted, "Oh, look at this! This is what I wanted! It is a walkometer. You pin it on your belt and it will tell you how far you have walked."

Walt put it on his belt and began to walk around the room. All of the other boys and girls were really excited. One boy said, "I wish I had that. That is the best gift of all the gifts. I wish George had drawn my name."

A girl said, "Next year I hope that George gets my name."

Then Miss Booth said, "George, you sure do know how to give good gifts. Everyone in the class wants to be able to make others as happy as you have made Walt."

Walt turned around and looked at me and said, "Thanks, George, for making me the happiest boy in the class."

Suddenly I didn't feel sad inside. I looked at my coloring book and saw a picture of some pirates. I loved pirates. I wanted to get out my crayons and go to work, but it was time to go home.

As I left to go home Bob shouted, "Merry Christmas, George." I said the same thing back, and I felt that this would be my happiest Christmas so far.
