No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Silent Substitute

Anne Osborn Poelman

Anne Osborn Poelman is professor of radiology at the University of Utah School of Medicine and is the first occupant of the William H. and Patricia N. Child Presidential Endowed Chair Honoring Pioneering Utah Women in Medicine. She is the 1996 recipient of the Rosenblatt Prize, given annually to honor the top faculty member at the University of Utah. An internationally renowned lecturer, Anne travels extensively to share her medical expertise in neuroradiology (the diagnosis of brain and spine diseases). She has written a number of medical textbooks; The Simeon Solution is her first book for a general audience. Anne and her husband, Elder Ronald E. Poelman of the First Quorum of the Seventy, live in Salt Lake City.

Memories are quirky. They can be annoyingly elusive, slipping just beyond our grasp as we vainly try to retrieve some errant thought. They can also be disturbingly evocative, bringing with them a cascade of thoughts and feelings that may momentarily overwhelm present reality.

Memory is also a type of Orwellian time machine: Step into it and years are erased instantaneously as it transports us from the Now into the Back When. Stir in the intense emotions that surround special times and events. Spice memory up with a dollop of nostalgia. Toss in a bit of the child that secretly dwells in all of us. The result? A potent brew that can inspire or depress us, excite or calm us, satisfy or shame us, comfort or disturb us.

Christmas. The very word evokes a flood of memories along with the hope of future salvation.

Christmas. A time for giving. Also a time for rampant greed.

Christmas. A time for family. Also a time that can accentuate loneliness and heartache.

Christmas. A time for joy. Also a time of uncertainty for those who give. Will the offering be accepted? Will it be enough? Or will it be rejected with a disappointed, "Is that all?"

Christmas. For newlyweds, the first big holiday. A time to revel in newfound relationships. A time to plan painstakingly for the perfect gift that will surely surprise and delight a loved one. A time of unspoken anxiety, too: How will we blend two sets of traditions, two sets of expectations? And, yes, two sets of memories.

As our first Christmas together approached, Ron and I somewhat gingerly approached the topic of the impending holiday.

"So," I asked, carefully choosing a neutral subject. "About Christmas. Are there any sorts of special things to eat that you particularly liked?"

Ron chuckled.

"Of course! We didn't have much money when I was growing up and couldn't afford the fancy stuff. But I do remember one Christmas when my mother made Scottish shortbread. I thought it was the best thing I'd ever tasted. Talk about 'melt in your mouth'! I think it took a whole pound of butter. So she only made it once," he concluded wistfully.

I silently resolved to search every cookbook in the cupboard for a basic shortbread recipe, modify it, and then surprise him with a batch.

"What about you?" he returned.

"I was really a very finicky eater. So I mostly remember what I didn't like."

He persisted. "Well, what was it?"

I groaned in mock despair. "Rutabagas! And scalloped oysters!"

"Ugh!" We both made faces and vowed to eliminate those two noisome items from the menu.

Ron grew reflective.

"So what is your most memorable Christmas? Aside from the one we're about to have," he added hastily.

"I suppose it's the time we went to Kansas City to visit Baba and Bill—Mom's parents. I was only six. We drove to Chicago a few days before Christmas and got on the Burlington overnight train to Kansas City. We had two adjoining bedrooms in the sleeper car; each had an upper and a lower berth. Lucy and I shared one; Mom and Dad and the baby—Greg—shared the other.

"I got the upper berth," I continued with a satisfied smile. "Lucy was younger, so they put her in the lower berth. We kids were already dressed in our pajamas when we left Culver, so we went right to bed. I was so excited I thought I'd never get to sleep. But once the train pulled out of Dearborn Street Station, the rhythmic swaying of the cars and the monotonous clackety-clack of the wheels put me right into never-never land.

"When we woke up, we were nearly there. Kansas City's Union Station! It was almost magical. You know: going to sleep one place and waking up in an entirely different one. We had breakfast in the dining car. Pancakes with gooey syrup and lots of butter!" I mentally smacked my lips at the delicious memory.

Ron was momentarily silent. I looked at him expectantly, then it hit me. Traveling on the train—any train—would have been a rare occurrence for the Poelman family. Sleeping berths and tasty meals in the dining car? An unheard-of luxury.

I felt a rush of shame at my insensitivity.

"So," I asked sheepishly, attempting to deflect attention from my gaffe, "what was your most special Christmas?"

Surprisingly, his face brightened. "Oddly enough, my most memorable Christmas was when I was sixteen. The Depression was over—at least officially. But many families such as ours still struggled with its lingering aftereffects. Dad had often been out of work. He and Mom were really anxious about Christmas, knowing there was just enough money for food and other basic necessities. Little—if any—would be left for presents."

Ron shook his head ruefully at the memory of his parents' dilemma.

"They talked with us all, trying to prepare us for a skimpy Christmas. Suddenly, the thought struck me: I could be Santa Claus! Or at least his silent substitute! I'd been working every day after school to help out and I'd managed to save a bit extra. So I asked my parents if they would let me be the Santa Claus this Christmas. I could provide the gifts for my younger brothers and sisters! Without the kids knowing who did it, of course."

He grinned happily. "Mom and Dad were reluctant to accept but grateful. So they agreed.

"I was really excited! I counted my savings and planned really carefully. First I allocated some money for the tree, which Dad always decorated with painstaking care. With great ceremony, he would drape each individual silver icicle and tinsel over its branches until the whole tree shimmered!

"I bought a pretty sweater for teenaged Carol. Toys for Stuart and baby Keith. My younger brother Lloyd was only ten at the time. He didn't talk about it much, but I knew in his heart of hearts he longed for a bicycle. I couldn't afford a brand-new one, so I took my old one to Eldredge's bicycle shop and had them put new tires and pedals on it. They polished and repainted it, put new grips on the handlebars. It looked terrific!

"I could hardly wait, but Christmas Eve finally came. After the kids were in bed, I helped Mom and Dad put the gifts under the tree. I was singing in the East High A Capella Choir and we had a special carol service later that night in the old Douglas Ward. I had some very intense feelings as we sang hymns and listened to the Christmas story read from the book of Luke."

His eyes moistened at the memory.

"When we came outside after the concert was over, it had started to snow. A glistening white frosting coated every branch of every tree. It had an almost magical quality. I walked home alone, wanting to treasure and savor those special feelings. I think I realized, perhaps for the first time, what the real spirit of Christmas is. Being the secret giver filled me with gratitude to our Heavenly Father for his own gift to us, the Savior Jesus Christ.

"Christmas morning, I quietly watched my brothers and sisters come into the living room. Their joy at the unexpected gifts was reward enough. Later on that day I realized—to my own surprise and delight—that I hadn't once thought about what gifts I might receive!

"That," he concluded, "was my most memorable Christmas. I guess it still is."

Tears ran down my cheeks as I imagined the teenaged Ron walking home in the snow, heart filled to overflowing with the joy of giving. It even made me a tiny bit envious, knowing that the kind of sacrifices he and his family made for each other bonded them in a way that even the most closely knit but better-off families may not experience.

Fast forward a few years. Now comfortable with each other's traditions and having invented a few new ones of our own, Ron and I relished the Christmas holidays. One of my favorite Poelman traditions was the annual Christmas family home evening.

This particular year we gathered at Lloyd and Catherine's home for a potluck supper and evening program. By the time all the brothers and sisters, in-laws, children, married cousins and their children, plus a few guests had squeezed in, the house was quite literally packed to the rafters. Happy chatter filled the family room. A blazing fire crackled away merrily, adding to the festivity.

After supper was over, Lloyd called the clan together. Following his brief welcoming remarks, a Christmas hymn and prayer started the much-anticipated family home evening. Then Lloyd stood again.

"This year I thought we might do things a bit differently. Instead of a program, it occurred to us that the children might be interested to hear their parents, aunts, and uncles talk about their most memorable Christmases. Okay?"

After nods of assent, Lloyd suggested that Ron—as the oldest—begin first. Somewhat diffidently, Ron told the gathering about that long-ago post-Depression Christmas. Mostly, he spoke about how he felt.

The children listened raptly, murmuring their empathy.

Each of the brothers and sisters spoke in turn. As the host, Lloyd spoke last.

Obviously struggling with his feelings, Lloyd cleared his throat and began.

"I didn't know about Ron's role in that Christmas. I, too, feel that was my most memorable Christmas. I was only ten years old at the time. Old enough to feel the concern and anxiety of my parents; too young to understand the constant worry of providing for a large family in those difficult times."

He paused, overcome by memories. A faraway expression swept across his face. When he resumed, it was as though ten-year-old Lloyd Poelman was talking.

You could have heard a pin drop in that crowded room. All eyes were fixed on Lloyd as he continued.

"I had a secret wish that Christmas. More than I'd ever wanted anything, I wanted a bicycle. It was an impossible dream. Something that was so far beyond reason I scarcely dared even think about it, let alone hope for it.

"Christmas Eve came. After dinner, we each opened our single gift that was under the tree. Pajamas, of course. It always was; Mom and Dad had to make a practical necessity into a gift. I tried not to cry as we hugged each other and said 'Merry Christmas' as we went off to bed."

The ten-year-old Lloyd's face was bleak as he struggled bravely to keep his disappointment from showing.

"Dad always got up first on Christmas morning. He would stoke the fire and turn the tree lights on. Then, and only then, were we allowed to come into the living room. I knew in my heart of hearts that Santa hadn't come. The floor under the tree would be as barren as it had been the night before. But I wanted to be a 'good scout,' so I straightened up my new pajamas and trooped in with the rest.

"And when I walked in, I rubbed my eyes in disbelief. There—there, right under the tree—was the biggest, most beautiful shiny bicycle I'd ever seen! And it had a great big tag on it that just said, 'LLOYD'!"

He gulped back a sob, his voice still thick with wonder. There wasn't a dry eye as everyone crowded around to hug Lloyd. Hug each other. Hug anyone in the room, for that matter. Forty plus years later, Lloyd's story created an unforgettable Christmas for our entire family. We still talk about it, one of our most cherished Christmas memories.

(P.S. In case you want the shortbread recipe, here it is. It's been called "to die for." Maybe it is, given the cholesterol that lurks in every bite.)

Annie's Shortbreads

Cream together:

1 C granulated white sugar

1 C butter (the better the quality, the better the product)

Add 3 C unbleached white flour.

Roll out on a cookie sheet to about 3/8" thickness. Chill in refrigerator until moderately firm. Score dough with a knife into squares. Prick each square with a fork. Chill again until quite firm. Cut along scored lines into squares. Separate squares and place about 1/2" apart on cookie sheets.

Bake in oven preheated to 275Â°F. Remove when squares barely begin to turn golden brown around the edges. Cool completely on racks.

Store in tightly covered container. Frozen, they'll last for several weeks. That is, unless the two-legged mice get into them first!
