No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Long-Lasting Battery

Dean Hughes

Dean Hughes is a full-time author who has written more than sixty children's books, including the popular Lucky Ladd series. With his son Tom, he has written Great Stories from Mormon History and We'll Bring the World His Truth.

When Santa Claus gave me my first bicycle, he left it on the front porch. When I didn't find it by the tree, where I expected it, I had to fight back the tears. But I was all the happier when, after some broad hints, I stepped outside and discovered it—in all its shiny splendor. That was a magical year. But it is not my favorite Christmas memory.

I also think fondly of the first year Kathy and I were married, when I shopped and shopped to find just the right things for her. And I remember some of those wonderful years when our kids were young: like the year little Tom got walkie-talkies and we spent the afternoon trying to think of things to say: "Can you hear me? Over." "Yes, I hear you. Over." "Okay. Over." But those years are still not my favorites. My most treasured memory involves something much more prosaic: a car battery.

Kathy and I were living in Seattle in 1967. It was our second Christmas as a married couple. I was in my first year of graduate school at the University of Washington, and Kathy was teaching at a high school. She was pregnant, however, and she was planning to stop working in the middle of the year. She was making the fabulous salary of $5,900 a year, but all that was soon going to stop, and we had accumulated very little in savings—all of which had to go toward my next tuition. We were trying to squeeze our budget to the absolute limit, and that meant that Christmas had to be very simple, so we shopped wisely for our families ("cheaply" is probably the more accurate word), and we agreed to give each other almost nothing.

Kathy was in desperate need of clothes, and I had bought her a psychedelic maternity dress that was ugly even by the standards of the sixties. (For some reason, it was on sale.) She had made herself a couple of outfits, and she had to get by with just those few options. There was simply no more blood in the turnip.

One day Kathy was cooking a pot of chili for a ward dinner, and she sent me to buy some of the ingredients. One of the items was "one large onion." At the grocery store, I happened to discover the largest onion I had ever seen—the size of a cantaloupe—and I thought it would be funny to bring it home. But it cost 38 cents. I debated, and then decided to splurge. Well, we both laughed, and we still joke about that "one large onion," but the point is, I really gave the expense serious thought. We were trying to get by on ten dollars a week for groceries, and 38 cents was a fair hunk of that.

Kathy would take the car to school each day. I carpooled with some students in our apartment building. And, by the way, our apartment was a real dump. The bathroom was filled with disgusting aromas, and poor Kathy, with morning sickness, would have to face that chamber of horrors every day. But one snowy morning about a week before Christmas, she held her breath long enough to get ready and then walked out to the car, turned the ignition key, and got no response. She somehow found a ride to school, but I was left to see what I could do about the car.

In the next little while I checked around for some jumper cables and found none. I was in a hurry because I had a class that morning, and so I came up with the idea of removing the battery, carrying it to a nearby gas station, and leaving it to be charged. All was going well with that plan until I was striding down the street and slipped on some ice. As I swan-dived toward the sidewalk, I tried to keep the battery from landing first. I hammered my elbows, but still the sacrifice was not enough: the battery struck the pavement. I thought it was all right for a moment, but then I saw a crack in the casing.

I can still remember how ill I felt at that moment. My bruised elbows would heal themselves, but a battery is less resilient. I was quite certain the thing wouldn't take a charge now, and I was running out of time, so I decided I better catch my ride to school and worry about the car later.

What a day I had! I concluded that I would have to buy a new battery, and I estimated the cost at about twenty-five dollars. But it might as well have been twenty-five hundred. We simply didn't have any extra money. Even worse was knowing that it was my fault and I would have to tell Kathy what a dumb thing I'd done. You have to understand that I'm not usually a klutz about falling down, but when it comes to mechanical things, I was—and am—a poor excuse for a "provider." I never felt it more than I did that day.

Somewhere in the course of that morning, however, I thought of Don Gessel. Don and his wife, Elaine, had more or less adopted us at the time we had arrived in Seattle. We knew a relative of theirs in Ogden—and with no more motivation than that, the Gessels began to invite us to dinner and to look after us. On a few occasions Don had kept our dear old Mercury Comet operating. He had once worked as an auto mechanic, and he had all the right equipment in his garage. Out of pity for our financial plight, he had repaired our car and charged us only the price of the parts.

It's important to understand Don. He was wonderfully helpful, but he could also be rather—well, "gruff" is too strong a word and "terse" sounds a little too sophisticated. He was certainly "direct." And he asked those questions my dad had always posed: "How long have you been running around on that low tire? You're going to ruin it."

I would look at the tire with considerable surprise and mumble that I was sure it must have gone down overnight—since I tried to be careful about such things. But in my heart of hearts, I knew that I rarely thought to check.

"Don't you ever change your oil?" "Do you know you have a tail-light out?" These were hard questions for me, however appropriate, and I was always afraid of people like my dad—and Don—who asked me such things. All the same, I decided to call Don when I got home that day. Maybe there was some way to patch a cracked battery, or maybe a crack didn't matter all that much—as long as nothing leaked out. What did I know? I only knew that Don would know.

I had to break the news to Kathy that night, and she was as sick as I was—but nice about it. And then I called Don. "It's probably shot," he told me, "but bring it out and I'll try to give it a charge." The problem was, I had no way to get it to his house. "Well, I'll tell you what," he said. "I think I've got a battery that might fit your car. I'll drive over and put it in, and you can get by with that for now. Then I'll see how bad you smashed up your own battery."

When he arrived, he teased me a little about the nosedive I had taken, but otherwise he was pretty lenient on a guy who had done something that stupid. I told him I would come out the next night and check on the battery. "You're coming out for Christmas dinner, aren't you?" he asked, and I told him we were. "Well, don't worry about it until then." So that gave me a few days—a little reprieve before I had to figure out a way to come up with the money that we didn't have.

Have you ever prayed for a car battery? I prayed for a sump pump once, in the middle of a terrible storm, and the pump was healed. But that was later. Even back then, however, I had no doubt that God could make that battery well, and I could think of no other way to solve the problem. I was certainly better at praying than I was at fixing, and so I prayed every day until Christmas that somehow a miracle would happen. By the time I walked into the Gessels' home on Christmas Day, I was saying silent prayers and hoping to hear that my faith had softened and welded that plastic casing. But I had not been there a full minute before Don said, "That battery of yours is dead. It wouldn't take a charge."

I felt my stomach turn over. I didn't have time to think what to do, but I remember how completely desolate I felt. God had turned down all my requests.

And then Don said, "Just keep that battery that's in your car. That'll be your Christmas present."

This was the miracle. My battery wasn't healed, but I was.

For a few seconds, I couldn't get a word out, but when I found my voice, I tried to thank him. But Don didn't like my gushing; he brushed it off and changed the subject. I guess you could say he was "terse" about it.

Kathy and I have been trying to thank Don and Elaine—and the Lord—ever since. We try, especially at Christmas, to notice someone—a student or a family going through a hard time—and give them some anonymous help. Once we even had a chance to buy a young friend a new battery. But we never feel that we have done enough to pay the debt—not even close.

It took me a while to realize that I had actually received what I prayed for. My battery took a charge after all—one that has lasted all these years—even though my casing is dreadfully full of cracks.
