No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

"Losing the Christmas Spirit"

Marion D. Hanks

Elder Marion D. Hanks was sustained as a member of the First Council of the Seventy in 1953. He served in a number of positions as a General Authority, including twice as a member of the Presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy, from 1953 until 1992, when he was given emeritus status. He is the author of A Warm and Gracious Christmas and Gifts from a Mother.

Warren Bainbridge was an able and amiable gentleman, much in the pattern of other respectfully remembered pastors of established religious groups who over the years have been recruited to serve congregations in our predominantly Mormon area. I became acquainted with this choice man through attendance at a weekly meeting of a service group to which we both belonged. We grew to be good friends, and I developed strong affection for him. He was a devoted leader of a large Protestant congregation, and his members, I learned from many reports, greatly appreciated their minister.

"It was not his preaching," one of them explained, "though he was a fine preacher. It was not his counseling skills, though he was a trusted, qualified counselor. It was his love for us! He really loved us, and we quickly learned to love him."

Our first three daughters were very young and the other two children not yet born when the Bainbridges moved from our city to another state to conclude his distinguished career among family and friends there. Over the years they continued occasional contact with us, with particular attention to our eldest daughter, Susan, who was about four when we had a special experience with Dr. Bainbridge. The effects of that occasion endure still with our family, for us like a sparkling Christmas candle lighting a path of memory and motivation in our neighborhood and community and beyond.

It has seemed remarkable to us that no Christmas season in all the passing years has come and gone without recurring tender memories of the Christmas Day worship service our family attended at the Methodist Church where Reverend Bainbridge ministered. The celebration of Christ's advent fell on Sunday that year, and my wife and I decided that after attending our own morning services we would join Warren's congregation to share with our little ones the experience of worshiping with another admired church group on this special day.

It was a decision and a privilege we have rejoiced in through all the intervening years.

We arrived at the downtown church just before the meeting began and were cordially welcomed by assigned greeters at the door. We had not notified Reverend Bainbridge of our coming, desiring to join his group as worshipers rather than as special guests. By the time we arrived at the entrance to the sanctuary he had left his place at the door of the chapel, perhaps to enjoy a few moments of quiet thought and prayer in preparation for the services which he would conduct and preach.

As the meeting began, the Hanks family cheerily joined with members of the congregation as we sang together treasured Christian hymns and stood in the responsive reading of familiar scriptures pertinent to the holy season.

For our children and for us it was a delightful, different, and very enjoyable experience. These many years later our daughters recall and appreciate that good day when we broadened our feeling for and understanding of other people and other ways of worship.

But the heart and highlight of our adventure that Sabbath morning was yet—and soon—to come. The Reverend Dr. Warren Bainbridge approached the lectern to deliver his Christmas message. The congregation stirred in anticipation of this seasoned platform speaker's holiday sermon. He looked first to the right, then to the left to recognize the large congregation, then briefly to the notes on his pulpit, and began his sermon.

The dynamic teacher had no trouble arresting the full attention of the Hanks family that day with his first words: "My dear friend, Elder Marion D. Hanks," he began, "a General Authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, shared with me this week a tender family story with which I would like to begin my message today.

"Susan, the eldest of the three little girls then in the Hanks family, awakened in the night 'upchucking,' as her daddy said, perhaps from a slight overdose of holiday excitement and anticipation mingled with the season's largess of goodies. Rocking in her father's comforting arms, Susan looked up into his eyes and said, 'Daddy, for awhile I thought I was losing the Christmas Spirit.'"

At that moment in his sermon Warren Bainbridge looked full into the faces of those filling the center section of pews, anticipating with a smile the gentle murmurs of appreciative response that came from the congregation.

And also at that moment the pastor's eyes fell on my face. Startled and adjusting his glasses, he blurted, "Elder Hanks, is that you?" Assured that it was I, he continued, wonderingly leaning over the pulpit, "And is that Mrs. Hanks and your children? Could that be Susan sitting by you?" He had our family stand to be recognized and then offered, with tears, a warm and loving expression of appreciation and incredulity that we were there to worship with him and his people in his church on Christmas Day. It seemed to him a thing incredible that a Mormon leader and his family would come and join in celebrating with them during this holiday season the faith we shared and our loving appreciation for the Savior.

He told me later that to his knowledge his church had never had such a visit before. It was not with such thought in mind that we had made the decision to be with Brother Bainbridge and his people. I had come to know the man and his character and integrity, so when the unique opportunity presented itself, we went with no agenda other than to manifest our love for him and for the Master whom he had served with earnest sincerity over a lifetime.

I have thought much on that day since. Perhaps in this generation it would seem less unusual for such an event to occur. Under direction of Church leaders, and often involving members of the First Presidency, there now seems to be a much more intensive intermingling with leaders of other denominations, including a not infrequent joint involvement in serving the indigent, needy, and suffering people in our community and the world. Many Church members express delight in this development.

Community service activity and outreach by Latter-day Saint missionaries across the earth, and widespread participation in Christian service by local Church units and individuals, have made a difference in the perception of our religion by others. Many have not understood the Christ-centered theology and earnest application of Christ's instruction and example which are the foundation of the Church and its people.

For us, nothing is more fundamental in our faith than the truth that God is the loving Father of all mankind, and that the "first and great commandment, and the second like unto it" (upon which two commandments all other teachings of the law and the prophets hang) are that we are to love him with everything in us, and to love our neighbor as ourselves. Christ died for all mankind, and as a commitment to him and as an element of our religious faith, we must look for and respond to the needs of those about us. As children of God, loving him, we have all his other children as our neighbors, and we have been enjoined to love and serve them. The scriptures teach that our salvation and our happiness depend as much on how we treat other human beings as upon anything else. It is the kind of people we are that really matters; indeed, this is the test of how well we have understood and internalized all that we believe to be true.

For many years, our young Latter-day Saint missionary representatives have given selfless, significant service in the refugee camps of Southeast Asia. Without exception, they have come out of that difficult, dangerous undertaking saying, "This is the most decent thing I have ever done; my life will never be the same again." Faithfully keeping United Nations camp rules, which appropriately restrained denominational instruction from various faith groups and agencies serving in the refugee camps, our representatives taught no missionary discussions, but they accepted the opportunity and responsibility to prepare the refugees to speak English as a second language and to provide the cultural orientation that would qualify them to be received in a third country. Our young people have done the work of Christ and are receiving the pay of Christ. In the peace and pleasantness of their own consciences, they have received the warm spiritual assurance that in service to these, "the least of these [his] brethren," they truly were serving him. (See Matt. 25:40.)

And there have been wonderful outcomes to this honest, patient procedure. One unforgettable and memorable incident symbolizing the sweetness of service in the sobering atmosphere of the refugee camps occurred one Christmas. Our wonderful young lady representatives had presented a Christmas pageant in music and drama telling the story of Mary and Joseph and the Christ Child to a large group of refugees, many of whom had never before heard of it. A refugee mother, with wonder in her eyes and voice, approached the lovely missionary who had represented Mary, mother of Christ, holding a tiny brown baby in her arms representing the Savior, and said, "Why, the story of Mary and Joseph and Jesus is a refugee story, isn't it!"

Joseph Smith once wrote, "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race." (Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed., 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1951], 4:227.) On another occasion he said, "We are to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to provide for the widow, to dry up the tear of the orphan, to comfort the afflicted, whether in this church, or in any other, or in no church at all, wherever [we] find them." (Times and Seasons, March 15, 1842, p. 732.)

In 1978 the First Presidency issued an official statement regarding the position of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints toward other religions. A concluding paragraph reads: "Our message . . . is one of special love and concern for the eternal welfare of all men and women, regardless of religious belief, race, or nationality, knowing that we are truly brothers and sisters because we are the sons and daughters of the same eternal Father."

Our family has been blessed in the remembrance of a Christmas that included worshiping with our friend and neighbors in another church. The surprised delight he and they expressed because we were there out of love and caring has inspired us and our extended family and motivated other, similar undertakings through the years.
