No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Christmas Is Christmas Wherever You Are

Wm. Grant Bangerter

Elder Wm. Grant Bangerter was called to be an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1975 (while still in Portugal) and a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy a year later. He served in the presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy from September 1978 to April 1980 and from February 1985 to October 1989. For nearly ten years, he was executive director of the Church's temple department, from 1980 until October 1989, when he was given emeritus status as a General Authority.

Both before and after I was called as a General Authority of the Church, I was sometimes assigned to live and work in foreign countries. At first, my wife and I wondered how our children would do in new and strange situations. We wondered how we would feel without our home. We soon found that no matter where we went, when we were in the service of the Lord we were not strangers or foreigners but were fellow-citizens in the household of God—and we were "Home."

In April 1974, President Kimball was presiding over his first general conference as the prophet. He announced his intent to open the gospel in areas and countries where we had not previously been able to send missionaries. As the Saints prayed for the doors of the nations to open, the Lord responded almost immediately by unlocking the doors of Portugal. I was called to establish the mission, and I was given four missionaries to begin the work. We arrived in Lisbon just before Thanksgiving. In our group were my wife, five of our children, and the four missionaries. As the Christmas season descended upon us, we became involved in setting up our home in an unfamiliar place and adjusting to the business and legal arrangements of opening a new mission and country.

One of the first orders of business was to establish our living arrangements. We got busy looking for furniture. We had begun by sleeping on mattresses on the floor, but rather than buying expensive bedsteads, I put my carpenter expertise to work and enlisted the help of my family to build box-bases out of plywood for our mattresses. My wife made a matching skirt for each of their bedspreads.

With the missionaries, our family now numbered eleven. Another member family—the Ray Caldwells from Canada, who were serving in the Canadian embassy (he was First Secretary there)—had been holding meetings in their home, which was near to ours. Almost immediately, an employee of the U.S. embassy, Steve Lindsey, found us; and two young U.S. navy personnel surfaced from the NATO offices: John Peterson and Marilyn Dalton.

The climate, while cool, was similar to northern California's with its almost-constant rainy weather. We did our shopping under umbrellas with sloshing water underfoot. In this new land there was no snow, there were no Christmas trees, there wasn't much of anything to embellish the home with Christmas adornments. The nation of Portugal had been limited in its progress under a dictatorship of restraint for fifty years. The revolution that had inadvertently opened the doors to the gospel had removed the political restraints, but there was not much in the economy to excite the Spirit of Christmas. There were no sparkling lights and a very limited number of items for purchase in the shops—although people in this Christian nation emphasized and celebrated the traditions of Christmas in their own unique and enjoyable way.

Our children, aged from seventeen down to nine, embarked on the new experience with no regrets; but as parents, my wife and I wondered how we could make this season a time of celebration and excitement for them. Our new house was bare, the living arrangements were foreign and strange, and we needed something to bring life to the season.

Two days before Christmas we decided that we desperately needed a piano. Our sixteen-year-old daughter, Peggy, played well, and we wanted to sing songs of the season, as well as what we called our "homesick" songs (such as "O Home Beloved Where E'er I Wander" and "Springtime in the Rockies") and some of those special songs we had learned in Brazil, which we could sing to our missionaries and the Portuguese neighbors. These included "Papai Noel" (Santa Claus) and "Noite Feliz" (Silent Night).

We began our search. Pianos did not seem to exist in the stores, but finally we located one place downtown in Lisbon that had a used upright piano. We arranged the purchase and asked when it could be delivered. The manager said, "Maybe tomorrow." Sister Bangerter responded, "No, we must have it delivered this evening." It was already late in the afternoon, but with this insistence the man agreed. We rejoiced. We were finally ready for the holiday. What a happy surprise, a perfect delight for the whole family! It was all we would need in gifts for Christmas.

Our four missionaries came back to the mission home to spend Christmas Eve, staying the night. Two were native Brazilians and two were from the United States. We planned a happy supper to bring them into a feeling of comfort and something like a home. We arranged bedding on the floor to give the elders a place to sleep. The Caldwells also joined us for the evening.

After the meal, members of our family went to their dresser drawers, and the elders went to their backpacks, and we each pulled out a sock to hang on a clothesline we'd set up in the living room. It was a homely and laughable sight Santa would find for his limited offering.

As the evening progressed, three or four young Portuguese boys, each about fifteen years of age, came knocking on the door. One had an old ukulele with two strings missing. We invited them in and listened as they tried to sing a little ditty ("Boas Festas, Boas Festas") while he strummed on the strings. After their song they waited for us to give them money, which we did, along with an offering of something to eat.

That visit reminded us of the caroling we had traditionally done for our neighbors back in Utah, and we suddenly felt the missionary urge to call on and sing to some of our new neighbors! With our family, the missionaries, and the Caldwell family, we visited several of the houses nearby.

We soon discovered that it was a challenge to convince our neighbors to open their homes to us; they assumed that we were another group of caroling boys from town, looking for a tip or a handout. We persisted, however, and they were delighted to discover that we were their neighbors from down or across the street, simply making a call to wish them the Spirit of Christmas.

One neighbor was an official of the Brazilian embassy. As our group entered that home, the family listened to our singing of songs from their homeland that they had not heard for ten years. Tears of longing welled up in their eyes. Across the street was the home of a businessman from Germany. We will never forget the dignity and reverence they displayed—the father, mother, and their young son, all dressed formally for Christmas Eve at home. They seemed very lonesome in their quiet setting, wanting to find something to touch their feelings of home. They wept as we harmonized the three verses of "Silent Night." In return, they sang "Silent Night" to us in German, then expressed appreciation for our offerings of warmth and friendship on Christmas Eve. Somehow, our own hearts and eyes seemed to glow and burn as the Spirit of Christmas stamped an unforgettable impression on our souls.

This never-to-be-forgotten Christmas was much like we'd have had at home, though of course it was modified because of our circumstances. The gifts were surprisingly plentiful. There was a continued celebration of games (including outdoor games on the beach), singing in Portuguese, and visiting and spending time with the elders and the Caldwell family. Throughout the day, we each stored up the inward spiritual force needed to launch us in the pioneering effort of opening a new country to the gospel and beginning our missionary labors in the days and months to come. Though we were thousands of miles from "home," the Lord had us in his palm, touched us, and through us, touched others. We felt that no matter where we happened to live, while we were in his service we always would be "home."
