No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Barney—or the Bishop's Son?

Kris Mackay

Kris Mackay is a freelance writer from Fair Oaks, California. She is the author of five books, including No Greater Love, and coauthor of The Confident You. She has also been published in Reader's Digest and Parade.

My most memorable Christmas? No contest! But unusual as it may sound to you who are unfamiliar with the story, that particular silent night, that holy night—the night that altered my destiny forever—took place years before I was even born. Let me explain.

Katie Marie Dana stood before the bedroom mirror one December evening in her parents' Ogden, Utah, home. Slowly brushing her beautiful, naturally curly, honey-red hair, preparing herself for bed, she paused, deep in thought. Which should it be? Not that she needed to make a decision right away. She was only sixteen, after all. For months now, she and two wonderful young men had been as companionable as The Three Musketeers. Katie hadn't known who she was actually "going with," and up to that night she hadn't cared. When one came to her home, they both came. The trio went everywhere together, not as literal dates, but gravitating together instantly whenever and wherever their paths happened to cross. Like tonight's Christmas sleigh ride, for instance.

Ward leaders had organized the outing for the youth. Katie was the last on the list to be picked up and, quick as a flash, Barney, the newcomer from Norway, and Ray Terry, the bishop's son, scooted apart and made room for her to squeeze in between them. She wasn't surprised. By then a pattern had definitely developed.

Their conveyance was packed. They snuggled in with other happy teenagers on the floor of a wagon bed, sitting on nice, clean straw with plenty of warm blankets to keep out the cold. In preparation, the wagon's wheels had been replaced by runners, putting them close to the ground. It was such fun gliding smoothly and silently over the snow, hearing the jingle of sleigh bells attached to the harnesses of two powerful horses pulling the sleigh, and watching puffs of "smoke" billow from the animals' nostrils, from their exertion in the crisp night air. It was a night filled with magic.

But all things must end, even magical sleigh rides. Back home again, holding the brush momentarily suspended above her head, she wondered for the first time. This arrangement—like the sleigh ride—couldn't go on forever. Who should she eventually choose? They were both so nice. Each had his good points. Ray was taller. He was dark and he was definitely handsome, with the added distinction of being the bishop's son. The brush stroked her hair one more time while she pondered.

On the other hand, Barney was quiet. But he was steady, levelheaded, mature, and reliable in all things. And he also was good-looking, though in a less flamboyant way.

She wasn't consciously attempting to decide then and there, but she remembers leaning noticeably toward Ray. He was more outgoing, more flashy, somehow more exciting to a young girl's imagination. Laying her brush aside and pulling her flannel nightgown over her head, then slipping between the cold sheets of the bed, her subconscious must have been more involved than she suspected, because that night she had a dream so vivid that every detail was as clear to her sixty years later as if it were happening again for the very first time.

In the dream, Katie found herself standing all alone on the back porch. The night was crystal clear. She looked up to see the dark sky laden with brilliant, twinkling stars. Gradually she became aware that she was praying with all the fervor and anxiety of which she was capable, pleading to know which of the two was right for her. In her dream state, she realized that decision was the most momentous she would ever be called upon to make.

Suddenly every star in the sky began falling, swirling, up, down, and around in a dizzying dance. The girl was terrified. Was the world coming to an end before she'd had time to really live?

She watched, horrified, for perhaps a minute, maybe two, barely able to breathe, until the stars ceased their wild, uncoordinated flurry and began to take shape. At last they came together in a long dazzling strip stretching from one side of the heavens to the other, and when they were finally at rest, their light spelled out the name

BARNEY KRISTOFFERSON

Katie has never considered that to be an ordinary dream, but felt it was the advice or will of the Lord. Ray soon dropped out of the race. His mother confided that she had been a little disturbed at this unusual pattern of dating and had told Ray he should either cut Barney out of the threesome or bow out himself. So, sympathetic to the depth of his friend's feelings, he graciously did the latter.

Katie and Barney—my mother and father—saw more and more of each other for the next three years and, in the process, fell deeper and deeper in love. Their first official date was on January 11. They celebrated that anniversary each year thereafter as even more important than the day of their marriage three years later, which was on January 16.

Each week during the winter months they went to Pantage's vaudeville theater to enjoy a play, and stopped afterwards at a favorite restaurant for a snack. In the summertime, they went to Hot Springs for a swim. Sometimes they rode the streetcar up Ogden Canyon to the Hermitage, an amusement park where Wheeler and Ogden canyons branch off from one another. But their favorite outing of all was to Lagoon, another amusement park reached by taking the Bamberger train to a little town called Kaysville. The train stopped conveniently at Lagoon's front gate.

One unforgettable date was scheduled for what turned out to be the coldest, most blustery night of the year. Deep snow covered the ground knee-high, and a strong wind blew the falling snowflakes about, making it impossible to see more than a few feet ahead. And, in those days, Barney didn't have access to a telephone.

Katie, worried for his safety, kept vigil at the window, straining to see him approaching up the street. Her mother said over and over, "Katie, you might as well stop looking. He won't come out on a night like this." But Katie knew him. She knew he would come. He was late, but finally there he was, bent double, almost losing his struggle against the force of the wind. He was late because he had crossed a pasture near his home and twice became disoriented, not able to see where he was going. But he never gave up. His dependability that night was a precursor to their married life.

Theirs was the proverbial marriage made in heaven. As a young wife, Katie worried again when it seemed they might not be able to conceive, but finally, over time, they became the parents of six children (four girls, a boy, and another girl—and I was the third girl of the bunch). They are the grandparents of twenty and great-grandparents of many others—I'm afraid I've lost count. Growing up in their home was a happy time. None of us recalls hearing an argument or an angry word ever spoken between them.

I don't personally remember this, my most memorable Christmas, but I have no doubt that my brother and sisters and I were deeply involved. No doubt we were peeking down between the swirling stars while our futures were being decided that awesome night, and I also have no doubt that we might have nudged an errant star or two in their journey across the sky to form our father's name.

Our beloved Dad was called back to heaven four years ago, passing peacefully in the night, and by now Mother's memory for details isn't what it once was. I can't ask her for the exact date and be sure. I'm not certain that the night the Lord took a hand in the destiny of all their descendants was Christmas Eve on the dot, but I like to think it was Christmas Eve when every star in the heavens moved. At the very least, I know it was during that glorious, sacred season—a season to celebrate not only the miraculous and holy birth of our Savior, Heavenly Father's Only Begotten Son, but also the miraculous birth of our family.
