No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Christmas in New Guinea

Robert L. Backman

Elder Robert L. Backman was called to be a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on April 1, 1978, and he was called to serve in the presidency of the quorum in 1985. He was named an emeritus general authority in 1992. Elder Backman is the author of Take Charge of Your Life and Be Master of Yourself.

My most memorable Christmas occurred during World War II in an unlikely setting—Hollandia, New Guinea. To help you understand what happened, let me set the stage.

Some time before that December, I had returned from the mission field and found employment in an electronic tube factory, where my wife and I worked on rotating shifts. Finally World War II caught up with me. I was drafted into the army of the United States and shipped to Texas for basic training in the infantry. I left my wife, pregnant, at home. Those seventeen weeks of training were very difficult, particularly because the environment was extremely foreign to a returned missionary. Thanks to the companionship of other returned missionaries, I survived basic training. Then I held my breath, wondering where I would be assigned.

At that time, the war was raging in Europe, so many of my fellow trainees were assigned to the European theater. I was surprised to learn that I was headed for the Pacific.

We all received a ten-day "delay en route" before reporting to our embarkation station. I came home to find my wife very large with child, expecting our baby to be born within three weeks. As my ten-day respite came to a close, I hoped I could gain an extension of my leave so I would be present for the birth of our child. With the help of the Red Cross I sent a telegram to the commander of my next station, Fort Ord, requesting an extension. He replied by collect telegram, telling me in no uncertain terms that there was a war on and they desired my immediate presence. I complied, leaving my wife in tears, knowing she would have to deliver our baby without my physical and emotional support.

I reported to Fort Ord feeling I had been cheated out of one of life's great experiences. I was despondent and very unhappy. We immediately started intensive training for combat, my weapons being the heavy mortar and machine guns. Our trainers, all returned veterans from jungle combat, didn't give us much comfort as they told us what to expect in facing the enemy. Their words made me feel even more despondent. I could not perceive of my being in a position where I would be forced to take human life and risk my own.

The day before we shipped overseas, I received a telegram at mail call informing me that my wife had delivered a healthy baby girl. The good news lifted my spirit in one sense, but lowered it as I began to wonder whether I would ever see my sweet daughter—or ever again in this life see my eternal sweetheart. This was to be the last word I had from home for four months.

I shall never forget how I felt as the troop ship steamed out of the San Francisco Bay. I stood on the fantail of the ship watching the Golden Gate—then the shoreline of my country—fade in the distance. I cried bitter tears as we commenced the long voyage across the vast Pacific.

During our voyage, we had to take evasive action to protect ourselves from submarines. We sailed under a complete blackout at night. It was frightening to a young soldier so far from the security of his loved ones and his home. I began to realize that I was headed for war—and that there was a good possibility I would never see my home or family again. I kept thinking to myself that the army would certainly give us more training before we were thrown into combat. It was wishful thinking, a cover for the fear I felt as we drew closer to the war zone.

Twenty-nine days after leaving the shores of America, we finally dropped anchor in Hollandia, New Guinea. It had been such a long, boring trip that we were all happy finally to step ashore, even if we were facing the enemy. Anything seemed better than the cramped quarters, the tasteless food, and the boredom of having nothing to do aboard the troop ship.

By the time we landed, Hollandia had been secured. The bay had become a great supply base for the Pacific war zone. Being replacements, we were marched to a tent city to await our assignments to particular combat units.

The weather was so hot and humid it was very uncomfortable. It rained every day, tropical storms that were like cloudbursts back home. We had to ditch our tents with trenches two or three feet deep to handle the runoff. The climate was so damp that we had to build platforms on which to place our boots or they would be rotted overnight. All of our belongings had to be kept off the ground if we wanted to preserve them. We slept under mosquito netting to protect us from the ubiquitous insect population.

While waiting for our assignments, the replacement troops were treated like expendable supplies. To keep us busy, our leaders formed us into labor squads to clear jungle, build defenses, fell trees, and haul supplies from the ships in the bay to the storage tents ashore. It was hard, dirty, exhausting work in that terrible humidity. And it did nothing to make me feel any better about my situation. I wanted to go home.

As Christmas approached we all hoped for a mail call, but we hoped in vain. I kept wondering what my little daughter looked like, how my wife was coping in my absence. I didn't even know what name had been given to my little girl. It was most discouraging.

One day we were detailed to clear some trees. We entered a grove of magnificent mahogany trees and were handed axes to fell them. As I struck that hard wood with my first blow, the recoil made my arms quiver—while I hardly made a dent in the tree. Since our work was really a project to keep us occupied, no one seemed to care that we did not have the right equipment for the job or made little progress. I stood in awe of those majestic trees that resisted so steadfastly all our feeble efforts to fell them.

Then it was Christmas Day!

I know I was not the only G.I. who hoped our officers would surprise us with a mail call with packages from home. As the day progressed, however, we realized that this was just another day of waiting and working. No mail, no packages, no remembrances from home, no Christmas tree, no lights or ornaments. Nothing! We were granted a few hours of leisure in recognition of the holiday, but that made it even worse. I sat on my cot and thought of home, of my lovely wife and family. I felt bitter that I had been forced to leave all that I held dear to be sitting, uselessly waiting, in a dank, humid jungle on the other side of the world. I wondered what my family would be doing, what Santa Claus had brought them—whether they even thought of lonesome me. Had I been completely forgotten? After all, there was no mail, no Christmas remembrances—not even a card.

I choked back the tears and swallowed the sobs that racked my body. To hide my feelings from my tentmates , I took a walk, hoping to find some privacy where I could be alone with my thoughts.

I was drawn inexorably toward the grove of mahogany trees. Entering the grove, I found a quietness I had not experienced since leaving home. It felt good to be alone without interruption from anyone. Although the grove was very dense, I noted shafts of sunlight that penetrated the branches and leaves. I felt I was standing on holy ground in a sacred grove, like Joseph Smith. I thought of his experience in his sacred grove and the response he received to his plea for help. That thought drove me to my knees. The tears came freely and I pled with my Father in Heaven to help me overcome the feeling of despair, the foreboding that I might not return from the war. I asked for assurance that I was in the right place doing the right thing for that time of my life. As I prayed, I was reminded it was Christmas Day, a day set aside across the world as a time of peace and good will toward all men, even in time of war. My Savior, Jesus Christ, had lived and died for me. He had never wavered in the face of persecution and despair. He knew of his future, the nature of his impending death, yet he maintained his steady course, his grand mission, teaching by his example as well as precept that he would bring his peace to us.

His words came to my mind: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

A comfortable, warm spirit permeated my soul. The darkness left. Fear departed. I felt at peace. I felt I was willing to submit my life to my Exemplar and Redeemer. Whatever he required of me I pledged I would do, knowing that he would guide and protect me until my earthly journey was completed. I knew all was well with my loved ones, and that they would be safe from the world until I could return to their sides.

I don't know how long I remained on my knees in that sacred grove. I do know it was the longest, most sincere prayer I had offered to that date.

I walked out of that grove a different man. I returned to the camp renewed and invigorated. Christmas was real. The birth of Jesus Christ assured me that God, our Heavenly Father, rules; that there is a plan of salvation to guide us through this life and back to him; that Jesus Christ is my personal Savior, who died to save me from my sins, to show the way to live in an imperfect world, to show me how to enjoy happiness in the face of all the opposition the world offers to us.

From that day to this I have rejoiced in being a disciple of Jesus Christ!

That memorable Christmas ended on a very happy note. Our fellow servicemen from the navy brought the entire camp a Christmas dinner cooked aboard ship. It included turkey, yams, cranberry sauce, and pumpkin pie.

Boy, did it taste good!

That memorable experience has made every Christmas since then even more meaningful—as I recall the events of that Christmas Day in Hollandia, New Guinea.
