No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

The Gift-Giver

Janath R. Cannon

Janath Russell Cannon, who served as first counselor to Barbara B. Smith in the Relief Society general presidency, has taught at the University of Utah and written extensively on Church history. A former member of the Tabernacle Choir, she has served as matron of the Frankfurt Germany Temple and on missionary assignments in four continents with her husband, Edwin Q. Cannon Jr. She is coauthor of Women of Covenant.

Christmas of 1938 was not a festive time in Germany. Indeed, the events of that whole year would mark it as one of the darkest in history. On February 4, Adolf Hitler had assumed command of the Third Reich's military machine, which then proceeded to take over the bordering countries of Austria and Czechoslovakia. An uneasy quiet followed Hitler's diplomatic triumph at the Munich Conference in September, where France's Daladier and England's Chamberlain had put the Czechs in Hitler's grasp for the sake of "peace in our time."

That fragile quiet was shattered with the sound of glass being broken across the land on the night of November 19. Using as an excuse the murder of a German diplomat in France, supposedly by a Jew, the Nazis unleashed their war against all the Jews. A young American missionary for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Elder Edwin Q. Cannon Jr. (known as Ted), who was stationed in northern Germany, recorded his shock in his journal:

"All night long there was much disturbance. We awoke in the morning to find the Jewish synagogue burned right to the ground and stores destroyed with the windows broken in. . . . This movement took place throughout entire Germany. In Berlin, President Rees said, they mobbed all Jewish stores. On Kurfurstendamm, the swankiest street in Europe, all of the wonderful stores were destroyed. . . . Jews just disappeared? during the night.

"I can see government's slow strangling process on all sides. . . . One can also see the movement by the churches and the people as a whole to first throw off the Old Testament and then the New Testament even to throwing off Jesus, as he was a 'Jew.'"

Truly, 1938 was not an auspicious year in Germany to celebrate the Savior's birth. Yet in spite of the evil abroad in the land, Christmas was coming. Ted looked forward to it eagerly, for he had been invited to accompany his companion, Tom McKay, to Switzerland, where Tom's father, Thomas E. McKay, was the mission president. Switzerland was an island of peace in Europe's stormy sea; the mission home would be a haven of family love and familiar Christmas joys, a place to gather strength for the difficult year ahead.

But President Rees had other plans for him. A new missionary in the north needed help in his struggle to learn German and overcome homesickness; his companion also needed help. A strong companion for the two of them was the president's solution. Ted's journal reveals no hint of the disappointment he must have felt at the call:

"Brother McKay went to Switzerland to visit his folks there and we said goodbye and I went my way. In Insterburg I stayed with brother Evans and his companion. My job was to help them out in any way I could. I started out by helping brother Evans study German."

Christmas came without fanfare, but not without the Spirit. Ted recorded nothing of church or community Christmas decorations or programs, nor of gifts received or given. But nature's lavish decorating skills were noted, and the gifts he gave to others are visible in his journal:

"On Christmas Eve it started to snow and it was really beautiful. We had a long walk through town in this snow-storm and I had a wonderful feeling. We sang 'Silent Night' and other Xmas carols all the way and had a wonderful time. . . . Monday we went to a little dorf called Sobrost to visit a family Braun. There was a wonderful spirit in the home. We played, talked and ate with them for three days. I slept between two big Goosedown ticks in an ice-cold room. We ate Schweinebraten because they had just killed a pig for Christmas."

The Braun family members were Latter-day Saints with a missionary spirit. They invited their farmer neighbors from all around to a house-meeting with their American guests. Ted wrote about the meeting:

"I read the shepherd verses from Luke's Gospel while brother Braun played 'Silent Night' on his violin—I surely felt the Spirit when I did that. I then gave a speech about Christmas. How Augustus called a census of the whole world, and as Mary & Joseph went to this census, there was at the same time, in a 'world' that was not included in this census, a prophet on his knees in prayer. (3 Nephi 1.) I told of the happening in both hemispheres that night."

Outside, the Baltic wind moaned in the bare trees as the pale horse bearing Death and War galloped ever nearer. But inside the crowded cottage, the candles on a small Christmas tree lit the faces of those who listened attentively as the young missionary spoke. "It was the best speech I have ever given," he wrote in the journal with ingenuous satisfaction—and perhaps a little awe.

A few days later, a journal entry records an even more touching success:

"In helping brother Evans prepare a speech, I started talking about a testimony. I talked [with him] for about three hours and the whole time there were tears in Brother Evans' eyes. We finally ended up that a testimony of the Gospel is the only sure thing that we can stand on in this unsure world. . . . In the afternoon of the same day, he started to read his patriarchal blessing to me but broke down. I took it and read it to him, after which he asked me to join him in prayer. He prayed & then I prayed. . . . We stood up feeling lots better. Bro. Evans was very earnest and will work until he gets the language."

One year later, with all the missionaries either released or transferred from Europe to safer missions, a Christmas greeting reached Elder Cannon in the Canadian mission home from Elder Sterling Evans in Minnesota:

"Dear Ted, Christmas brought back vivid memories of a year ago. I will always be indebted to you; because of me, you missed seeing Switzerland and association with the McKays. . . . Tomorrow I receive my 4th new companion since I've been here! President Broadbent said that he was using me as a trainer of Elders. . . . If I have pleased him by my efforts, it is largely due to the splendid help you gave to me one year ago."

Elder Evans had no immediate need for the German language on which he had worked so hard, but the gifts of faith and testimony he had received were of everlasting worth. He would never forget that Christmas in northern Germany—nor would the missionary who cheerfully gave up his Christmas in Switzerland to help him.

Thirty-three years later, Edwin Q. Cannon Jr. became the president of the Switzerland Mission and spent three Christmases there.

A More Personal Gift

That Christmas of 1939 in the Canadian mission home was also memorable for me, for I too received a priceless gift from Elder Cannon. I was there as a refugee from the French Mission—the last full-time lady missionary to leave Europe, so far as I know—waiting for a companion and a new place to start missionary work. Meanwhile, I helped in the office and was grateful to be part of President and Sister David A. Smith's mission home family.

Canada was involved in the war effort as part of the British Commonwealth; the prevailing atmosphere was a brave "Keep a stiff upper lip." I had grown up hearing that the next big war would surely be the last, as eventually no one would be left to do the fighting. Of course, only a madman would start such a war—and now Hitler had done it! I had been part of the fearful preparations in Paris after war was declared—the blackout, the gas masks, sirens in the night that sent us stumbling down four dangerous flights of curving stairs to the basement shelter. It was a scary time I could not forget.

Elder Cannon had arrived in Canada weeks before me and was diligently pursuing his missionary labors in Kitchener when he broke his leg on Thanksgiving Day. Kind President Smith decided to bring him into the mission home to recuperate. His presence added a surprising amount of cheer to the somewhat gloomy atmosphere. He joked about his heavy cast and awkward crutches as he climbed the two flights of stairs to the elders' attic bedroom. He knelt comically on one knee at morning prayers, with his cast sticking out to one side. He could also be serious. When it was his turn to pray, I noticed with approval that he remembered the suffering people of Europe—especially the Jews. (Two of my best friends in high school were Jewish.)

One evening just before Christmas we all went to a neighborhood movie theater. I don't remember the movie, just the Hollywood cartoon—a grandfather squirrel telling the little ones about the terrible humans who used to terrorize the planet, before they destroyed each other. One of the last scenes printed itself indelibly on my mind: the last two humans, in gas masks and battle dress, rising out of opposite trenches, killing each other with machine guns. Could this be the way the world would end in the last days—and were those days already upon us? It was definitely not a happy thought for Christmas!

We walked back to the mission home through falling snow. There, hot spiced cider and doughnuts warmed us, and lights twinkled on the Christmas tree. The office elders enjoyed their usual good-natured banter. But I sat apart, looking into the little gas fireplace and brooding. Quietly, Elder Cannon came to perch on a footstool beside me; quietly, he put his hand over mine, smiling reassuringly as if he understood my sad thoughts. And suddenly the sad thoughts were gone. Hope and courage seemed to flow from his warm hand. I smiled back.

On Christmas morning we opened our presents. My gift from the mission home family was a book I still treasure: Jesus the Christ, by James E. Talmage. The signatures of the gift-givers are on the front page—headed by "Edwin Q. Cannon, Jr. (Ted)"—my now and forever husband.
