No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Christmas through a Window of Time

Francis M. Gibbons

Elder Francis M. Gibbons served as secretary to the First Presidency for sixteen years under four different prophets. He was called to the First Quorum of the Seventy in April 1986, the Second Quorum of the Seventy in April 1989, and was released as a General Authority in October 1991. He is the author of biographies of nearly all the presidents of the Church, the most recent being Spencer W. Kimball: Resolute Disciple, Prophet of God.

Look with me through a window of time to see a Christmas in another era, a Christmas in southern Utah in 1935. . . .

The Bays loved Christmas. Indeed, they cherished it above all other holidays. Even the Fourth of July, with the excitement of fireworks and footraces, stood a distant second in their feelings.

The reasons for the bias are clear. The father of the family, H. Earl Bay, was the bishop of the Junction, Utah, Ward. His compassionate nature and spirituality imbued his family with a love for the Savior and an understanding of the significance of Christmas.

The mother, Iola Maxwell Bay, was the guardian of the family Christmas traditions. She organized the holiday arrangements, prepared the food, decorated the house and the Christmas tree, and checked to be sure everyone was remembered with suitable gifts in sufficient numbers. Iola had a beautiful round face, set off by rosy cheeks and laughing eyes that threw off sparkles when she smiled. By picturing some false padding, one could easily think of her as the embodiment of an imaginary Mrs. Santa Claus.

The influence of these parents, and the rich traditions the family had nurtured, endowed Christmas with an almost magical quality for the Bay children. Feelings of excitement were generated weeks before the event and lingered afterward like the remembered strains of a beautiful melody.

In December of 1935, Earl and Iola had six children. Two more were born later. The oldest, Helen, buoyant and imaginative, could captivate her young siblings and their friends with fanciful tales. She was an "almost mother" to the younger Bay children—feeding, bathing, and diapering them as necessary. Bernice, bouncy and mischievous, was two years younger than Helen. As a little girl, she could coerce her older sister into doing her will by threatening to let the coyotes get her. Bud, the oldest son, was four years younger than Bernice. When he was a small child, Bud thought he became invisible on closing his eyes. He would feel his way into Earl's confectionery and grope toward the candy, confident he could not be seen. Later he was amazed at his mother's perceptiveness when she knew he had taken an unauthorized swim because his hair was wet and his clothes dry. Mary Lorraine, two years younger than Bud, was the pretty and caring friend to all. Three-year-old Elvon, blond and full of bravado, was prone to wander, unless closely guarded or tethered. And baby Paul was only five months old.

At Christmas 1935, the Bays had felt the pinch of the Great Depression. Earl was pressed to provide for his large and growing family. The income from his job as postmaster was insufficient. He supplemented it with income from several sidelines: He converted a room adjoining the post office into a combined store and confectionery where he sold homemade ice cream, candy, canned goods, and nonprescription drugs; he operated Earl's Auto Camp, which consisted of several rustic cabins he built from materials salvaged from old houses he had purchased and razed; he sold hunting licenses, was the ticket agent for the bus line, and was a representative of the power company; and he pumped and sold Parco gas. Moreover, he was a skilled carpenter whose services were often in demand in Junction and nearby communities. He was a careful craftsman, insisting that everything be plumb, with lines straight and edges smooth. His painstaking habits irritated some customers who lacked his eye for detail and were interested only in seeing the job finished quickly. He never compromised, however, and insisted that the work be done right, even though it required that he devote time for which he received no payment and involved the risk of alienating a customer. "If you don't have time to do it right the first time," he would say, "how will you ever find time to do it again?"

Obviously, Bishop Bay was unable to do all that work himself. He relied heavily on Iola and the older children for help. Except for the carpentry, these duties became a family enterprise. Whoever was available distributed the mail, tended the store and confectionery, rented rooms to tourists, sold bus tickets, pumped Parco gas, issued hunting permits, or received utility payments.

Much of this burden fell on Iola. When added to her other duties as wife, mother, homemaker, and hostess to many visitors (including General Authorities who always stayed at the bishop's home), she had little leisure. The Christmas events threw her schedule into overload.

Earl and Iola began their Christmas preparations early. Lacking surplus money, many gifts were homemade. Earl fashioned many toys and pieces of furniture for the children and the family. A three-wheeled kiddy car, fondly named Freda, was enjoyed by the Bay children for many years. A high chair, now in the possession of one of Earl's grandsons, was constructed to be used not only as a chair, but also as a teeter-totter, a slippery slide, a wheel-less car (propelled by the humming noises of the driver), and, when turned on its side, as a small serving table. He also made major pieces of furniture which are now family heirlooms—tables, chairs, and a buffet. The Bay children remember there was often a faint odor of paint on Christmas morning, since the new toys had not had time to dry fully in Earl's car shed. Meanwhile, Iola added to the cache of gifts by sewing clothes and preparing special candies and pastries.

On the day before Christmas in 1935, the preparations were almost completed. Earlier, the beautiful tree had been cut on the mountain west of town, up toward Puffer Lake. It was adorned with the traditional decorations, and gifts had begun to mound around the base of it. Earl had gone to a nearby town to perform a piece of emergency carpentry, and Iola was happily engrossed in making final preparations. An unexpected telephone call shattered her sense of peace. It was from a friend across the mountain who said he would not be driving to Junction as planned and that he could not give Helen a ride. She had been attending school in Cedar City that semester, living with an aunt and uncle. The thought that Helen would be away from her family at Christmas devastated Iola. She reacted instantly and decisively. "Bud," she called, "go fill up the car with Parco. We're going to go get Helen in Cedar City."

The car was a Model-A Ford, serviceable but not fancy. Eight-year-old Bud was selected to go with his mother so she would have a "man" along in case of car trouble. This flattery seems to have been a subterfuge to mask the reality that Iola wanted to get Bud out of Bernice's hair, since Bernice would be in charge of the family and the Bay compound in her absence.

It was not a good day to drive over the mountain. Snow had fallen several days before, and the unsurfaced road was a conglomerate of ice, snow, and mud. Things became especially treacherous when they left Highway 89 south of Circleville to go westward through Bear Valley toward Highway 91. Iola thought it strange that they passed no oncoming traffic after the cutoff. The mystery was solved when at the junction with Highway 91 she found a "Road Closed" sign. The highway department had failed to post a similar sign on the east side of the mountain.

Meanwhile, in Cedar City, Helen had arisen early, excited at the prospect of going home for Christmas. Perhaps the most ardent "Christmas person" among the Bay children, she had never been away from home during the holidays. She had packed her things and sat waiting for the promised ride, a suitcase at her side. Unaware of the change in plans, she began to worry when her ride didn't show on time. Worry turned to anxiety as the minutes ticked on. She could never quite describe her feeling of relief and utter joy when she saw her mother and Bud pull up in front of Aunt Theresa's house. The old Model-A never looked so good.

They drove home via Clear Creek Canyon north of Junction, which was a longer but safer route. They arrived home in the late afternoon. In the meantime, Earl had returned home and had completed the plans for the annual ward Christmas party in Junction's little chapel. There was the usual appearance of Santa Claus with gifts for the children, caroling, and a Christmas story.

But it was later, in the warmth and glow of the family home, surrounding the tree piled with gifts, that the Bays truly enjoyed the spirit of Christmas. There, as they knelt in family prayer, Earl gave thanks for life's bounties and for the priceless gift of the Savior, whose birth they celebrated.

But that wasn't the end of it, of course. The younger children still anticipated Santa's annual visit to the Bay home. According to tradition, a piece of pie and a glass of milk were left out as a treat for the rotund visitor. Being the oldest child, Helen was privileged to stay up to help retrieve from their hiding place the gifts Earl and Iola had lovingly made, and to arrange them around the tree. Helen ate the treat and left a note, "Thanks, from Santa."

As that Christmas Eve closes, our window on the past closes as well. But that's not the end of the story.

Many of the traditions and the love for Christmas generated in the family of H. Earl Bay and Iola Maxwell Bay have found their way into the family of the writer and his wife, Helen Bay Gibbons. Changes in lifestyle and economic conditions, the writer's abysmal lack of carpentry skills, and personal innovations have necessarily altered the procedures and the format of the Christmas celebration as observed in the Gibbons family.

But one thing has not changed. Helen has ever remained completely dedicated to the idea of giving and sharing at Christmastime, in the spirit of the Savior. This is something she learned in the home of her parents, parents who had little in the way of earthly wealth, but who lavished all they had on their children. And in that giving, Earl and Iola Bay created an example that will endure, for we see much of the same attitude and style in the families of our children. Their children will likely follow the same pattern—the goodness of Christmas, a sweet remembrance of our Savior, passed on from generation to generation without end.
