No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Paul's Gift

Deanna Edwards

Deanna Edwards has a deep interest in music therapy, traveling throughout the United States and to other areas of the world to present workshops to those in the health-care industry and at colleges and universities. She is the author of Music Brings My Heart Back Home, where this story was first published, and Grieving: The Pain and the Promise. A singer, author, and composer, she has recorded eleven albums, many with songs written for people with special needs. She served for three years on the Foundation Board of Directors for the American College of Health Care Administrators and was selected as one of fifty American Heroines by Ladies Home Journal. This story was reprinted with permission of Deanna Edwards, Rock Canyon Publishers, 777 East Walnut, Provo, Utah. (Â©1996.)

It was Christmas Day. An icy wind blew a few of the last brown leaves across the frozen snowdrifts, leaving bare trees to cast a pattern against the cold blue sky. It felt good to be inside where it was warm and cozy, but I couldn't shake the feeling that I was needed at the hospital. I kept thinking that if I found it delightful to be at home with Cliff, the children, and soft Christmas lights, how lonely it must be for some of the patients who couldn't go home for Christmas for even a few minutes.

I called to Cliff, who was in the living room. "Honey, would it be all right with you if I go to the hospital for a while this afternoon?"

After a brief silence, he called back, "Deanna, do you feel you have to go today? Christmas is a family day. Couldn't you go tomorrow?"

I walked into the living room, and his eyes met mine. "Cliff, I don't know why. I just feel there's someone in the hospital today who needs me."

Cliff's voice softened as he sensed the urgency in my voice. "If you feel it's important, then you should go." He smiled. "Just don't be gone too long."

I often visited the hospital, singing to cheer up patients at a difficult time in their lives. This day the hospital was unusually quiet, with only a few staff members on duty. A Christmas tree stood in the waiting room, its drooping branches tied with bright red bows. Most of the patients who were not seriously ill had been released so they could spend the day with their families, and I noticed many empty beds in the rooms as I walked down the hallway on the main floor.

I entered the elevator, wondering where I should go first, and, without thinking, pushed the third-floor button. Room 381, next to the nurses' station, is one I will never forget. It was dimly lit by the fading afternoon sun. Outlined against the window, a man sat on the edge of his bed smoking a cigarette. There was not a sign of Christmas anywhere in his room. No sprig of holly or bright ornament. No Christmas cards or gifts. The only possession he seemed to have in the world was his cigarette. I looked into his thin, gray face and judged him to be in his early sixties. The veins stood out above his temples, accentuated by his baldness. A white hospital gown was draped about his slight form.

The patient's face registered surprise and curiosity when I entered his room, and I could hear the unspoken question, What are you doing here?

"I'm a volunteer at the hospital," I said, "and I thought some of the patients would like to hear Christmas carols. Would you like to hear my favorite, 'Silent Night'?" I always avoided singing songs like "I'll Be Home for Christmas" to patients who could not go home. "Silent Night" created a soft emotional impact.

He listened as intently as I had ever seen a patient listen. When I finished the song, his eyes narrowed and he said, "Do you happen to know the song 'I'll Be Loving You Always'?"

If he had been a physician writing his own prescription, there could not have been a better one than this song. The impact of the words was strikingly real: "I'll be loving you . . . not for just an hour, not for just a day, not for just a year, but always." It was a song of commitment that reflected not just this man's need but the need of all of us to be loved and cared for. As I sang the promise, I became a bit uncomfortable. What if he expects me to love him? I thought.

"I failed this time, but I won't fail next time," he muttered when I finished the song. The words fell like stones in the silence.

"What do you mean, Paul?" I asked. I had caught a glimpse of his nameplate above the bed.

"I failed to take my life," he said simply. "Like I said, the next time I try, I won't fail."

My heart jumped, and I was speechless for a long moment. I had surmounted all the other hurdles—first the needs of long- and short-term-care patients, then the dying patients. But Paul was the first person I had met who had been admitted for attempted suicide. What could I say to him? Intuition told me it would be more important to listen than to talk. I asked only a simple question to open the door: "Why do you want to die?"

He promptly answered my question with a question: "Why should I want to live? I haven't received a card, letter, or phone call from anyone for almost twenty-two months. If I should die tomorrow, no one would cry. I'm not sure anyone would even show up for the funeral."

"Don't you have a family?" I asked, horrified that anyone could be so alone in the world.

"My only son . . . " He hesitated a moment. "My only son was killed in Vietnam. I haven't been able to locate my daughter-in-law and my four grandchildren. The oldest would be seventeen or eighteen by now. I've written to them, but I always receive the same response: 'Moved. Left no forwarding address.' So many times I've wondered what they're doing, and if they're all right."

Paul's eyes suddenly lit up. "You know, life wasn't always this way. There was a time when I was loved. Sometimes those days get very fuzzy in my mind, but music brings the memories back."

Suddenly I remembered the words of a resident I had met in a nursing home in Alabama: "Music—we love it for what it helps us to remember and for what it makes us forget."

"There's a song my dad and I used to sing when we attended a little country church in the Midwest," Paul continued. "Do you happen to know 'How Great Thou Art'?" He stuttered slightly and crushed the remainder of his cigarette in a nearby ashtray.

I strummed the guitar, softly at first, and began to sing. "O Lord, my God, when I in awesome wonder . . . " The chorus was stronger: "Then sings my soul, my Savior God, to thee . . . " A warm, mellow voice joined mine. Paul was singing with me. All traces of stuttering had disappeared. His voice was clear and true. Many patients with speech impairments who cannot remember how to speak in a sentence can sing their favorite songs all the way through. The remarkable thing about Paul was the almost professional quality of his voice.

"You have a beautiful voice, Paul!" I exclaimed when we finished, feeling as if I had just discovered a buried treasure. "Are you a musician?"

"Of course I'm a musician," he said emphatically. "When I was not much more than a kid, I was playing solo trumpet, and I joined a band. I could do anything—hit C above high C without hardly touching the mouthpiece. I could really get up there—bust lightbulbs from the vibrations. Sometimes I played that trumpet till it was white-hot and still heating."

"If you played as well as you sing, that must have been some playing," I commented.

"Aw," he continued modestly, "I sound like an old crow. But I do have a good whiskey tenor." He chuckled to himself. Then he looked at my guitar. "I've been around a lot of hospitals, but I've never seen a guitar in one before. I kind of like the idea."

"Since you're a musician, how long has it been since you've sung or played your trumpet?" I asked.

"I gave up playing long ago," he said. "I haven't really sung for about twenty years."

"Twenty years?" I asked, incredulous. "I can't go five minutes without singing. How did you pull off an absence of twenty years?"

"Well, to tell you the truth, I haven't felt like singing. I've been alone for twenty-six years. In fact, the music brings back a lot of memories. Both my father and my mother loved music. It sort of brings back the good about the past and reminds me of a time when life was worth living. I wasn't always alone, you know. I had a beautiful family. But that was a long time ago."

He lit another cigarette. "I should get rid of these things," he said, looking disdainfully at the cigarette. "They're terrible for your health. The doctor says they're bad for my circulation. Living a long life doesn't mean that much to me, so I guess I've never tried to stop smoking. It's the same with alcohol. After high school I started driving a cab. It was then that I was introduced to alcohol.

"Things went from bad to worse, and I lost one job after another. After I got married I was having so many drinking problems that my wife was going to leave me. Well, I talked her into giving me another chance. We drove out to California to a town just this side of Los Angeles to look at a business that the two of us could run. On the way back there was an accident. My wife was killed. I don't know why I was saved. I used to pray every night that I wouldn't wake up in the morning, because I was so lonesome. I still pray that . . . "

It was Christmas Day, a day when most people were praying for safety, protection, and abundant life. Paul was praying for death. I had heard that the suicide rate soared during the holidays because the celebration of families accentuated the pain of those who were alone. But Paul was not a statistic yet, and I prayed he would not become one.

"Well, I really started hitting the bottle after that," he continued. "My son was staying with relatives by then, and for about a week I drank steadily. I never ate a meal. I drank anything that came along. I wasn't fussy, so long as I could get drunk and stay drunk. That's when I made my first suicide attempt. I took a box of sleeping tablets. Two or three days later I woke up in a hospital. I had had a long sleep, but I was still alive.

"About that time a cousin of mine helped me to get a job at a state mental hospital. I'd been in the medical corps in the army and was the son of a doctor, so I guess it came natural for me. Then I had a stroke. Arthritis and circulation problems also began to set in, and I haven't been able to work since then.

"I moved into an old boardinghouse on the west side of town here in Bloomington, and on the twenty-first of December I decided again to end it with tranquilizers and alcohol. I woke up in this room the next morning, clear-headed but a failure at suicide again. I can't do anything right."

Suddenly a wonderful thought hit me. "Sounds like you did okay when you were working in a hospital," I said casually. "Ever thought of volunteer work?"

"Not really," he said. "I've never done anything like that before."

"Every Thursday we have a sing-along downstairs in the activity therapy department," I said carefully. "We sure could use a voice like yours. Why don't you try it for half a day?" I almost chuckled. I knew what half a day could lead to.

"Do you really need me?" he asked.

"Of course we need you," I retorted. "Why do you think I asked?"

"I still sound like an old crow," he said, "but I guess I'll try it." He tried to sound reluctant, but his words were shining with hope.

The afternoon sun had gone down and it was getting dark. I knew there would be no time to sing for other patients. But that was all right. I had come to the right room.

"Since you haven't had a letter for almost two years," I told him, "I'm going home to write you a long letter, and I'll even bring it to you in person. In the meantime, our volunteer supervisor will come by to talk to you."

I picked up my guitar and turned to leave. I had just reached the door when I heard Paul's voice from the stillness: "Jesus sent you here today, didn't he, for my Christmas present."

"Yes, Paul, I believe he did."

The activity therapy room in the long-term care unit looked different when I walked into it the first Thursday after New Year's Day. The walls had the same colorful posters, and handmade gifts and pillows decorated the shelves. The same residents were sitting around the table, busily occupied. The big difference was Paul, sitting in the midst of them, grinning from ear to ear. I took off my coat, rubbed my hands to warm them up, and sat down beside him. He was almost bursting with things to tell me.

"Ever since you came into my room Christmas Day and got me to singing, things have been starting to click!" he exclaimed. "The volunteer supervisor came into my room last week and introduced herself. She talked to me for about thirty minutes and told me that as soon as I got out of the hospital, she would put me to work. So when the doctor came by on rounds, I said, 'Doc, get me out of this hospital!' He looked at me like I was nuts. He said, 'Why?' I said, 'Volunteer service wants me to go to work.' He said, 'How about today at noon? Would that be soon enough?'"

"That's fantastic, Paul!" I responded. "What are you doing in your new work as a volunteer?"

"Well, I help get residents down from the floors for activities, and I help take them back to their rooms after therapy. I don't take all of them—just my share—and I help get the wheelchairs down again for dinner. I'm tired. It hurts me to walk sometimes, but I don't feel much pain, because I feel like I'm helping somebody else. I used to feel so doggone sorry for myself, remembering what I used to do and what I couldn't do now. It's the thought of 'nothing' that drives people to suicide."

"Looks like you have a lot more to do now than nothing," I observed.

Paul smiled and began to tell me his experiences—how he'd helped a lonely patient named Louie. How he'd helped Harold, who'd become lost on the floor, find his way back to his room. How he'd held the hand of an elderly lady who needed comfort.

Within a year's time Paul contributed seven hundred hours of service to the hospital. He loved all the work he was asked to do, but his favorite day of the week was Thursday, the day of our long-term-care sing-along. After carefully choosing the songs he wanted to sing, he practiced them and then sang out with the confidence of a seasoned performer. He especially loved the old songs: "Let Me Call You Sweetheart," "Down by the River Side," and our favorite, "Ain't She Sweet." To the latter song, Paul would add such embellishments as, "Ain't she sweet, oh, yeah! / See her comin' down the street, oh, man!" No one could sing it as he did.

Paul had tremendous empathy for those who were lonely and vulnerable. Whenever any of us were unable to come to the hospital because of illness, mysterious cards would appear in our mailboxes, always signed, "Get well soon. We love and miss you. Donald Z. Duck." For a while, no one could figure out just who Donald Z. Duck was.

One day in the activity therapy room, Paul was busy helping a resident paint ceramics. "Have you ever heard of Donald Z. Duck?" I asked.

For a moment Paul registered surprise. His grin was sheepish. "How did you know it was me?"

"I had a feeling it was you," I said, smiling. "Why do you do that? Why do you always remember us with these funny notes and cards when we're not feeling well?"

"I remember what it's like to be forgotten," Paul explained. "You see mail come along in the hospital, and they pass it out but skip you. I just decided that's not going to happen to any of my friends."

"The next time you get sick, Paul, I'm going to send you a dozen cards," I promised.

He looked me straight in the eye and said, "I'd rather have you."

There remained the problem of his family. Staff members, residents, and volunteers in the hospital had become Paul's family, but the missing members were still on my mind. Some of us had a birthday party for him and gave him an elaborately decorated cake inscribed "Happy Birthday, Donald Z. Duck." We had a special Christmas party for him in the unit his first Christmas with us, and invited him into our homes for dinner on occasion. But I knew he yearned to be in touch with his daughter-in-law and four grandchildren.

After many long-distance calls and much searching, I still had not located them. I decided to write to one of the editors of the National Enquirer because I had heard they could find anybody anywhere. Not long afterward, I received a letter from Malcolm Balfour, an editor, telling me the family had been located and the editors sincerely hoped Paul would once more enjoy being a part of a family.

I called Paul's family, full of excitement, only to learn that his son had not been killed in Vietnam. He was very much alive. Due to past emotional wounds, still unhealed, he had disowned his father. He told me he did not want to be in contact with Paul—yet he was willing to tell me about the children, about their ages, their talents, and their progress in school.

When I returned to the hospital, I was not sure how much Paul was comfortable with me knowing, so I revealed my information slowly. "Paul, we've finally located your family."

"Maybe my son was not killed after all," Paul said cautiously. "Maybe he was just a prisoner of war."

I knew then that I could tell him everything I'd learned. I also knew it had been easier for him to admit the absence of his son than to admit the absence of his son's love.

When I was finished, he said, "Thank God they're all right. That's all any man would want to know." It was the last time Paul ever talked about his family.

After a year of volunteer service, he suffered a toe injury that failed to heal. He was hospitalized for some time, and then finally the difficult decision had to be made to amputate his leg. But Paul never once gave up. "There are a lot of things I can do from a wheelchair," he said. "I can still help with the activities, shave the male residents, and sing in our sing-along."

Though his volunteer service was more limited after that, he continued to serve until circulation problems damaged his kidneys. He was readmitted to Mennonite Hospital with kidney failure, to the same room where I had first found him.

Paul did not have to die alone. He was surrounded by people who loved him and appreciated all he had done to make life happier for them and for others.

The last time I saw him, he said, "You know that Christmas Day you came into my room? I'm so glad you came, because I didn't really want to die. I just wanted to learn to live. And I have. I've had two of the greatest years of my life. At first I figured you'd run out of my room when I told you why I was in the hospital. Most people think anyone who tries to commit suicide is nuts. But you didn't leave. You stayed and listened and played your guitar. When you walked out that door, every desire I had to drink—or to die—walked out with you. Because you loved and accepted me, I began to love and accept myself. Now I kind of like myself. You taught me to do that."

"No, Paul," I said. "You were the teacher. You taught us so much about living and loving."

He smiled wisely. "I didn't teach you a thing you didn't already know."

In that same bed, in room 381, Paul died a few days later. His wallet contained a faded piece of paper, a poem I had hurriedly written and given to him:

One day a stranger crossed my way Upon the road of life. He was tired of the stony path And weary of the strife. I had no gift of gold Or wreath to give that day— So I gave his heart a song to sing As he went along life's way.

Snow covered all his cherished dreams As he walked through life alone. He seemed to have no special friends— No home to call his own. But God sent him a message clear: He had a work to do. Now he works, he gives, he laughs, he lives, To strengthen me and you.

And even when discouragement Makes other people sad, Paul is there to cheer them up And make their spirits glad. He never stops to count the cost Or think about the pain— And when a friend has fallen down He picks him up again.

We love you, Paul!
