No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

Christmas Eve in Jail

Kurt Bestor

Kurt Bestor is an Emmy-Award-winning composer nationally known for his numerous film scores, television themes, symphonic works, and thirteen music CDs, including his bestselling A Kurt Bestor Christmas.

The first Christmas away from home is always tough. But spending Christmas thousands of miles away from home in a communist country gives new meaning to the word tough.

My first Christmas as a missionary was spent in the Language Training Mission where, after the rare treat of sleeping in until 7:30 a.m. and a morning full of letter writing and scripture reading, we ate a fantastic Christmas dinner. Later that night all the missionaries watched the holiday movie Scrooge and then fell asleep with visions of mysterious Christmas futures dancing in their heads.

Nearly a year later, after nine months of living in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, I had grown accustomed to the difficult language, unique traditions, and quirky government of the land. But, as the Christmas season approached, I suddenly felt like a stranger again. I missed the magical glow of Christmas lights, the sweet smell of holiday cooking, and even the commotion of a crowded shopping mall. Although the Serbian Orthodox Church held Christmas services, they followed the Julian calendar—which meant "Bozic," or Christmas, fell on January 7th—and those who attended church were usually older and certainly few and far between.

The week before Christmas (according to our calendar) was an especially difficult time. No letters had come from home. No zone conferences were planned—if there had been, at least we would have been able to meet with our missionary "family." There were only two Latter-day Saints in the entire city, and they were planning to be with family and friends. Elder Todd Zagorec and I found ourselves very much alone. Then we received a very unique Christmas gift.

In a communist country, where it was illegal to tract door-to-door, receiving the very rare referral was always a thrilling moment. We excitedly opened the letter from the mission home in Vienna, Austria, and began reading.

"Name of Referral: Tomislav Stankovic

"Town: Guca

"Country: Yugoslavia

"Reason for interest: After reading the Book of Mormon, I had dream in which Joseph Smith appeared and told me to join the Mormon church. I would like to know where to find his church."

There was no telephone listed, just the town where this gentleman lived. After consulting our map of Serbia, we found that Guca was a tiny dot outside the slightly larger dot called Cacak. After hurriedly packing a few changes of clothes and some religious pamphlets, we boarded the next train for Cacak. Upon arrival, we boarded a rickety bus for Guca, having no idea who or what we would find there.

As the bus driver announced that we had arrived in Guca, Elder Zagorec and I stepped out of the bus and into a sleepy little village that could have been 1878 just as easily as 1978. We asked a few villagers if they knew Mr. Stankovic and learned that he lived forty-five minutes away, up the mountain. At this point, our "purse and scrip" was depleted, so, just like disciples of old, we headed up the mountain on foot.

We arrived at the Stankovic farmhouse around dusk, exhausted but exhilarated by the fact that we were on the verge of our first baptism. What a perfect Christmas gift! But our expectations were immediately dashed—the little wrinkled man who answered the door informed us that his son, Tomislav, was living in Austria and had been for several years. Our disappointment must have been apparent, because he extended his gnarled hand and invited us in to eat a holiday dinner with him and his wife. The meal was delicious and much needed, but it did nothing to feed our aching spirits.

Then, in typical Yugoslavian fashion, they opened their home and hearts to us, inviting us to spend the night. They insisted that we take their beds while they retired to the small couch and settee in the cramped living room. We gratefully accepted. It was Christmas Eve, thousands of miles from home, and it was as good a place as any to celebrate the Yuletide.

Shortly after my companion and I had settled down for our long winter's nap, our visions of sugarplums were interrupted by a loud rap on the door, after which two Yugoslavian Milicija burst into the room. Startled and confused, we bolted from our beds and nervously watched as these two burly policemen searched our bags. Luckily, most of our religious material was back in our Belgrade apartment. They did, however, look at us quizzically when our Mormon dictionaries and pamphlets were found. I passed up the opportunity to ask if they "wanted to know more" and started to put my clothes on as they had ordered. Using only a few grunts and gestures, they indicated to us that our stay at the "Hotel Stankovic" was over. I'll never forget the look on our host's face as we sheepishly left. I'm sure the topic at the coffee shop the next day was the "U.S. spies caught napping in Serbian village!"

Our forty-five minute walk up the mountain was replaced by an amusement-park-like ride down. Sitting in the backseat of a Zastava (a car designed for two passengers and low gas mileage), Elder Zagorec and I pondered our fate. I remember praying furiously between bone-jarring bumps on this winding mountain thrill-ride.

Finally we arrived in Cacak and were escorted into the police station. After experiencing a hasty search of our belongings by another policeman, we were placed in a small holding cell. The sound of the heavy door closing behind him was deafening. After a long, strained moment, I looked up at my companion and started whistling the theme from Mission: Impossible. Somehow it didn't seem funny to him, and I realized that both of us really wanted to hear the sound of Christmas carols instead of the pounding sound of the jail cell door. The idea of the smells of spicy wassail, fragrant pine boughs, and sweet hot chocolate never appealed so much as they did then. It was the loneliest I've ever felt. Would this be our last Christmas in freedom?

Early the next morning—Christmas morning—the police captain entered our cell. It was no wonder that he was in charge—he looked the most imposing of all the policemen we'd encountered. He took one last look at our passports, glanced suspiciously back at us, then threw them back at us and told us that the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade had vouched for us and that we were free to go.

As we stepped out into the crisp air of the Christmas dawn, the Lord's gift of freedom, taken for granted by a young, impressionable missionary named Elder Bestor, had become a precious gift that I still count as his most prized Christmas present.
