No specific author, Keeping Christmas: Stories from the Heart ( 1996)

"I Was in Prison"

Michael Ballam

Michael Ballam, founder and general director of the Utah Festival Opera Company and professor of music at Utah State University, continues an international operatic and recital career and is a sought-after lecturer and clinician. But perhaps his most important performances are given at the bedside of the elderly, disabled, or terminally ill, or in the classroom as he teaches little children of the wonders of Beethoven and Mozart.

Christmas is a time of miracles. Perhaps the greatest of all is the changing of the human heart.

I became aware of that power a few years ago when I heard a very dear man by the name of Thad Carlson, our stake president, tell his experience of visiting the inmates at our local jail at Christmastime. I was so taken by his story that after his speech I went to him and asked if he would allow me to go with him the next time he went. Of course, my request was made in the heat of an exuberant moment—I didn't really expect that he would take me up on it!

The following Christmas morning at 9 o'clock the phone rang. It was President Carlson. "I'll be by to pick you up in a few minutes," he said. "No, actually, I'll meet you down there." I had no idea what he was talking about. It was not until after he had hung up the phone that I realized he was talking about the jail. I told my wife where I was going, stole away from my family as they were opening presents, and went down to spend just a moment at the jail. I am ashamed to admit I had to look in the phone book for the address. It is difficult to do as the Savior said in Matthew 25—"I was in prison, and ye came unto me"— if you don't even know where it is!

I took with me a plate of cookies my children had made. As I arrived at the jail, having never been inside, I tried the front door and found that it was locked. I was actually relieved and was ready to go back home when a voice, somewhere overhead, said, "What are you doing here? Who are you?"

I explained who I was and why I was there, and then the voice said again, "What is that in your hand?"

I said, "It's a plate of cookies."

I heard a conversation going on in the background, and then the voice said again, "You must leave the cookies there."

I said, "Well, they're just from my children. They made them, and wouldn't it be all right if I brought them in?" I heard some more conversation and then was given permission to bring the cookies and myself through the glass doors.

I proceeded to another set of glass doors and found them locked also. I heard the same voice telling me to proceed forward and to go to another set of doors. At this point, as I was hearing each successive set of doors lock behind me, I became aware of the fact that this was serious business. This was not a common kind of Christmas morning visit, and I was wishing that I was not present. Then a door opened, and there stood President Carlson, beaming, with his happy smile and his firm handshake as he greeted me on a merry Christmas morning.

I walked in to see a very small space that had room for six folding chairs, three on each side, with just enough room for one person to pass between the rows. He said, "There are thirteen inmates here today, the thirteen who were not given leave to go during the Christmas holidays, and they are going to be released in just a moment. Those who wish to will come and hear what we have to say." That plural pronoun loomed out to me. I was here to observe, not participate!

Within seconds I heard the opening of thirteen cell doors, in unison, and expected to hear twenty-six anxious feet coming to greet us, but there appeared to be no sound coming from the cells. Again I was relieved and ready to return home. Then I became aware of one young man coming down the hall. I was stunned beyond belief as I looked at him. Somehow I expected that all prisoners in our local jail would resemble a grizzled Humphrey Bogart or Edward G. Robinson. Instead I saw a young man with beautiful black hair, institutional attire of "hunter orange" color and slippers, and a countenance I couldn't see because he was looking at the floor. As he approached President Carlson he was met with "Good morning! Merry Christmas!" and a proffered handshake. The young man refused the handshake, looked President Carlson in the eyes and said, "Oh, yeah? Exactly what's good about it? What's merry about this Christmas?"

President Carlson said, "It's a beautiful morning with a skiff of snow on the ground sparkling like diamonds."

The young inmate replied in an angry tone, "That's great, man. You come here and tell me what it's like out there. Have you noticed I'm in here? That's great!"

President Carlson answered in a loving tone. "If you will come over here and look through these windows at this angle, you can see the snow." The young man followed the directives to where I was standing there at the window, and I was able to view at close range his expression. It began as a look of wonder and longing at the sight, but quickly changed to one of anger and hostility. At that moment he began a profane tirade about why he was there. It was the fault of the lawyers, the judge, the parole officer. Everyone was to blame for his being there, with one exception: him! But at that particular moment I did not feel compelled to explain that principle to him.

At that point, I was sure I didn't want to be there, and I couldn't possibly understand what input of significance I could offer in the situation. Then I saw another inmate walking toward us, looking very much like the first, and then another, making three inmates who had come down to see what was going on. They sat on the folding chairs across from each other and I sat down too, waiting to hear what in the world President Carlson could have to say to these young men on this Christmas morning. The statement he made left me stunned: "Gentlemen, we're pleased to be here this morning, and now Michael Ballam would like to talk to you."

In spite of how much I adore President Carlson, the sixth commandment came to my mind! I had absolutely nothing to say. I hadn't come with a speech, and I certainly didn't know what I could possibly say to these men. As I looked at the inmate across from me, who was so close our knees were touching in uncomfortable proximity, I recognized he was wearing a rosary and a cross. I asked him if he was a Catholic, and he said he was. I told him that I had sung for the pope, which seemed to catch his attention.

"The pope?" he asked.

"Yes," I answered.

He asked me why I had sung for the pope, and where it had happened. I told him it was in the Vatican—that I was a soloist with an organization that went to sing one of Schubert's magnificent masses for the pope, and that a most unusual thing had happened.

The pope knew that we had prepared the Schubert Mass, and we knew he knew and loved those pieces of music, but instead he asked us if we knew any Negro spirituals. I answered that of course we did, and we sang some spirituals for him. The boy asked me why I thought he had wanted to hear the Negro spirituals as opposed to the great work of Schubert that we had prepared. I could only answer by saying that there is something innately powerful about the sound of the black Southern slave. Their lives were circumscribed by bondage and they had only two means of deliverance: one was through Jesus, and one was through death. So they sang about both, Jesus and dying.

As I was explaining this, the thought occurred to me that I knew a song, a Christmas song, in fact, that was typical of a black Southern slave spiritual, and I began to sing:

Sweet little Jesus boy, They made you be born in a manger Sweet little holy child, Didn't know who you was.

Didn't know you'd come to save us, Lord, To take our sins away, Our eyes was blind; We couldn't see, We didn't know who you was.

Long time ago you was born, Born in a manger low, Sweet little Jesus born. The world treat you mean, Lord, Treat me mean, too. But please, sir, forgive us, Lord, We didn't know it was you.

Sweet little Jesus born Born long time ago, Sweet little holy child, And we didn't know who you was.

The feeling in the room changed, and the young man who had been looking at the floor was now looking me directly in the eyes. He said, "I wish I weren't here today. I wish I was home with my kid." Tears came to his eyes and he began to talk about why he was there and how he could get out and how he could change things. I'm convinced that all the speeches I could have labored to write could not have touched this man's heart like this simple song about a blessed baby.

Music is miraculous. It is one of God's most eloquent languages. It cuts through politics, race, religion, education, and economics and speaks to the heart. I know that the Spirit of our Father in Heaven dwells in music, particularly in the music associated with the Christmas season. It was there when the Savior was born. It was there when he died. It will be there when he comes again. What a blessing from him to us here below!
