Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

New England Symposium: 1985 Introduction

The idea of a separate symposium including travel to historic sites for the Church History Department originated with Keith W. Perkins, Chairman of the Church History Department. In the fall of 1984 he discussed the general idea with Dean Robert J. Matthews. He then discussed the possibility of a New England trip with Donald Q. Cannon, who had lived in Massachusetts and Maine for several years. New England was considered for the initial symposium because it is the birth place and seedbed of Mormonism. A committee was selected, which consisted of Donald Q. Cannon, A. Gary Anderson, LaMar C. Berrett, and Milton V. Backman. This committee took charge of planning the program, itinerary, travel and housing. The committee considered holding the symposium in April, when there was more time, but decided that it might be too cold in New England. Therefore, the weekend between Spring and Summer term was selected. (21-25 June 1985)

A smaller group, twelve people, went ahead of the main party and traveled to the Fox Islands. This group flew from Salt Lake to Boston via Chicago on Wednesday 19 June 1985. Arriving in Boston in the afternoon, they rented a van and drove to Portland, Maine via the North Shore of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. During the evening they enjoyed a real Maine seafood dinner and a tour of the greater Portland area.

On the Thursday 20 June they traveled from Portland to Rockland, Maine. Following lunch they traveled by ferry from Rockland to North Haven. This island was one of the Fox Islands, where Wilford Woodruff preached in the 1830s. On the island the company had the privilege of being escorted around the island by Seward Beacom, a friend of Don Cannon's, who had written a history of the churches on the Fox Islands. The most outstanding and meaningful site visited was the Baptist Meetinghouse on Noah Haven. Wilford Woodruff preached in this same church building on Sunday 20 August 1837. It was a special experience to stand where Elder Woodruff had stood and preached.

After spending the night in a charming country inn, the Pulpit Harbor Inn, the party traveled by ferry to Rockland and from there by van to Boston. At Logan International Airport they met the main tour group, who had just arrived from Salt Lake City. The entire company then boarded a Greyhound bus driven by Jack Mitchell, who skillfully drove them through Sumner Tunnel into downtown Boston. Next, came a combination Freedom trail/Mormon trail walking tour of Boston. Don Cannon and LaMar Berrett provided commentary and guide service for this tour. Highlights of the Freedom trail included the Boston Common, the Boston Massacre site and the Old North Church. Some of the LDS sites visited include Franklin Hall, where the Saints held Sunday meetings, Boylston Hall, where Mormon missionaries preached, and the Josiah Quincy statue.

During the evening three papers were presented in the Phillip Brooks House on the Harvard Campus. Richard L. Anderson spoke about "Josiah Quincy," Alan Parrish presented a paper on "Mormons and Harvard." Finally, Richard Cowan talked about "LDS in New England Since 1875."

After spending the night in a Cambridge Motel the tour group began the day on Saturday 22 June by traveling to Lexington. Following a tour of Lexington Green, where the American Revolution began, the party moved to Concord. In Concord they walked to the old North Bridge and then visited a museum and visitors center. From Concord the bus traveled to nearby Walden Pond, where Thoreau loved to spend time. Kelly Cannon provided some information on Thoreau.

Early in the afternoon the company arrived at Topsfield, ancestral home of the prophet Joseph Smith. Five generations of Smiths lived there. In Topsfield, under the direction of Don Cannon, they saw the Common, the Parson Capen House, and the Smith Family Homestead. At the latter place they were the guests of the present owners of the property, Mr. and Mrs. Levi Wade, and had the privilege of listening to Miss June Tilton of the Topsfield Historical Society tell about the Smiths and Topsfield. A short visit to the Pine Grove Cemetery where several Smith ancestors were buried, was followed by a bus ride to Salem, some twenty miles distant.

So many tourists had crowded into Salem on a busy summer Saturday that the bus-driver could not find a place to park. From the bus the group saw Derby Wharf, the old Customs House and Union Street, the street where Joseph Smith and his party rented a house while they were in Salem in August 1836. On that occasion Joseph Smith received the revelation contained in D&C 111 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

A delightful drive along the North Shore brought them to the quaint fishing village of Gloucester, Massachusetts. Time permitted a walking tour of the harbor and a seafood dinner. Here, some of the tour group feasted on lobster for the first time. Boarding the bus, they traveled to Manchester, New Hampshire, where they spent the night.

On Sunday, 23 June Gary Anderson showed the group some the Mormon history sites in Manchester, including the property owned by Asael Smith along the Merrimack River. Asael was the Prophet's grandfather. A scenic bus trip to West Lebanon, New Hampshire brought the party to the site where the Joseph Smith leg operation took place. Presently, there is an A & W Root beer stand on the site of the old Smith home. A short drive along the Connecticut River took the company to Hanover and Dartmouth College Campus, where they toured and ate lunch.

Crossing into Vermont, the group was instructed by LaMar Garrard. He took them to Norwich to see the home where Don Carlos Smith was born on 25 March 1816. Following the highway along the White River they traveled through the towns of Sharon and South Royalton and then proceeded northward to Tunbridge. This picturesque Vermont village is the place where the Smiths and the Macks came together in LDS history. Joseph Smith, Sr. owned a farm in Tunbridge when he met and married Lucy Mack, whose father Solomon had moved there from Gilsum, New Hampshire in 1779. Alvin, Hyrum, Sophronia and Samuel Smith were all born in Tunbridge.

Joseph and Lucy and their family moved from Tunbridge to Randolph. Thus, the tour included Randolph, located twenty miles south of Barre. Joseph Smith, Sr. operated a store in Randolph. Here Lucy became severely ill with tuberculosis and covenanted to serve God if she recovered. While in Randolph Joseph lost his investment in a business in which they planned to sell ginseng in China.

Following a late afternoon tour of the Joseph Smith birthplace the weary travelers enjoyed a delicious meal served by the South Royalton Ward, in their beautiful meetinghouse at the birthplace. After dinner a special evening meeting was held. Three men presented papers. Keith Perkins spoke on the purpose of the trip and the writing of Church history. Ronald Esplin delivered an address on Brigham Young. LaMar Garrard spoke on"The Tradition of Honesty and Integrity in the Smith Family."

The group spent the night in a motel in White River Junction, Vermont. On Monday 24 June they traveled by bus to the town of Marlow, New Hampshire. Gary Anderson guided the party to the Solomon Mack property. Solomon Mack, grandfather of the Prophet, had settled in Marlow in 1761. The Mack name has survived in such designations as Mack Mountain and Mack Hill in Marlow.

In 1773 the Macks moved from Marlow to Nearby Gilsum. Consequently, the tour group traveled to Gilsum, where Gary Anderson escorted them to the Mack property in that place. Lucy Mack, the Prophet' s mother, was born in Gilsum on 8 July 1775.

The scheduled itinerary next called for a visit to Whitingham, Brigham Young's birthplace. Some on board the bus expressed concern about going to Whitingham because they really wanted to have time to visit Plymouth on the following day. A vote was taken and the majority chose to go directly to Sturbridge, thus bypassing Whitingham. Traveling along the Connecticut River in New England it was fitting indeed for a vote of the majority to carry the day-a truly democratic decision.

During the late afternoon the party toured Old Sturbridge village, a recreated early nineteenth century village near the town of Sturbridge, Massachusetts. The buildings and live demonstrations of early American crafts and skills provided fascination and education for all who participated. While this village is more directly related to American history it provided a good background for Mormon history because the buildings and lifestyle represent the same time period of Joseph Smith' s life experience.

During the evening a meeting was convened in the conference room of the American Motor Lodge in Sturbridge, Massachusetts. Three papers were presented. Paul Damron, a CES man residing in Maine, talked about "LDS in Maine." Milton Backman spoke about "The New England Background of the Restoration." James Christianson concluded the evening with his presentation on "Puritanism and Mormonism."

On Tuesday 25 June the company traveled by bus to Plymouth, Massachusetts. They toured the replica of the Mayflower in Plymouth harbor and some of the historic sites in the town of Plymouth and then visited Old Plimouth Plantation, a few miles south of Plymouth. They enjoyed seeing the model village patterned after the place where the pilgrims first lived in early seventeenth century America.

En-route from Plymouth to Boston the tour group presented the bus driver, Jack Mitchell, a fair sum of money as an expression of their appreciation for his skillful driving. He responded by saying that this group exhibited greater unity and harmony than he had ever witnessed in his experience as a bus driver.

As the travel weary party waited for their flight at Logan International Airport they reminisced on the time they had spent together. Someone remarked that the weather had been near perfect-only two brief rain showers during nearly a week in New England. They had also learned a great deal about LDS and American history. Being on site had certainly helped them in both knowledge and testimony.

As they flew to Salt Lake via Chicago they had time to reflect on the New England experience. Their future teaching concerning the Saints, the Macks, the Smiths and New England would never again be the same. People, places and events in New England were now a living part of their consciousness.
