Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

Puritanism and Mormonism: Parallel Paths, Parting of Ways

James R. Christianson

Puritan Mission

Immersed in both the excesses and successes of what they saw as a faltering Reformation, Puritans were convinced that God would not permit their age to miss its destiny. In their view the elect of God, the saints of the latter days, were entering a new land of Canaan "where the world might see a specimen of what shall be over all the earth in the Glorious Times which are Expected." All the perceived shortcomings of the Reformation in the Old World would be remedied in the uncontaminated environment of New England. This inflated sense of destiny so unabashedly proclaimed by seventeenth-century Puritans reflects the conviction that it was their divine mission to fine-tune and perfect the Reformation, bringing it to its ultimate conclusion. As a matter of strategy, God reserved New England as the final battleground out of which Zion, the city of God, would emerge. If this notion of their own importance appears presumptuous, we must recall that in the Puritan view, thousands of years of history pointed unerringly to their day. For the first time since the advent of the Savior, God was establishing his covenant with a people who would "worship him in all his holy ordinances. [^1]-->

"We the people of New England," wrote Peter Bulkeley, "are as a city set upon a hill, in the open view of all the earth, the eyes of the world are upon us, because we profess ourselves to be a people in Covenant with God. Our function is to walk so that all the nations will say, 'Only this people is a wise, and holy and blessed people.' The Lord has purposely kept us few, weak, and poor, so that we may excel in grace and holiness alone." To John Cotton, the role of common consent in establishing the order of the churches and of the Commonwealth brought to mind, "the New Heaven and New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness." Thomas Hooker, another Puritan divine, supposed the day of judgment was at hand, for in the erection of the New England way, "truth had made the last disclosure conceivable within the frame of timeÂ�. Any further discovery would surpass the possibilities of earth and commence the rein of eternity." [^2]-->

Puritan Colonization

During the great migration from 1628 to 1640, more than 50,000 English citizens came to the New World, some of them settling Massachusetts Bay. 21,000 of them were Puritans, distinguished from the Pilgrims of Plymouth (who preceded them by ten years and who were later assimilated by them) in that they were not separatists but were disposed to purify and reform the Church of England. When they left or were driven from England and went into the wilderness, it was with the firm resolve that they would one day return, bearing the kingdom on their shoulders, welcomed by those who would recognize and wish to accept the work that God had wrought. Their insistence on the further reformation of the church and the resultant fears of James I-that they were antimonarchal and that the thirty-nine Calvinist articles of the church which they supported were reactionary-led to their expulsion from high government and university positions, and with increased persecution, to their emigration to the New World.

The 17 vessels that arrived in the New World in 1630 brought 1,500 settlers and initiated the best-organized, best-carried-out colonial effort in the Americas. In all, 298 ships transported people from the Old World to the New with the loss of but one vessel in 1635. [^3]-->

Unlike the Virginia and Plymouth colonists who preceded them, Puritans came as their own masters, paid their own way, and took up land as free men. Theirs also differed from other English colonies in that it was primarily founded for the purpose of establishing a Christian community. As with the others, economics was involved, but no one who has examined the documents would deny that the major thrust of the settlement of Massachusetts Bay was "Puritan desire to realize itself." Like Milton, their leaders "proposed to make over a portion of the earth in the spirit of Christian philosophy: a new church and state, family and school, ethic and conduct-a new city of God was their aim." In the words of one of their leaders, their purpose was to "restore the primitive, apostolic church pure and unspotted by human accretions or inventions." Along with Massachusetts Bay, Puritans colonized Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Haven as centers for the expression of God 's will. [^4]-->

Very wisely, before launching so major an undertaking, the Puritans sent out an advance party of 200 in 1629 to build houses and plant crops in Preparation for the many who would follow in the subsequent years. Even with this and the numerous supplies of food, nails, glass, iron, guns and ammunition, sheep, cows, and goats brought in 1630, the first winter was hard, resulting in many deaths and some defections. Unlike the Virginian and Spanish colonists to the south, the Puritans did not dissipate their strength in search of gold and other mineral riches or in warring with Indians, who sold them land and coexisted with them in relative peace. [^5]-->

Puritan Personality

The Puritans also stood apart from all other colonists in their respect for learning and their emphasis on the intellectual training of the young. As one of them recorded in 1643, "After God had carried us safe to New England and we had builded our houses, provided necessaries for our livelihood, reared convenient places for God's worship, and settled the civil government: one of the things we looked for and looked after was to advance learning and perpetuate it to our posterity." [^6]-->

Not solely a philosophy of faith, Puritanism included a basic tenet that man was to exercise his natural powers, his logic, and his reasoning, in order to understand the Bible, the physical universe, and human relationships. By using his mind, he was doing the will of God. Puritanism taught that man could not be saved in ignorance, and since only spiritual regeneration could put one on the right path in life, the individual was responsible to forge ahead on a perpetual course of self-cultivation. Puritans saw no incompatibility between natural and spiritual knowledge, except that the latter extended beyond the range of the former.

As one modern historian has noted,

The impulse to study Puritans intensively is easily understood. Their history is an important chapter-one of the opening chapters-in the story of the United States. For nearly 100 years Puritans dominated New[England...[and though it], as a living religious tradition, died out in the course of the eighteenth century....elements of the tradition lived on. Until far into the nineteenth century American Literature was mostly New England Literature written by Puritans and their descendants; American colleges were mostly New England colleges founded by Puritans or their descendants, and New England still has more colleges than any section of the country...and Harvard, the oldest and most Puritan of all, is the source of many of the best modern studies on Puritanism. Until quite recently, New England dominated American culture and New England was wholly Puritan in origin. [^7]-->

It is true that Puritans had little use for drama, religious music, and erotic poetry, all of which were popular in seventeenth-century England. Given the rigors of frontier life which allowed the individual little leisure time, they made a choice, and that choice was education. A formal education system, preceding comparable programs in other colonies by a century, together with the vigorous printing of sermons, poetry, and history created the intellectually-charged climate of Puritan society. In fact, no other frontier community on the continent spawned such a rich and pervasive intellectual tradition until the settlement of the Great Basin more than two centuries later by Mormon colonists.

As with other people whose very existence, to say nothing of their successes, remains enigmatic, for many modern historians, discovering the true personality of the Puritans and Puritanism is a venture too often undertaken with shameless subjectivity. Critics of puritanism have described the settlers of Massachusetts Bay as prying busybodies, incapable of enjoying life's simplest pleasures. H. L. Mencken formulated the oft-quoted assessment that "Puritans had a haunting fear that somewhere, somehow, someone might be happy." Others viewed them as the death's head at a wedding feast. Vernon L. Parrington, a noted colonial historian, charged Puritan leaders with being" academic thinkers and schoolmen...whom the free spaces of thought frightened and who felt safe behind secure fences [while making] a virtue of necessity and fell to disclaiming on the excellence of those chains wherewith they were bound. How narrow and cold was their prison they seemed never to have realized." [^8]-->

Though it was generally accepted that the colony should be led by those who stood highest in the sight of God-at least 90 percent of the people were in sympathy with this idea-some characterize the rule of Puritan divines as despotic. [^9]--> Government, education, church-state relations, family life, literature and art, customs, morality, and accepted beliefs all carried the imprint of the Puritan oligarchy. Assessments of the relative desirability of such a social order relate directly to the critic's understanding and appreciation of the role and rights of "inspired" leaders as viewed by those they govern.

How, for example, would the unsympathetic viewer assess the following statement by Mormon Apostle Heber C. Kimball in 1852, speaking of Brigham Young, "I have to do the work he tells me to do, and you have to do the same, and he has to do the work told him by the great master potter in heaven and earth. If brother Brigham tells me to do a thing, it is the same as though the Lord told me to do it"? Or for that matter, how would the words of Brigham Young which followed, be taken: "Let the judges in the county of Great Salt Lake take due notice, and govern themselves accordingly. The same thing I say to the judges of any of the other counties of the territory. Take notice, and govern yourselves accordingly....Now this is my order for the judges to take due notice of; it does not come from the governor but from the President of the Church"? [^10]-->

Sympathetic writers characterize Puritan leaders as having been at worst "Pharisees, rather than hypocrites, since they believed themselves to be actually better than they were." Others picture them as tough-minded realists who, because they were always prepared for the worst and expected no better, were incapable of being disillusioned. Them was nothing lukewarm, half-hearted, or flabby in their makeup. Though life was regularly plagued by difficulties, Puritan leaders approached it with utmost enthusiasm.

In their personal lives, Puritans are described as not opposed to drinking but to drunkenness. They were not opposed to sex but to its abuse. Neither were they opposed to recreation, parties, or sports except as pursued to excess or as they occurred on the Sabbath. They were strong-willed individuals who, in their effort to isolate the will in both religious and secular pursuits, proved themselves capable of "willing" hard rather than thinking hard. They believed there was but one great good, and all other goods were subject to it. Thus a hierarchy of goods was established with the result that some lesser ones were seen as possible evils. Such a mind-set culminated in the persecution of dissenters and in the Salem witch trials: Puritan responses to elements threatening the establishment of an acceptable Zion, free from the influence of the adversary. So firm was their determination not to compromise the cause of Zion that moral, spiritual, and secular life was at times placed on a war footing. This defensive mentality led to some of the excesses in Puritan history.

Politically speaking, the founders of New England came from the far right of the religious spectrum. In contrast to the Pilgrims, the Brownists, the Baptists, and the Seekers and Ranters, who were separatists, they maintained strong church-state ties. They felt the state should protect the church, and the church must in turn support the state. The successful enactment of this philosophy led some to describe the Puritan fusion of church and state as a thing of beauty. Interestingly, Puritans were also strong constitutionalists, clinging to the Protestant doctrine that "the conscience of the individual is the ultimate judge of right." Thus, "man must refuse to obey a law, however legitimately promulgated, which violates his own sense of right." When Ralph Waldo Emerson said of the Fugitive Slave Law which was enacted by Congress, signed by the President, and declared constitutional by the Supreme Court, "I will not obey it, by God," his Puritan conscience was at work. [^11]--> Such a moment brings to mind a similar position taken by Brigham Young, John Taylor, and countless others as regards the courts and the issue of plural marriage.

Puritan Covenants

John Winthrop's statement uttered on board the Arbella in 1630 is probably the most quoted of any in Puritan literature. Near-prophetic in content, it declares, "Men shall say of succeeding plantations, the Lord make it like that of New England: for we shall be a city set on a hill, the eyes of all people are upon us!" The sense that this was a peculiar society, designated by Deity to erect a community more perfect than any that men of the Old World had known, and that it was America's foreordained mission to be an example to all other nations is the substance of America's Puritan heritage. It resounds through the verses of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic" and "America the Beautiful," through the lines of the Gettysburg Address, and in the pledges made by Reagan, Carter, Ford, Nixon, Johnson, Kennedy, Eisenhower, Truman, and Roosevelt to use American strength to keep the free world safe for democracy. [^12]-->

The heart of the Puritan hope for America as a promised land, a place of destiny, was embodied in their concept of covenant, and in their attempt to cement the individual to God, the church to God, and society or the state to God. Though they would never completely let go of it, Puritan theologians distanced themselves from the doctrine of predestination by developing a series or network of covenants. By 1700 ministers spoke regularly of the Covenant of Grace, which embraced an invisible contract between the individual and God; of the Covenant of Baptism, wherein offspring of the saints were bound to the church since it was assumed that, having been born under the Covenant of Grace, they too were the elect; of the Church Covenant; the social Covenant; and even a National Covenant. In effect, all that they were or would ever become was laid on the alter with a covenant and promise. In return they had God declaring, "This is the covenant that I will make on my part, I will be thy God....You shall have all things in me that your heart desires: the covenant again that I require on your part, is, that you be perfect in me, so that though a man be subject to infirmities, yet if he have a single heart, an upright heart, the Lord accept it." [^13]-->

Christ, as exemplified in the Atonement, assumed the Covenant of Works initially given to Adam. Man, made bankrupt by the Fall, is approached by the Lord who guarantees him relief, providing him a way to make good his just debts. Man in turn, demonstrates his recognition of and gratitude for this by developing faith in, believing on, and obeying the Lord. He who does these things binds God by the Covenant of Grace to sanctify and glorify him. [^14]-->

From Abraham, the first to enter into the Covenant of Grace (Gen. 17), to the settlers of New England, there was but one agreement binding God to man. "We are the Children of Abraham," they proclaimed, "and therefore we are under Abraham's Covenant." Puritans heralded Abraham as the "Great Pattern Believer." The origin of the covenant, its historical development, and its culmination were the meaning of history, a thread which bound together the story of mankind. God never does anything for his people unless, "he doth it by virtue of, and according to his covenant." "This covenant must every soul enter into... out of this way there is not life."

Puritan divines had the Old Testament Jehovah declaring:

I will not onely tell thee what I am able to doe, I will not onely expresse to thee in generall, that I wil deale well with thee, that I haue a willingnesse and ability to recompence thee, if thou walke before mee, and serue mee, and bee perfect; but I am willing to enter into Couenant with thee, that is, I will binde my selfe, I will ingage my selfe, I will enter into bond, as it were, I will not bee at liberty any more, but I am willing even to make a Covenant, a compact and agreement with thee. [^15]-->

Man no longer need fear Jehovah's "hidden terrors." To John Cotton, He had "muffled himself as in a cloak" and "no longer hath he liberty to strike." Thomas Hooker declared, "We have the Lord in bands, for the fulfilling his part of the covenant."

Puritans perceived that the covenant, though new and everlasting, was not always the same, "but diverse, according to the ages in which the church hath been gathered." Allowed to grow with time, covenants were first dispensed through conscience, then through prophets and ceremonies, and finally through Christ, through the preaching of the word, and through sacraments. The essential point of the covenant was that it made possible a voluntary relationship between God and man even though man's will was "impotent," and God's grace "irresistible." The grace-induced faith of the individual not only regenerated his faculties, but also enabled man's reason and will to assert themselves, thereby giving free, rational consent to the contract. [^16]-->

In spite of occasional lapses, the covenant was not broken as long as the individual determined to follow the way of Christ through sincere faith and repentance. Being mortal and imperfect, "men, like boiling pots," have occasional impurities of scum that rise to the surface and must be ladled away. In recognition of this difficulty, Puritans were admonished not to let themselves be overwhelmed by their transgression, for "it is a wile of the devil to keep us poring upon our misdeeds; While the soule of a man is daily plodding upon his owne misery, and distempers... wee stop the streame of Gods promise... and wee set open the stream and fludgate of curruption." [^17]-->

Above all, men should never cease striving. Should they think that the Covenant of Grace ensures their salvation independent of their evil actions, they would surely be damned; whereas, if they endured to the end, no sin they committed would be enough to bring them down. Salvation and damnation were entirely matters of will. Hence men were saved for trying, not for succeeding; whereas the unregenerate were damned, not because they failed, but because they did not try. [^18]-->

Under these terms, Puritans believed that "no man was exempted, no man debarred, no man hindered to take grace" unto himself. "God doeth freely will that every soul that heareth the Word of God and hath Christ offered, that they should receive the Lord Jesus ." Any who refused, when dead would approach the judgment bar and hear the voice of God saying, "The time was, when I cryed to you by the minster, and ye would not hear." [^19]-->

On the other hand, those who, upon critical examination of themselves, saw that they were abiding the terms of the covenant both as the fruits were manifest in their lives and as they saw a change wrought in their hearts, would know their election was sure. This change was variously attested to by signs, inner light and dreams, or the bearing of testimony.

Just as Abraham and his children were chosen and brought under covenant first as individuals and later as a people, thereby establishing a compact society, so also the Puritan leaders viewed as one the social and religious destiny of the latter-day children of Israel they were called to shepherd. Government was necessary; otherwise "there would be no living together for mankind" and the world would become "a den of thieves and robbers." The dilemma they faced was how to impose leadership and laws on people whose natural tendency was to oppose and disregard both. As with the individual, so with society or the state, the answer lay in establishing a further covenant.

To do so, Puritan ecclesiastics declared that when Christ took possession of the soul of an elect person, that person conceived a great love not only for God, but for mankind as well, growing to love all people as he loved himself. Out of this love was born the community. Such a condition, created by true children of Abraham, opened to them a fullness of God' s spirit, causing them to inquire after and pursue his ways. Being thus united, they combined their wills to form a community, a city of Zion, wherein men walked in righteousness and prepared for the day of judgment. [^20]-->

In New England, God, acting through human agency, established the state. Men consented to covenants both spiritual and political whereby they agreed to behave "with a dutiful subjection to the eternal laws of God as expounded by those upon whom God had bestowed administrative authority." To this end Winthrop told the people of Massachusetts,

If you stand for your natural corrupt liberties, and will do what is good in your own eyes, you will not endure the least weight of authority, but will murmur, and oppose, and be always striving to shake off that yoke; but if you will be satisfied to enjoy such civil and lawful liberties, such as Christ allows you, then will you quietly and cheerfully submit unto that authority which is set over you, in all the administrations of it, for your good. [^21]-->

Puritan leaders instructed, "Look as in a Common-wealth or Kingdom, none hath the benefit of the Law, but those that subject themselves to the Law: none have the protection of authority, but those that obey it....If wee will have God to be our God to pardon us, and to blesse us, wee must have him a God over us to govern us after his own will." [^22]--> Such was the meaning of church to the people of New England, a people bound together by holy covenants with God and one with another.

Not alone for reasons of dedication did Puritans covenant to obey the law of God, but, as the following statement suggests, for economic advantage as well. "Marke the agreement between us and the Lord: He propounds the law, and saith, that if we will keepe the law, he will bless us abundantly in all things, house and land Then the people they agree and say, 'Content, Lord, whatever thou sayest we will doe.'" [^23]-->

Puritan Ethic

Out of the need, even the demand, for assurance as to when and if a man was of the elect, an emphasis, which in time grew into a monster, was placed on the temporal rewards of righteous living. Convinced by covenant doctrines that God would do his part if they, as partners to the covenant, did theirs, men took up their tasks as callings and with the strength born of near fanaticism, produced an abundance and beyond. This was the substance of what became known as the Puritan ethic.

Puritans were convinced that a man could serve God equally well in his calling as a farmer or merchant as could one called to the ministry. It was this doctrine of the Calling that led many of the rising merchant and capitalist class of the seventeenth century to embrace Puritanism. They viewed their success as a sign of regeneracy. Salvation could be achieved through actions of a disciplined, industrious, frugal, sober nature. [^24]-->

Though some disagree, the general consensus is that there are ties between puritanism and the nineteenth and twentieth-century American business ethic. "Business as a calling, the moral significance of profits and thrift, the moral dignity of work, the distrust of aristocratic leisure and dilettantism, the suspicion that the poor are shiftless and hence ungodly" were all expressions of the Puritan ethic. [^25]--> This ethic, an expression of dynamic individualism nourished by abundant resources in the New World, came into conflict with the Social Covenant which emphasized subjection to God, and as a result, class distinctions and the ethic won out. This ethic of individual responsibility was a primary legacy of Puritanism to the American way of life. From it have sprung a host of merchants, speculators, and industrialists.

In time the holy commonwealth became, as Cotton Mather saw it, worldly like the other New World colonies. Within forty years, easy living, few hardships, and the absence of religious commitment so altered the temper of Puritan communities that hardly a sermon was given that did not sound a note of alarm. Beginning with mild complaints directed at disrespectful hats and an absence of fervor, the list of offenses grew to include

worldliness, fornication, uncleanness, drunkenness, hypocrisy, formality, oppressing of debtors by creditors, usury and profiteering, the wearing of wigs and luxurious clothes, Sabbath-breaking and cock-fighting, rudeness and incivility among the young, and general "degeneracy from the good manners of the Christian world." Horror was piled upon horror when the people wished, like dogs returning to their vomit, to celebrate Christmas, when fortune-tellers could make a living in New England, and when at last there were rumors of a brothel in Boston. [^26]-->

The source of so much untowardness was pinpointed by one wit who wrote

Some doe walk and som runn, It is for Money when all is done.

Since it was God's doing that New Englanders were blessed with wealth beyond their needs, since he liberally provided for them in order to encourage orthodoxy, the clergy faced a serious dilemma. History and now their own experience taught that commitment and orthodoxy were near-certain casualties of sustained economic success. The law of life, it appeared, ran as follows: "A nation reforms with the aid of divine grace; God rewards its efforts with material prosperity; the reformed are then seduced by their security and in three generations the nation is back where it started." [^27]--> The New England clergy could not demand that the people stay poor, for their economic opportunities were specifically opened by the providence of God.

Puritan Demise

God rewarded New Englanders with riches for their holiness. Their land and livestock were both sufficiently fruitful and the ocean yielded up an abundance of cod, providing an economic boon to the colonial economy. But it was success that became the principal chink in Puritan armor. Being human, they were unable to sustain the official doctrine which was that God would prosper those who labored for him and thereby demonstrate to the world how he honored all who obeyed his law. As secular inducements became paramount, God was forgotten, and men consecrated their labors to the pursuit of wealth.

Since men could not be forced to labor for God, and since the doctrine of the church, even when voiced by its most powerful advocates, among whom were Cotton Mather and Jonathan Edwards, was not sufficiently persuasive to redirect the Puritan will, the die was cast. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, having taken a defensive posture because of pressures generated by religious dissidence and by a royal decree which altered the right of enfranchisement from one based on election to one secured by property ownership, Puritanism became increasingly stale, dogmatic, and emotionally unsatisfying. Though advocates defended its position with logic and power, it failed to meet emotional needs, and the people began looking elsewhere for satisfaction.

A major reason for the decline of emotional appeal within the movement was the refusal of the mother church in England to come to terms and purify itself. When this purification did not take place, Puritans were left without hope of ever going home. This failure deprived Puritanism of much of its original vigor, and, since there was no provision for converting such as the followers of Roger Williams, the Anglicans in the South, or the Quakers and Indians on the Frontier, when the Puritans reached the borders of Connecticut and Massachusetts, the movement lost its momentum. Unlike Mormonism, a century later, with the infusion of new and willing proselytes as a source of incalculable hybrid vigor, Puritanism relied on the inbred strength of those covenant generations produced by the 20,000 pioneers who journeyed to New England in the first decade of settlement.

And so, like a stream eroding its banks, the demise of New England Puritanism began to evidence itself within decades of its founding. Its eventual disappearance as a corporate entity during the last half of the eighteenth century was not by consequence or conversion, but by default. Like the Latin language of earlier centuries, once Puritanism no longer served a useful purpose, it was discarded as a living element in a society which formerly fostered it. As an item of history it remains significant and its legacy is undeniable, but as a viable force in directing the course of a specific segment of mankind, it was dead.

Puritanism and Mormonism

There was far too much that was right in Puritanism for its development to have been mere historical coincidence. As instruments in the hand of God, those who initiated the movement and those who made up its masses were like a mountain stream whose trickling origins contained waters fresh from the original snowpack, being a mixture of pure water and windblown and atmosphere-fed impurities. Rushing from the mountains, it swept over eroded banks and, picking up additional waste, and debris, dissipated its strength, eventually being absorbed into the environment. In the process, however, it watered barren ground and deposited rich loamy soils and trace elements that became a fertile seedbed.

Could they have observed the century that followed the demise of the kingdom they initiated, the Puritan fathers would not have been disappointed with the fruits of their efforts. In addition to much that is American, democratic, and constitutional in our heritage, we acknowledge the role they played in conditioning nineteenth-century Americans, especially those with New England roots, in what might be called the kingdom concept. As the Puritan sought God's Kingdom, so did later generations await its coming. A nation of seekers emerged from the Puritan quest for the original Church of Christ.

Though the originally parallel interests of Mormonism and Puritanism diverged, they continued to move in the same general direction. Where Puritanism faltered, Mormonism took root, feasting on the rich heritage of ideas and disposition that had been established by the Puritans.

Like the Mormons two centuries later, the Puritans eagerly put the hand to the plow, but without prophets, prophecy, or keys there was no one to show the way, or unlock the answers, no clear tone to come forth from their sounded trump. The Puritans formed a religious tradition, but had to look back to see where they had been in order to know where they were to go. In the process the Puritans cut a crooked furrow, and error multiplied.

The Latter-day Saint movement went on to become the kingdom of God on earth, but Puritan ideas, Puritan covenants, Puritan commitment paved the way. Both set out to serve God, and both did. Both are authentic; each fulfilled its purpose. They are as alike and as different as the terms Reformation and Restoration.

Puritanism and Mormonism have each had detractors: attention is drawn to the execution of witches at Salem in the 1690s, to repugnant doctrine, and to the persecution of the non-elect who proselyted the Puritan realm; Mormonism has misunderstood beginnings, plural marriage, and the Mountain Meadows Massacre. Each has its excesses, each its elements which, though true, were not understood or appreciated.

Mormonism and Puritanism are among the most studied subjects in American history. There is an abiding fascination with the history and accomplishments of both. For many the two terms have even taken on similar meanings. Samuel Eliot Morison, in his preface to Builders of the Bay Colony, stated well that which, with a change of dates and names, could also be said of Mormonism:

Most of the people described in this book would have led obscure lives but for a dynamic force called puritanism which drove them to start life anew in the wilderness. [The common-wealth which they helped to create was not a large one in their time....The total population was something between 14,000 and 16,000 persons in 1640...] Search the modern world, where will you find another community of like extent and age, containing so many outstanding, pungent individuals as those described herein?... It is not easy to describe these people truthfully, yet with meaning to moderns. For the men of learning and women of gentle nurture who led a few thousand plain folk to plant a new England on ungrateful soil were moved by purposes utterly foreign to the present America. Their object was not to establish prosperity or prohibition, liberty or democracy, or indeed anything of currently recognized value. Their ideals were comprehended vaguely in the term "puritanism," which nowadays has acquired various secondary and degenerate meanings. These ideals, real and imaginary, of early Massachusetts, were attacked by historians of Massachusetts long before "debunking" became an accepted biographical mode; for it is always easier to condemn an alien way of life than to understand it. My attitude toward seventeenth-century puritanism has passed through scorn and boredom to a warm interest and respect. The ways of the puritans are not my ways, and their faith is not my faith; nevertheless they appear to me a courageous, humane, brave, and significant people. [^28]-->

---
Notas:
[^1] Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), p. 51.
[^2] Although public support of religion was eliminated in the South before such action occurred in northern New England, some forms of persecution persisted there longer than in the far north. For a discussion of the relationship of church and state in early America, see Anson Phelps Stokes, Church and State in the United States, 3 vols. (New York, 1950); Leo Pfeffer, Church, State, and Freedom, rev. ed., (Boston, 1967); John Frederick Wilson, Church and State in American History (New York, 1965).
[^3] In this discussion I am using the popular definition of religious liberty that includes the concept that all have the right of free exercise of religion as long as such actions do not infringe upon the rights of others.
[^4] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), pp. 164-70.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 172-75.
[^6] Milton V. Backman, Jr., "Isaac Backus: A Pioneer Champion of Religious Liberty," (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1959), pp. 230-33, 243-44.
[^7] Backman, American Religions and Morrnonism, p. 185; B ackman, "Isaac Backus," pp. 323, 341. For a more detailed discussion of the separation of church and state in Massachusetts, see Jacob C. Meyer, Church and State in Massachusetts from 1740 to 1833, reprint of 1930 ed., (New York: Russell and Russell, 1968). Public support of religion ended in Vermont in 1807, in Connecticut in 1818, in New Hampshire in 1819, and in Maine in 1820.
[^8] Isaac Backus, A Great Faith Described and Inculcated (Boston, 1805), p. 16.
[^9] Herald of Gospel Liberty, (Portsmouth, New Hampshire), June 23, 1809, p. 1.
[^10] Edwin Scott Gaustad, Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), p. 167.
[^11] Backman, "Isaac Backus," p. 285.
[^12] Backman, American Religions and Mormonism, pp. 207-25, 231-32, 238.
[^13] Ibid., pp. 218-20.
[^14] Tunbridge Town Record, p. 188 (December 6, 1797), cited by Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 197 1), p. 106.
[^15] Backman, American Religions and Mormonism, p. 283.
[^16] Francis Asbury, The Journal of Rev. Francis Asbury, 3 vols. (New York: N. Bangs and T. Mason, 1821), 2:102.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 283-92, 308.
[^18] 18. Ibid., p. 387.
[^19] 19. Ibid., p. 393.
[^20] 20. Ibid., p. 419.
[^21] 21. Ibid., pp. 426-427.
[^22] 22. Ibid., p. 427.
[^23] 23. Ibid., p. 388.
[^24] 24. Morison, Intellectual Life, p. 9.
[^25] 25. Higham, Reconstruction, p. 40.
[^26] 26. Miller, The New England Mind, p. 472.
[^27] 27. Ibid., pp. 474-75.
[^28] 28. Samuel Eliot Morison, Builders of the Bay Colony (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1930), p.xiv.
