Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

The New England Background to the Restoration

Milton V. Backman, Jr.

Twenty-four hundred years prior to the restoration of the everlasting gospel, Nephi beheld in vision four precursors to that significant event. While guided by the Spirit of God, he witnessed, (1) the discovery and colonization of America, (2) the American Revolution, (3) the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and (4) the Restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith (1 Ne. 13:12-20; 2 Ne. 3:6-15).

From a historian' s perspective, there could not have been a successful restoration until after the birth of a new nation. Prior to that era, many forces hindered the restitution of all things. In addition to the intolerance and indifference of organized religion, the beliefs of many Americans were out of harmony with Restoration teachings. The field became white and ready to harvest after a religious reorientation paralleled the creation of a new nation. New England, known as a cradle of liberty, was a fruitful region where seeds of political and religious liberty, new patterns of thought, and a fresh religious zeal were planted. During the decades preceding the Restoration, many of these seeds flowered and were manifest in the lives of New Englanders.

Many early leaders of the restoration movement were born in the northeastern section (New England) of the young nation. From this area emerged Joseph Smith and his family; Brigham Young; Wilford and Phebe Woodruff; Orson Hyde; Heber C. Kimball; and John, Luke, and Joel Johnson, to name only a few. Of the known members of the Kirtland Branch during the decade of the thirties, 46 percent were born in New England and another 32 percent, in New York, representing 78 percent of all Latter-day Saints who settled in that community. [^1]--> Since one of the strongest migration patterns to New York was from the northeastern United States, many born there were children of New England parents.

While a favorable religious revolt in New England preceded the Restoration, the Church was not organized in that region. New York provided a more favorable climate for such an organization. Nevertheless, multiple forces emerged in the Northeast that changed significantly patterns of life in that region; and many of these forces were transplanted to New York and were fanned westward across the new nation.

One of these important forces that led to the Restoration was the rise of religious liberty. The struggle to separate church and state by eliminating public support of religion was longer and more intense in New England than in any other section of America. Although the South was also a bastion of intolerance during the colonial period, legal religious restrictions were removed more quickly in that area than in the far north. [^2]-->

A more tolerant religious relationship among people in New England began in Rhode Island where Roger Williams succeeded in founding a colony with religious liberty. [^3] However, religious freedom was not immediately embraced by other New England colonies. Meanwhile, Pilgrims in Plymouth and Puritans in Massachusetts continued a policy inherited from England. Although many seeking religious liberty immigrated to the New England colonies, after arriving in the New World, they did not generally believe in extending freedom to others. Roger Williams and Ann Hutchinson were not the only leaders who were driven from Massachusetts for proclaiming unorthodox beliefs. During most of the seventeen century, nonconformists of Massachusetts and Connecticut suffered from intolerant legislation. In that section of America, Anglicans were banished; Baptists were fined and imprisoned; and Quaker missionaries, men and women, were not only banished, fined, and imprisoned, but some were tortured and a few were executed. According to one oppressive law that applied to Connecticut and Massachusetts, Quaker preachers were to have their tongues bored through with a hot iron. [^4]-->

After toleration was imposed on Congregationalists in the 1680s by the mother country (especially by the passage of the English Toleration Act of 1689 that applied to all the colonies), Trinitarian Protestants were permitted to worship in public. Nevertheless, throughout most of the eighteenth century, non-Congregationalists in most of New England were required to pay taxes to support the Congregational Church; and many suffered various forms of oppression, including social ostracism. Prior to the Revolution, for example, Baptists were imprisoned in Massachusetts for failing to comply with ecclesiastical laws, including the complicated certification laws that were intended to provide exemptions to Baptists, Quakers, and Anglicans. The bigotry that Pilgrims and Puritans inherited from England persisted throughout the colonial period. [^5]-->

Under the leadership of Baptists and Congregationalists who were imbued with a spirit of liberty, a religious revolt paralleled the American Revolution in northern New England. Views of Roger Williams regarding separation of church and state found sympathetic adherents during an age when people were identifying their natural, God-given rights. When Thomas Jefferson sounded the patriot position that men were endowed with the "unalienable rights" of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, many Americans insisted that one of these rights was the freedom to worship God in peace. By timing their revolt to coincide with Lexington, Concord, and Bunker Hill, Baptists attacked the ecclesiastical tax laws of New England and refused to pay rates which in their opinion were a violation of their basic beliefs. Patriot Congregationalists needed the political support of these dissenters, and, after the eruption of hostilities, they relaxed enforcement of the laws that were most offensive to the Baptists. [^6]-->

Following the American Revolution, a quasi-Congregational establishment was maintained in most of New England until after the War of 1812. An ecclesiastical tax persisted, but individuals could select the faith that was to be the recipient of this tax, and, if no choice was indicated, the money was to be given to the Congregational Church. Amidst a thrust for political liberty, Americans of the early republic gradually changed their views regarding their relationship with members of other faiths. Legal religious liberty was implemented by provisions in state and national constitutions and bill of rights, by legislation, and by court action. Three years following the organization of the restored Church, Massachusetts repealed a law providing for the financial support for the Congregational Church. In 1833, the last vestige of public support of religion disappeared in the new nation. This act symbolized that religious liberty had became a legal reality throughout the young nation. [^7]-->

Although there was a new birth of freedom in the early republic, liberty was young and intolerance was old, and the bigotry that Americans inherited from the past persisted. Too often historians who identify forces leading to persecution of the Mormons neglect to include in their discussions America's heritage of intolerance. Meanwhile, the spirit of Roger Williams, the example of William Penn's Holy Experiment, the crusading beliefs of Baptists, and the ideals of liberty expressed by men of the Enlightenment (such as Jefferson, Washington, Madison, and Adams) combined, launching the dawn of a new era.

Many Americans of the early republic recognized that a new religious era had been inaugurated. In a tract published in 1805, Isaac Backus, one of the New England leaders in the struggle for religious liberty, wrote,

We have cause to remember with thankfulness, that God has established a civil government over us, which allows equal liberty to all; so that each one may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Such great, such unspeakable privileges demand proportional love and obedience. [^8]-->

Elias Smith, a Christian minister of New Hampshire, also recognized that a religious revolt during the Revolutionary era had transformed America. Writing in 1809 this preacher from Portsmouth recalled that in colonial New England settlers were "fined, whipped, imprisoned, banished, and hung for not worshipping according to the law of the state." In recent years, however, he added, remarkable changes had occurred and "the increase of civil and religious liberty in this country, since the declaration of independence,... will be the wonder of all future generations. [^9]-->

The new climate of liberty provided a fruitful field for a significant reorientation of Christian thinking. A second reformation was initiated by the Revolutionary generation. Beliefs that had been sacred to the most popular creeds of Christendom were suddenly challenged, and new patterns of religious thought were circulated. The most intense battles of this theological controversy were waged in New England; and this war of words and contest of opinions led to more divisions within congregations and the formation of more religious communities there than in any other region.

In 1750 all the religions of New England (as in other parts of the English colonies) were communities that had been transplanted from the British Isles. The dominant religion throughout the colonial period in the Northeast was the Congregational Church, and outside Rhode Island, there were few dissenters or nonconformists. There were far more Congregational churches in New England than all other churches combined. In the mid-eighteenth century, there were 454 Congregational societies in New England (representing 79 percent of all churches, excluding the Friends whose numbers are unknown) in comparison to 58 Baptist, 44 Anglican, 19 Presbyterian, and a few Quaker societies. There were no Roman Catholics, no Jewish congregations, and only 1 Lutheran congregation. Only in Rhode Island was there genuine religious liberty and pluralism with 36 Baptist, 12 Congregational, and 7 Anglican societies plus a number of Quaker communities. [^10]-->

The first serious challenge to Congregational dominance occurred in the 1760s with the rapid growth of the Calvinist Baptists. In 1734 there were only six Baptist churches in New England outside Rhode Island. In 1750 the number had grown to 28. In 1795, however, there were 285 Baptist churches in that region. [^11]-->

In the midst of a tremendous growth of America's first convert religion, other religious communities were organized in America in New England states. During the American Revolution and its aftermath, Universalists organized in Gloucester, Massachusetts (1779); Unitarians in Boston (Kings Chapel) ( 1785); Jemima Wilkinson's Jerusalem community in Rhode Island (1780s); Freewill Baptists in New Hampshire (1880); and restorationists (who called themselves Christians or Eastern Christians) in Vermont (1801). [^12]-->

During this second reformation, traditional Protestant beliefs were challenged; and amid a war of words many beliefs were being brought into harmony with teachings of the restored Church. The traditional view that God was three persons of one essence was replaced by Unitarians, Eastern Christians, and some Universalists with a belief that the Father and Son were two separate and distinct entities. Unitarians joined Quakers in proclaiming a belief in the Bible insofar as it was translated correctly. Unitarians, liberal Congregationalists, Eastern Christians, Freewill Baptists, and other groups replaced the traditional Calvinistic doctrine of total depravity with a belief that individuals will be punished for their own sins and not for Adam's transgression. Unitarians, Universalists, Freewill Baptists, and restorationists joined the newly organized Methodist church in proclaiming that man played a role in the salvation experience and that man could fall from grace. While Baptists and Eastern Christians were popularizing the doctrine of believers baptism by immersion and the Lord' s Supper as a memorial, restorationists added to these beliefs the need to return to the primitive purity of ancient Christianity.

Meanwhile, Universalists taught that after death men went into either a state of happiness or a state of misery. Christ, they added, preached to the spirits in prison to convert others so that eventually every knee would bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. All in the spirit world would eventually be converted and lifted up into a heavenly paradise. While others criticized Universalists for encouraging unrighteousness by saying that the punishment of hell was not everlasting, Universalists replied that wickedness was never happiness. In addition to arguing that through unrighteousness some created a hell on earth they preached that there is an intrinsic value in living the laws of God. [^13] Beliefs of Universalists were appealing to some of Joseph Smith's ancestors: Joseph's father (Joseph, Sr.), grandfather (Asael), and an uncle (Jesse Smith) sought ecclesiastical tax exemption in 1797 on the basis of membership in the Universalist church in Tunbridge, Vermont. [^14]-->

Amid a birth of religious liberty and a reorientation of Christian thinking, a new religious awakening occurred. Some historians have speculated that organized religion was at a lower ebb in 1800 than at any other time in the modern history of this land. [^15] As settlers penetrated the frontier, many lost an identity with institutional religion; and as people were influenced by materialistic and pluralistic ideas popularized in rising towns, many lost zeal for traditional Christian orthodoxy. When Francis Asbury, the foremost leader of the newly organized Methodist Church, traveled for the first time in New England in the 1780s, he commented, "We are now in Connecticut; and never out of sight of a house; and sometimes we have a view of many churches and steeples, built very neatly of wood; either for use, ornament, piety, policy or interest-or it may be some of all these." Although Asbury recognized that there were many Church buildings in New England (more per capita than in any other region) and that there were many well-trained and learned ministers in his opinion religion in that region was "spiritually dead." [^16]-->

After Organized religion experienced a decline in this land for more than a century and reached its lowest ebb in modern history, large numbers launched a crusade for religious truth. For the first time in history many asked the question, "Which church should I join?" and many united with the different religious communities. If Americans had been members of a state church, if liberty had been greatly curtailed, or if only a few churches had existed, large numbers would not have asked such a question. But in this land of liberty and pluralism something occurred that was unparalleled in the history of mankind. In unprecedented numbers Americans joined churches of their choice. The population of this country in pre-Civil War years almost doubled every twenty years, but church membership increased at a faster pace; and this increase occurred during a period of unparalleled western expansion. The approximate 8 percent church membership in 1800 increased to 11 percent in 1820, 13 percent in 1830, and 23 percent in 1860. [^17]-->

America was a unique land in the early nineteenth century. Religious liberty was becoming a reality. Beliefs of many were being brought into harmony with teachings of the restored Church. And amid unparalleled religious pluralism, vast numbers launched a quest for religious truth. Joseph Smith was not the only American who was seeking religious truth. The field was white already to harvest.

---
Notas:
[^1] Elgin A. Jones, "The Evolution of a New Hampshire Town," Collections of the Historical Society of Cheshire County, 2 July 1930, p. 26.
[^2] Ibid., p. 27.
[^3] Lucy Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, Liverpool publisher, 1853, p. 19.
[^4] Richard Lloyd Anderson, Joseph Smith's New England Heritage, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971, p. 27.
[^5] Jones, "Evolution of a Town," p. 29.
[^6] Sophia Smith Martin, Mack Genealogy: The Descendants of John Mack of Lyme, Conn. vol. 1. Rutland, Vt. 1903, p. 881.
[^7] Jones, "Evolution of a Town," p. 30.
[^8] Marlow Town Records, vol. 1, 1763-1865, p. 345. (Microfilm copy in N. H. State Library, Concord, N. H.)
[^9] Jones, "Marlow," p. 1. (This work is an unpublished, typewritten copy of a town history of Marlow, N.H. Although it was written after 1925, the exact date is unknown. There are three known copies of the history, located at the New Hampshire State Library, the N. H. State Historical Society, and the Marlow Town Library. This work will here after be cited as "Marlow." It was never completed or published because of the illness and eventual death of the author, who apparently intended to have numbers in the text corresponding with locations on maps published in his other work, Notes on History of the Town of Marlow, H. H., 1941. This would account for other apparent errors in the text.)
[^10] Ibid., p. 3.
[^11] Jones, Notes on History of the Town of Marlow, N.H., Keene, N. H.: Sentinel Printing Co., 1941), p. 38. This and the following references to lot descriptions are taken from this work by Jones. Jones indicates in this work the page number in the original manuscript from which these lot descriptions were taken. The writer was unable to find Jones' original manuscripts. The Cheshire County Deeds were thoroughly searched during this period with no correspondence to Jones' material, so he must have had access to some proprietor's records or some other material. Perhaps further research in Jones' estate in Keene, New Hampshire, where he died, would clarify this matter. The following biographical information establishes the credibility of Jones' work and is found in the foreward to his work referred to above on page vii: "Elgin A. Jones was a native of Marlow. Much of his lfe was spent there. He was educated in the public schools at Kimball Union Academy and Dartmouth College, from which he graduated in 1874.
[^12] Ibid., p. 80.
[^13] Ibid., p, 81.
[^14] Ibid., p. 95.
[^15] Cheshire County, N. H. Deeds vol. 8, pp. 263-64.
[^16] Cheshire County, N. H. Deeds vol. 2, p. 301.
[^17] Cheshire County, N. H. Deeds vol. 21, pp. 497-98.
