Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

Traditions of Honesty and Integrity in the Smith Family

LaMar E. Garrard

Although our character is not completely determined by family traditions and the environment in which we are placed, still these are factors that often influence and help to shape us. It is not hard to find instances where the character of a parent or grandparent set a pattern or tradition that affected the lives of his or her descendants. The Prophet Joseph Smith inherited a tradition of honesty and integrity from his own father and grandfather.

The Prophet's grandfather Asael Smith was the youngest of five children and the second son in the family of Samuel Smith. He was born in Topsfield, Massachusetts, in 1744. His mother died when he was not yet a year old. He was raised on the family farm, sharing the work with his father and other brother. He married Mary Duty when he was twenty-three years old, and they also lived and shared the work on the family farm until they had three children. However, "Asael was only the second son, so economic custom dictated his learning a trade and leaving the family homestead, allowing his older brother, Samuel Smith, Jr., to farm on shares with his father." [^1]-->

Asael moved his family to Windham, New Hampshire, in May 1772. While living there, one more child, Asael, Jr., was born. They then moved to Dunbarton, New Hampshire, in April 1774; and approximately four years later they moved again, this time to Derryfield (Manchester), New Hampshire. During this four-year period two more children, Mary and Samuel, were born.

Asael enlisted in the army during the Revolutionary War, "an act of obvious hardship for a family head with six dependents." [^2]--> His army duty may have contributed to the poor health he experienced later on. After moving to Derryfield, Asael purchased a one hundred-acre farm, which he and his sons worked during the summer. Over the winter he and his sons worked at the cooper trade, making barrels. Four more children were born during the seven years on this farm.

On 14 November 1785, Asael's father Samuel died in Topsfield, Massachusetts. At that time Samuel, Jr. (Asael's brother), was still living on the family farm with his stepmother, Priscilla Smith. Prior to the father's death, Asael had made a trip to visit his ailing father. The circumstances surrounding this visit were as follows:

In 1785 Asael visited his father, Samuel, in Topsfield in his last sickness, and saw the old man at seventy-two jump out of bed in a delirium and head for the door, saying he must go to the mill or his family would suffer. Asael assured Samuel the family would be watched after. After Samuel's death on November 14, 1785, care of his widow first fell to Samuel, Jr. He was executor of the estate and initially took over the family farm. His listing as gentleman in the land records as compared to Asael's cooper may reflect an aspiration to follow Samuel, Sr., into the town aristocracy. Within a few months of Samuel, Sr.'s death, however, Samuel, Jr., was ready to rid himself of the farm and settle for less. With the farm, he had inherited the responsibility for seeing that Priscilla Smith received one-third of its income, her widow's portion. In addition, he soon discovered that the estate was actually insolvent. The two burdens were greater than he chose to carry. [^3]-->

What type of man was Samuel Smith? He had been a prominent member of the community of Topsfield, holding responsible positions such as a half-dozen terms in the state legislature, many terms as governing selectman of Topsfield, and sometimes as town clerk. He was a captain in the militia and was active in the Congregational Church. His obituary described him as a man of integrity and uprightness. His involvement in civic affairs and lack of awareness concerning the condition of his personal finances no doubt accounted for his insolvency at death. Being insolvent at death often occurred among New Englanders.

The insolvency of Samuel's estate is not surprising. In the absence of currency, New Englanders conducted their exchanges through debts and credits with neighbors, storekeepers, tradesmen, and city merchants. An active man could easily owe money to fifty or a hundred individuals and be owed by as many in turn. Debts were paid with services, commodities, and occasionally with small sums of money if any happened to come along. At a given moment it was difficult to know where one stood, because it was never certain which debtors would make good or when creditors would demand payment. Creditors were lenient while a man had earning power and closed in when he was in trouble. A person could be prospering while alive and working, and suddenly be insolvent at death. [^4]-->

During the winter following the death of his father, Samuel, Jr., made a trip to Derryfield to visit his brother Asael. He explained that his father's debts exceeded what others owed him, plus the real estate and personal property. He had come to Asael for help. However, at the time of his father' s death, Asael himself was "recovering from economic setbacks and poor health," [^5]--> and at the time was father of eleven children. The conditions existing at this time were recalled and described by Asael's son John as follows:

My uncle Samuel, who lived with my grandfather at the time of his death, after finding the condition his estate was in, came to New Hampshire to counsel with my father on the subject. He said it was not possible to pay the debts with the property that was left under the then existing circumstances. My father not being so well acquainted with the state of affairs as his older brother Samuel, thought that it might be done. "For," said he, "I am not willing that my father, who has done so much business, should have it said of him that he died insolvent." And [he] urged hard to have my uncle go on and settle the business, and he felt that the Lord would prosper him in the undertaking. But my uncle said that he had a large family and but very little property, and he could not undertake such a work without the means to do with.

My father was then in low circumstances, had been in a low state of health, entirely unable to labor for three years, during which time he was only able to keep the town record, as he had held the office of town clerk for many years. He owned a small farm in Derrysfield, on Merrimack River, a large and growing family, and in consequence of his late sickness [they were] in very destitute condition. "Notwithstanding all my embarrassments," said my father, "I will undertake to settle my father's estate and save his name from going down to posterity as an insolvent debtor .... "After considerable conversation with my uncle, [they] agreed to change places. Accordingly, my father moved his family to Topsfield, Massachusetts and[attend[ed] to the business above mentioned. [^6]-->

Under these trying circumstances, Asael made good his promise to his dying father that he would take care of his family. But this "promise was kept by mental and physical blisters." [^7]--> Asael and his family managed the farm in Topsfield in an attempt to take care of his stepmother and pay off his father's debts. Asael's attempts to pay off these debts were described by his son John as follows:

Here my father struggled hard for about five years and made out to support his family comfortably. His stepmother was on his hands during this time, who was sometimes rather childish. However, by prudence and industry he had paid some part of his father's debts .... [H]is old mother received her third, [and] after supporting a large family with the scanty means which was at his command he could not pay the old debts which were crowding upon him. People showed no lenity, notwithstanding they knew that if he had not have come forward to pay them, they never could have got one-eighth part of what they [were] now determined to have. [^8]-->

It was almost impossible to pay off the father's debts. Asael was industrious and a good manager, but sickness and poor economic times took away any profits. The economic conditions under which Asael labored to pay off his fathers' debts were described as follows:

Describing coming to Massachusetts in 1786, his son says that Asael "had lost considerable in the downfall of Continental paper," a grim condition that had also affected Samuel's estate. This paper dollar lost value during the Revolution, only to reach its low worth below a cent prior to Samuel's death. The decade after the Revolution saw much else that was "not worth a Continental." Debts incurred by the father during heavy inflation had to be repaid by the son during depression when failing farm prices decreased the cash value of Asael's labors. At the lime he sought to pay off his father's obligations, thousands of debtors in rural Massachusetts supported armed revolution (materializing in Shay's Rebellion) rather than face compulsory collection and foreclosure proceedings. [^9]-->

During the five years of working the farm, the widow received her one-third, the children were fed, and an attempt was made to pay off the creditors. However, Asael finally realized that he could not pay off all the creditors and still keep the farm, so in 1791 the farm was sold to pay off the creditors, and Asael and his family were left practically destitute.

But if a failing economy bequeathed impossibility, Asael was generous with his resources. The widow' s right was met (perhaps on her demand) by renting a third of the land for her support, but the stepson voluntarily promised to pay necessities that she lacked. By entering the picture, Asael shouldered the burden of paying the widow plus the creditors; the latter obligation came largely out of his pocket, so he correctly said that honoring his father "cost me much money and trouble." Overall, he traded his own land for Samuel's farm; while running it he devoted excess profits to Samuel' s creditors; when sold, he distributed virtually the entire return to settle his father's affairs. He might have walked away and let the creditors divide up the estate, with the widow assured of her dower. Instead, with his own labor he paid off all the debts in full, by family tradition a net cost of $700 to him. Asael sold the farm but did not keep the proceeds: "He then paid all the debts... against the estate and left himself almost destitute of means to support his family." Five years of labor added little to his pocketbook but much to his moral stature. [^10]-->

Asael did not sneak out of Topsfield owing large amounts of money, but rather, he left as a respected member of his community, one who was morally unright and willing to pay off his debts, though not incurred by himself. He communicated with several members of the community for years after leaving for Vermont and was highly respected. In fact, fifteen years after Asael had moved to Vermont, one local investor in Topsfield loaned Asael and his sons seven hundred dollars. [^11]-->

It is under stressful and opposing conditions that one's true character comes to light. Considering the conditions under which Asael lived during his last five years in Massachusetts, he proved himself to be an upright and honest man, a good example to his sons and grandsons. This tradition of integrity and honesty was carded on to his son Joseph Smith, Sr., who was careful to pay all the debts he owed to others, even when others had cheated him or had not paid the debts they owed to him. The events which are evidence of his integrity took place later on in the state of Vermont.

After selling the Topsfield farm in March 1791, Asael moved his family temporarily on to a dairy farm in the nearby town of Ipswich, Massachusetts. After they were settled there, he and his eldest son, Jesse, journeyed to Vermont while the rest of the family was left behind to manage the farm. While in Vermont he purchased eighty-three acres of uncleared land in the Tunbridge Gore. He intended to have his sons Jesse and Joseph clear the land that summer and winter and then move the entire family there in the spring of 1792. However, it was finally decided to not split up the family, and so the crops were sold while still in the ground at Ipswich and the entire family moved to Tunbridge, Vermont, in October 1791.

Two of the great challenges facing parents in those days were to help the children get off to a good start when they reached the proper age and also to make preparations to care for themselves in their old age. "Adult life was a race to accumulate sufficient goods to give the children a start, and still have enough to be independent and comfortable in old age." [^12] When he moved to Tunbridge, Asael had seven sons who shared the work on the farms with him. In the next few years following, Asael was able to purchase additional farms of one hundred acres each until he eventually had over three hundred acres in farms adjoining each other. As each son married he was helped to get started on a farm of his own. Jesse married shortly after arriving in Vermont and Joseph in 1796. Joseph was given the original farm of eighty-three acres in a partnership with his father while the new land was being purchased and cleared. [^13]--> Joseph married Lucy Mack, a sister of a prominent member of the community, Stephen Mack. Stephen was a very prosperous businessman, at one time owning a saw mill, grist mill, blacksmith shop, and other establishments in Tunbridge. When Lucy married, Stephen gave her $500 and his partner also have her $500. Joseph and Lucy then started their married life with a farm and $1,000, which Lucy laid away for future use. They farmed for six years and then decided to try their luck in business as Stephen had done. They rented their farm and moved to nearby Randolph, where they established a mercantile business. "Joseph Smith opened his Randolph store with a line of goods purchased on credit from Boston. His inventory sold quickly, not for cash but for promise of payment in commodities at harvest." [^14]--> The debt he incurred by the purchase of these goods in Boston came to about $1,800.

At about this time, Joseph decided to make some money selling ginseng root. It grew wild in Vermont and after being gathered and processed, could be sold for considerable profit in China-it being" used as a remedy for the plague which was then raging there." [^15]--> Joseph used all his means to obtain a quantity of this root and then process it and get it ready for shipment. In fact, he processed a quantity of it so large that he was offered $3,000 for it by a merchant in Royalton named Stevens. However, Joseph felt he could make more profit by shipping and selling it himself, so he took the crystallized root with him to New York where he contracted with a ship's captain to take it to China and sell it for him. Mr. Stevens got wind of all this and shipped some crystallized root himself on the same ship, but sent his own son on the ship to manage the sale.

When the ship returned, the younger Stevens told Joseph Smith the venture was a failure, and the only payment Joseph received for all his efforts was a chest of tea. However, Stephen Mack discovered that Mr. Stevens had actually sold all the processed ginseng root for quite a profit and had pocketed Joseph's share. In fact, Mr. Stevens was setting up a plant to process the root when he was found out by Stephen Mack. He fled to Canada to escape punishment. Joseph pursued him but was unable to catch him.

After being cheated by Mr. Stevens and being unable to collect the $2,000 owed him from sold merchandise, Joseph had nothing to pay the $1,800 he owed to creditors in Boston for the merchandise he obtained from them. Lucy explained the predicament as follows:

My husband pursued him a while, but finding pursuit vain, returned home much dispirited at the state of his affairs. He then went to work to overhaul his accounts in order to see how he stood with the world, upon which he discovered that, in addition to the loss sustained by the China adventure, he had lost about two thousand dollars in bad debts. At the time he sent his venture to China he was owing eighteen hundred dollars in the city of Boston for store goods, and he expected to discharge the debt at the return of the China expedition; but, having invested almost all his means in ginseng, the loss which he suffered in this article rendered it impossible for him to pay his debt with the property which remained in his hands. The principal dependence left him, in the shape of property, was the farm at Tunbridge, upon which we were then living, having moved back to this place immediately after his venture was sent to China. This farm, which was worth about fifteen hundred dollars, my husband sold for eight hundred dollars in order to make a speedy payment on the Boston debt; and, as I had not used the check of one thousand dollars, which my brother and Mr. Mudget gave me, I added it to the eight hundred dollars obtained for the farm, and by this means the debt was liquidated. [^16]-->

As a result of his honesty, Joseph Smith, Sr., now had no property of his own. This situation necessitated many moves in the next few years.

One of the misfortunes of the propertyless was the necessity for frequent moves. Tenants ofttimes rented farms that were in process of being sold and available only for a few years. When the farm was not sold out from under them, a better opportunity elsewhere impelled a move. Over the next fourteen years the Smiths moved seven times. Between 1803 and 1811 all the moves were in a tiny circle around Tunbridge, Royalton, and Sharon, immediately adjoining towns and probably never involved a distance of more than five or six miles. [^17]-->

According to Lucy, after the farm in Tunbridge was sold in 1802, the family moved to Royalton for a few months and then moved to Sharon, Vermont, where they lived on a farm rented from Lucy's father, Solomon Mack. [^18] In order to make ends meet, Joseph taught school in the winter in addition to running the farm. It was while the family was living on this farm that the future prophet, Joseph Smith Jr., was born on 23 December 1805. The family moved again, this time back to Tunbridge, where Samuel Harrison was born 13 March 1808. Again according to Lucy, they lived there only "a short time, then moved to Royalton, where Ephraim was born 13 March 1810. We continued here until we had another son, born 13 March 1811, whom we called William." [^19] In 1811, the family left Royalton and moved about twenty miles east to West Lebanon, New Hampshire, a town just across the Connecticut River from Vermont. Here they struggled to get ahead and also to send their children to schools which were conveniently located nearby. However, they suffered a setback here when every member of the family, except the parents, was struck with typhus fever. Sophronia suffered greatly and Joseph Smith, Jr., had to eventually have his leg operated on as a result of complications from the disease. This period of stress and disease lasted about a year. When health returned to the family, Lucy explained "it found us in quite low circumstances. We were compelled to strain every energy to provide for our present necessities, instead of making arrangements for the future, as we had previously contemplated." [^20] It was in 1814 that they moved again, this time to Norwich, Vermont, just five miles north of West Lebanon and back across the Connecticut River. By necessity they again had to rent a farm, and they had crop failures for three years in succession up to the year 1816. Evidently the family was destitute at this time for they were "warned out of town," a legal procedure used by the town selectmen to absolve themselves from responsibility to take care of the poor. The constable was "required to summon Joseph Smith and family now residing in Norwich to depart said town hereof fail not but of this precept and your doings herein due return make according to law." [^21] It was signed by the selectmen of Norwich on 15 March 1816. On 27 March 1816, the constable signed the town record attesting to the fact that he had served the warning to Joseph Smith. [^22]-->

The crop failures, and advertisement of good land in New York, and the "warning out of town" were no doubt the factors which resulted in Joseph Smith, Sr.'s decision to leave Vermont and move to New York. However, Lucy explains that her husband Joseph was careful to be honest and settle his debts before he left for New York.

This was enough; my husband was now altogether decided upon going to New York. He came in, one day, in quite a thoughtful mood, and sat down; after meditating some time, he observed that, could he so arrange his affairs, he would be glad to start soon for New York with a Mr. Howard, who was going to Palmyra. He further remarked, that he could not leave consistently, as the situation of the family would not admit of his absence; besides he was owing some money that must first be paid.

I told him it was my opinion he might get both his creditors and debtors together and arrange matters between them in such a way as to give satisfaction to all parties concerned; and, in relation to the family, I thought I could make every necessary preparation to follow as soon as he would be ready for us. He accordingly called upon all with whom he had any dealings, and settled up his accounts with them. There were, however, some who, in the time of settlement, neglected to bring forward their books, consequently they were not balanced, or there were no entries made in them to show the settlement; but in cases of this kind, he called witnesses, that there might be evidence of the fact. [^23]-->

Joseph Smith, Sr., then set out for Palmyra, New York, with Mr. Howard. Meanwhile, Lucy and the rest of the family made preparations to leave. When word came to Lucy from her husband to leave, she was confronted by unjust claims of creditors against her husband. She explained the situation as follows:

We shortly received a communication from Mr. Smith, requesting us to make ourselves ready to take up a journey for Palmyra. In a short time after this, a team came for us. As we were about starting on this journey, several of those gentlemen who had withheld their books, in the time of settlement, now brought them forth, and claimed the accounts which had been settled, and which they had, in the presence of witnesses, agreed to erase. We were all ready for the journey, and the teams were waiting on expense. Under these circumstances, I concluded it would be more to our advantage to pay their unjust claims than to hazard a lawsuit. Therefore, by making considerable exertion, I raised the required sum, which was one hundred and fifty dollars, and liquidated the demand. [^24]-->

A gentleman by the name of Flagg, a wealthy settler, living in the town of Hanover, also a Mr. Howard, who resided in Norwich, were both acquainted with the circumstances mentioned above. They were very indignant at it, and requested me to give them a sufficient time to get the witnesses together, and they would endeavor to recover that which had been taken from me by fraud. I told them I could not do so, for my husband had sent teams for me, which were on expense; moreover, there was an uncertainty in getting the money back again, and in case of failure, I should not be able to raise the means necessary to take the family where we contemplated moving. [^25]-->

The above-named gentlemen then proposed to subscribe some money from those friends who understood the situation and present it to Lucy to help them out. She refused their offer, explaining that "the idea of receiving assistance in such a way as this was indeed very repulsive to my feelings." [^26]-->

So we see that Joseph Smith, Sr., left for a new state-as did his father Asael-only after he had honestly tried to settle all his debts. Many enemies of the church have accused Joseph Smith, Sr., of being dishonest in one way or another. However, their accusations cannot be substantiated. The author of this article spent considerable time and effort going over the civil court records of Orange and Windsor Counties in Vermont and Grafton County in New Hampshire. The records were located in the county seats which were, respectively, Chelsea and Woodstock in Vermont, and Woodsville in New Hampshire. All the court records were examined covering those years in which Joseph Smith, Sr., was a resident of each county. If he ever defaulted on a note or loan and a lawsuit was filed, it would appear in the court records. No such lawsuits were ever found filed against Joseph Smith, Sr. [^27]--> Evidently he was like his father Asael, an honest and upright man. The Prophet Joseph Smith did indeed inherit a tradition of honesty and integrity from his father and grandfather.

Note

This article was published earlier in Robert L. Millet' s To Be Learned Is Good If (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987). The talk was given in New England in 1985.

---
Notas:
[^1] M. Hamlin Cannon, "A Pension Office Note on Brigham Young's Father," American Historical Review 49 (October 1944):82-90; for an extended discussion of John Young' s age at enlistment and his Revolutionary War record see also Gene Allred Sessions, Latter-day Patriots: Nine Mormon Families and Their Revolutionary War Heritage, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1975), pp. 24-28, 192-93.
[^2] "Manuscript History of Brigham Young," p. 1, LDS Church Archives; the township of Coxsaokie had been created on 7 March 1788, see Thomas F. Gordon, Gazetteer of the State of New York (Philadelphia: T.K. and P.G. Collins, 1836), p. 472.
[^3] S. Dilworth Young, "Here is Brigham": Brigham Young-the Years to 1844 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), pp. 17-18.
[^4] "History of Brigham Young," Deseret News (Salt Lake City), 3 February 1858, p. 377.
[^5] Whitingham Town Record Book 3, pp. 72, 203.
[^6] Personal interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 17 August 1987, Whitingham, Vermont. Mr. Wheeler has served as Whitingham Town Clerk from 1954 to the present (1987). His knowledge of the records, physical location of properties, and history of the region was indispensible to the writer. Joseph Mosely sold his remaining holdings in Whitingham to Lovell Bullock on 2 June 1806, see Town Record Book 4, p. 233.
[^7] Whitingham Town Record Book 3, p. 675; Personal interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 17 August 1987.
[^8] Personal Interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 17 August 1987.
[^9] Joseph Young, Sr., Journal, pp. 10-11, located in LDS Church Archives.
[^10] "Manuscript History of Brigham Young," p. 1, LDS Church Archives.
[^11] Hamilton Child, Gazetteer and Business Directory of Windham County, Vermont, 1724-1884 (Syracuse, New York: Journal Office, 1884), p. 304, emphasis added. The "part of the cellar walls" is not discernable today (1987).
[^12] Personal interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 18 August 1987. Mr. Wheeler stated that the systematic numbering and posting of roads by civil authorities didn't occur until some time after the turn of the century.
[^13] Doris Kirkpatrick, "Where Was Brigham Young Bom Anyway?" Brattleboro Reformer (Brattleboro, Vermont), 1 July 1983, p. 15; see also Doris Kirkpatrick, "Brigham Young Just Missed Being Born in Hopkinton," Worcester Sunday Telegram (Worcester, Massachusetts), Feature Parade, Section F, 19 October 1958, pp. 7-8, (Doris Kirkpatrick is now deceased).
[^14] Extracts taken from the Gazette and Courier, Greenfield, Massachusetts, 23 August 1880, from the address of lion. Clark Jillson at the Centennial of Whitingham, 18 August 1880, on Town Hill, located in Marjorie W. Graves File, Whitingham Town Clerk's Office.
[^15] Personal interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 18 August 1987.
[^16] Ibid.; Matthias F. Cowley said that the monument had been placed there by "non-Mormon residents," but did not specify who or when; see "My Acquaintance with President Brigham Young," Millennial Star, 100 (22 September 1938):600.
[^17] Clark Jillson, Green Leaves from Whitingham, Vermont (Worcester, Massachusetts: Private Press of the Author, 1894), p. 227; see also Esther Munroe Swift, Vermont Place-Names, Foot Prints of History (Brattleboro, Vt.: Stephen Green Press, 1977), p. 512.
[^18] Doris Kirkpatrick, "Where Was Brigham Young Born Anyway?", p. 15.
[^19] Leonard J. Arrington, Brigham Young: American Moses (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985), p. 435, n. 11.
[^20] Grand List, 1802-1804, Whitingham Town Record Book 1. Arthur D. Wheeler said that the Grand List is an assessed value of the property and not the tax which is actually assessed each person. The evaluation of the properties in the whole town would be totaled and a percentage then charged to the individual property holder based on that evaluation. Personal interview, 18 August 1987.
[^21] "Manuscript History of Brigham Young," p. 1, LDS Church Archives.
[^22] Personal Interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 18 August 1987.
[^23] Joseph Young, Sr., Journal, p. 7, emphasis added, LDS Church Archives.
[^24] Personal interview with Arthur D. Wheeler, 18 August 1987. Sadawaga Pond or Lake lies between Town Hill and the village of Whitingham. The large body of water to the west and northwest of the village of Whitingham is the Harriman Reservoir. The reservoir was made possible by an earth-fill dam completed in the spring of 1923.
[^25] Extracts taken from the Gazette and Courier, Greenfield, Massachusetts, 23 August 1880, from the address of Hon. Clark Jillson at the Centennial of Whitingham, 18 August 1880, on Town Hill, and located in Marjorie W. Graves File, Whitingham Town Clerk' s Office.
[^26] Marjorie W. Graves, Stories of Whitingham (n.p., n.n., 1975,), p. 97, copy located in Whitingham Town Clerk's Office, (Marjorie Graves is now deceased).
[^27] Doris Kirkpatrick, "Where Was Brigham Young Born Anyway?", p. 15.
