Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

Wilford Woodruff's Mission to the Fox Islands

Donald Q. Cannon

Wilford Woodruff was one of the greatest missionaries the Church has ever had. He is best known for his mission to England in the 1840s, in the course of which he succeeded in converting more than a thousand people to the Church. His mission to the Fox Islands is relatively unknown but nevertheless very important.

As he departed for his mission to the Fox Islands, off the coast of Maine, Wilford Woodruff believed he was the first elder in this dispensation to preach the gospel on an island of the sea. Describing his arrival on North Fox Island, he recorded this statement in his journal:

This was the first time that I, or any Elder of the Church, (to my knowledge) ever arose before the inhabitants of one of the Islands of the sea to preach unto them the fulness of the everlasting gospel and the Book of Mormon. [^1]-->

Technically, Elder Woodruff was wrong. The gospel had been preached to the people of England about a month earlier. However, he was full of enthusiasm about the prospects that were his. He was making history and was on the Lord's errand.

The Fox Islands are located along the coast of Maine about midway between the New Hampshire state line and the Canadian border. The two islands are situated approximately twelve miles from Rockland in the open water of Penobscot Bay. [^2]--> (Today the people of Maine refer to the islands as North Haven (North Fox Island) and Vinalhaven (South Fox Island).

Wilford Woodruff's knowledge or awareness of the Fox Islands probably stemmed from his relationship with his wife and her family. Phoebe Carter Woodruff was a resident of Scarborough, Maine, and was acquainted with the islands off the coast. There is also a possibility that his companion, Jonathan Hale, talked to him about the islands, as he had been there earlier to get a load of sheep. [^3]-->

Wilford first met Phoebe Carter on 28 January 1837. After a whirlwind courtship of two and a half months they were married on 13 April 1837 at the home of President Joseph Smith. President Frederick G. Williams performed the marriage, and Joseph Smith, Sr., then gave the newlyweds their patriarchal blessings.

The call to serve on a mission was both personal and Church-related. As a seventy, Wilford Woodruff was expected to serve as a missionary. It was Wilford Woodruff himself, and not the Church, however, that selected the Fox Islands as his field of labor. Feeling impressed to work in this area, he found acceptance of the idea among Church leaders. As he said, "I made my feelings known to the Apostles, and they advised me to go." [^4]-->

His willingness to leave his wife only a few weeks after his marriage indicates the importance which Wilford attached to this mission. His companion, Jonathan Hale, would later serve as a bishop in Nauvoo. Sister Hale and Sister Woodruff remained in Kirtland, and Elders Woodruff and Hale departed on 31 May 1837.

Although the Fox Islands had been designated as the destination of the elders, they performed missionary work enroute to the Islands. They preached the gospel in Canada, New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. As was customary in early missionary work, they made a special effort to contact friends and family. [^5] They visited with Wilford's brothers Azmon and Thompson Woodruff in Richland, New York, where Wilford described "a coldness manifest towards me." [^6] In Colebrook, Connecticut, he met with his sister, Eunice, whom he had not seen for five years. In Avon, Connecticut, he visited Titus Woodruff and at Farmington, Connecticut, he and Elder Hale had the privilege of visiting with Elder Woodruff's parents. Besides preaching to his family and renewing family ties, he also taught in public meetings. For example, Wilford Woodruff "preached in the Methodist meeting house in Farmington." [^7]-->

Phoebe Woodruff, Elder Woodruff's wife, joined the elders at her father' s home in Scarborough, Maine. It was the first time Wilford had met her family. He took the opportunity to become acquainted and to preach the gospel.

After a ten-day visit, Elder Woodruff bade his wife and her family farewell, and he and Elder Hale continued on their journey to the Fox Islands. After walking ten miles to Portland, they took a steamer to Owl's Head, where they boarded a sloop that carried them to North Fox Island. Elder Woodruff was deeply impressed with the rugged beauty of the Maine coast, especially Penobscot Bay and the Fox Islands. He carefully recorded his observations of the natural beauty, as well as other significant features of the islands:

North Fox Island is nine miles long by two miles in width, and has a population of eight hundred. They have a post office, one store, a Baptist church and meetinghouse, four schoolhouses, and a tide grist mill.... The products are wheat, barley, oats, potatoes and grass. The principal timber consists of fir, spruce, hemlock and birch. Raspberries and gooseberries grow in great abundance, and some upland cranberries are raised. The principal stock are sheep.

South Fox Island comes as near being without definite form as any spot on earth I ever saw .... It is about ten miles in length and five in width, and is a mass of rocks, formed into shelves, hills and valleys, and cut up into necks and points to make room for the coves and harbors that run into the island. The population is one thousand. The inhabitants get their living entirely by fishing .... Upon this island there are two stores, three tide mills, six schoolhouses, and a small branch of the Methodist Church presided over by a Priest. What timber there is upon this island, such as pine, fir spruce, hemlock, and birch, and likewise whortleberries, raspberries and gooseberries, grow mostly out of the cracks in the rocks. [^8]-->

The two Mormon elders arrived on Noah Fox Island at two o'clock on Sunday morning, 20 August 1837. Groping through the darkness, they stumbled over rocks and trees until they came upon a house. When they knocked on the door, a woman came to the window and asked who they were. Elder Woodruff informed her that they were two strangers who needed lodging for the night. Being unafraid, she unlocked the door and gave them a bed and breakfast. When asked what she charged, she answered that they were her guests and did not need to pay her. [^9]--> They learned that there was a Baptist meetinghouse on the island, and walked the five miles to it. When a deacon greeted them, they asked him to tell the minster that they were two servants of God and had a message to deliver to the people. Much to their surprise the minister invited them to join him at the pulpit, and after he had delivered his sermon, he asked Elder Woodruff what he desired. In this manner a special meeting was arranged for five o'clock that evening.

Curiosity about the two strangers led most of the congregation to return at the appointed hour to hear their message. Elder Woodruff arose and spoke for one hour, using Gal. 1:8-9 as his text. With power and conviction he told those assembled that the Lord had raised up a prophet and organized his church anew, as in the days of Christ. Elder Hale followed Brother Woodruff and bore his testimony of Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon. The next four evenings in different schoolhouses, they preached the messages of the Restoration. Elder Woodruff recorded that he "was clothed with much of the Spirit of God." [^10]--> That spirit, in spite of opposition led to success.

Wilford Woodruff left Mr. Newton, the Baptist minister, a copy of the Doctrine and Covenants during a visit to his home. [^11] [^12]--> He reflected upon the matter for several days, studying and pondering late into the evening. Finally, in contradiction to the dictates of the Spirit, he decided to reject the message and launch a campaign against the Mormon missionaries.

Although faced with vigorous opposition by the minister, Elders Woodruff and Hale began to baptize members of the Baptist congregation. The first members of the Baptist congregation, and indeed, the first inhabitants of an island of the sea (according to Wilford Woodruff) to be baptized in this dispensation, were Justin Eames (Ames), a sea captain, and his wife, Betsey. Elder Hale baptized them on 3 September 1837, thus disproving the false predictions of certain apostate members in Kirtland who had sought to discourage Brother Hale's mission by telling him he would "never baptize anyone." [^13]-->

Growing ever more alarmed, Mr. Newton invited the Methodist minister from South Fox Island, Mr. Douglass, to join him in combatting Mormonism. Thus, two professional clergymen who had been at odds for years allied themselves against Wilford Woodruff and his companion. They arranged a conference for as many members of their congregations as possible. During the conference they denounced Joseph Smith as a false prophet seeking to destroy the faith of recent converts. Undaunted, Elder Woodruff attended the meetings, took careful notes, and then invited the congregation and the two ministers to attend his meetings. There he convincingly refuted the false teachings of Mr. Newton and Mr. Douglass.

During the course of their labors the missionaries often meditated and reflected upon the significance of their assignment. Some excerpts from Wilford Woodruff' s journal capture their mood:

We walked to the top of a high ledge and stop'd on a smooth granite rock. We sat down under the shade of a pine for morning prayers, and O, what glorious contemplations vibrated our souls.

Elder Hale read the XIV Ch. of Jeremiah that spake of the hunters and fishers that God should choose in the last days to gather Israel. And of a truth here we were on an Island of the Sea standing upon a rock where we could survey the gallant ships, and also the Island, which was full of rocks, holes, & caves. Perhaps as any part of the earth. But what had brought us here? Ah to search out the Blood of Ephraim & gather him from these Islands, rocks, holes, & caves, which were numerous. While the sun shed his beams to gladden earth, the spirit of God caused our souls to rejoice.

I sat down in company with Elder Hale. We read, and sung, and Prayed, and rejoiced. We spake of the ancient Prophets & Apostles in Jerusalem and Asia, Also of Nephi, Alma, Mormon & Moroni in America. We Also spake of Joseph, Oliver, Sidney, & of the twelve & Seventies, especially, Kimble, Hide, Goodson & others in England. Of Page & Blakesley on Canida & many other we thought and spake of. While filled with these meditations, & the Promises of GOD, we fell upon our knees and thanked the God of heaven, & Prayed for all Israel, not forgetting the Church of Latter Day Saints, head nor foot. We plead with God for Joseph & for all the Elders and members, especially our wives. Our souls rejoiced, & we went our way with glad hearts. [^14]-->

The elders continued their missionary work, preaching with such zeal and conviction that many faithful souls entered the waters of baptism. "The excitement became great on both islands" [^15] with more than a hundred persons joining the Church. For two small islands off the coast of Maine, this success was nothing short of miraculous. The work progressed rapidly and by the latter part of September, a branch of the Church was organized on each of the islands. As one local historian wrote: "About this time, Mormonism was preached here, and it is said held sway for several years, during which time a number of the hitherto prevailing faith were converted to its ranks." [^16]-->

On 2 October 1837, after organizing branches of the Church on both islands, Elders Woodruff and Hale bade the Saints farewell and returned to Scarborough. There, Elder Hale, who felt it his duty to return to his family and home in Kirtland, parted company with Elder Woodruff. Elder Jonathan H. Hale' s mission had ended, but Elder Woodruff's mission to Maine had only begun. [^17]-->

After spending a few weeks with family and friends in Scarborough, Wilford Woodruff, accompanied by his wife, set out for a second mission to the Fox Islands. This time, rather than arriving a stranger, he was greeted by throngs of happy Church members, eager to have him continue his missionary labors. On Sunday, 5 November 1837, he spoke to a large congregation of members and friends and baptized several persons.

One baptism, conducted during December, took place under circumstances that clearly demonstrated the great faith of the early converts. Elder Woodruff and Isaac Crockett spent a full hour clearing huge blocks of ice from the cove where they planned to perform the baptismal ceremony. When the tide came in, the two men descended into the frigid waters of the North Atlantic, and Isaac Crockett was baptized. Elder Woodruff baptized two more people at the same spot six days later, and one more the day after that. The residents of the Fox Islands demonstrated great faith in their desire to be baptized under such adverse conditions. The true nature of these difficult circumstances becomes more apparent when one realizes that the water temperature in the North Atlantic even in the summer reaches only about 60 degrees Fahrenheit. In the winter the water temperature is so cold that it is debilitating. The zeal and faith of both Wilford Woodruff and his converts are truly remarkable.

Elder and Sister Woodruff crossed the narrow waterway between the two islands many times as they continued to preach and baptize. The work was moving forward, but obstacles did confront them. During one meeting held in a schoolhouse, those who opposed the work of the Woodruffs began firing a gun, hoping to intimidate the missionary couple. Despite the crack of gunfire, Elder Woodruff continued to preach, and following the services he baptized two people. On other occasions the opposition fired warning shots and posted notices demanding the departure of the Woodruffs. Undaunted, the faithful couple continued their missionary labors. The Church continued to grow, and no harm came to them.

Opposition on the south island assumed the form of anti-Mormon writing. One poem which has survived over the years illustrates the feelings of some of the Fox Islanders.

Goodbye to Mr. Haler, goodbye to Mr. Ball, Goodbye to Mr. Woodruff, the greatest one of all. Goodbye to all the Deacons. Goodbye to all Christ Church. They cannot get their money, they've left them in the lurch Goodbye their Book of Mormon, goodbye their Revelation.

Goodbye to all their fools, and all their botheration. Goodbye to Elder Luce, goodbye to Deacon Thomas. Look not to right or left till you see the land of promise. Goodbye to all the ladies that like their Thievish Bank. Go taste their milk and honey in the promised land. We'll eat our fish and taters and tell the same old story, While you travel to the great Missouri.

Remember old Lot's wife was turned into salt For looking round behind her, commanded not to halt. So now you are pondering right between two stools, Goodbye to all your nonsense, for listening unto fools. I've bid you all goodbye for forming such a lie, The time is surely acoming, we surely all must die. Suppose I should die here and you be in Missouri, Which do you suppose would be the nearest Glory? [^18]-->

Wilford Woodruff felt inspired to preach to some of the inhabitants on the mainland, and so, in company with his wife, he journeyed to Bangor, Maine, via Searsmont, Camden, and Belfast, holding meetings at each place. Following a meeting in Searsmont on 21 February 1838, they emerged from the schoolhouse to find the sky aflame from horizon to horizon. Wilford wrote in his journal:

A light commenced in the NE. & spread to the W. & soon rolled up over head & also in the south & it centered in the heavens & rolled forth fire blood & smoke like contending armies: the whole heavens was illuminated with blood & fire for the space of half an hour & shook like a fowl upon the wing. It seemed at times as though the veil was about to rend in twain and the throne of God to appear. It appeared as though the elements were contending with each other.

We were trayling through deep snow drifts most of the time during this sceneery. This is one of the signs in the heavens in the last days spoken of by the ancient as well as modern Prophets. [^19]-->

They were observing one of the glorious spectacles of winter in the northern latitudes, the northern lights.

On 1 March 1838, his thirty-first birthday, Elder Woodruff and his wife arrived in Bangor, where he contacted some of the leading men of the city. These contacts allowed him to use the city hall for a series of meetings. Although those present showed considerable interest in his message, Elder Woodruff felt that he should return to the Fox Islands.

Upon returning to the islands, Wilford Woodruff received a "momentous letter [^20]--> from the Church leaders in Missouri. On 9 August 1838 Wilford Woodruff recorded the full text of the letter from President Thomas B. Marsh in his journal. An excerpt from that letter follows:

Know then brother Woodruff by this that you are appointed to fill the place of one of the twelve apostles; and that it is agreeable to the work of the LORD given vary lately that you should come speedily to far west, And on the 26 of April next to take your leave of the Saints here and depart for other climes across the mighty deep! Yours in the love of God. [^21]-->

Reflecting upon the weight of his new calling, Elder Woodruff wrote, "sleep departed from me as I spent the night in deep meditation." [^22]-->

Inasmuch as he had been instructed to go to Missouri, Brother Woodruff desired "to take with him those Saints from Maine who wished to gather." [^23]--> As he went about the task of organizing the Saints who wanted to gather to Missouri, Wilford carried a heavy burden of family problems. His wife's parents, who were not members of the Church, tried unsuccessfully to persuade Phoebe to remain with them in Maine rather than undertake an arduous journey to Missouri with a three-month-old baby. The news which the Saints received from Missouri also had a discouraging impact upon the gathering. The ortland Transcript, ne of the Maine newspapers, carried reports of violent persecution against the Mormons in Missouri. Still another dampening factor was the almost inherent desire on the part of the islanders to remain on the Fox Islands. Despite such discouragement, Elder Woodruff went ahead with preparations to help the Saints gather to Missouri.

There were factors, however, which made the thought of leaving a little more desirable "a national depression had set in; times were hard; Ohio fever was rampant. A number of the island flock, their conviction shaken by adversity, were ready for a new approach to salvation. [^24] Ultimately, the decision to gather to Zion rested with one's testimony and conviction. Wilford Woodruff succeeded in convincing 53 people to leave their homes on the islands and gather to Missouri. As they began the physical preparations for the journey west, Elder Woodruff commented on their lack of skill in using wagons and teams. "The inhabitants of the islands had but little acquaintance with the management of horses and wagons; in fact most of them knew more about handling a shark than a horse." [^25]--> Despite such obstacles, they made the necessary preparations and got underway in late September 1838. The branch president on the North Fox Island, Nathaniel Thomas, provided assistance to the Saints. He not only helped prepare the wagons and teams, he donated his own money to assist the poor in gathering. Under the direction of President Nathaniel Thomas, the Saints joined Wilford and Phoebe Woodruff at Scarborough, Maine, on 3 October 1838.

The entire company departed from Father Carter's in Scarborough on 9 October 1838. They traveled through New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. Since they were traveling so late in the year, they encountered bad weather and consequent delays. Some journal entries will illustrate. "It is a rainy and gloomy day. We traveled 12 miles through me mud & water." [^26] "We have troublesome times in the camp. Several of the children very sick." [^27] "A cold day, We had some snow." [^28] "A dubious looking morning for the air is full of snow & a cold winter day. This a tedious journing for horses, men women & children." [^29]-->

The cold weather caused more than delay. There was intense suffering, illness, and even death. Clara Newel Thomas, the five-year-old daughter of President Nathaniel Thomas, died on 5 November 1838 at Westfield, New York. They buried the child and moved on. Such experiences were a foreshadowing of the trials the Mormon pioneers would endure during their trek to Utah.

The party from Maine arrived in Rochester, Illinois, not far from Springfield, on 19 December 1838. While encamped at Rochester they learned that the Saints in Missouri "were suffering the severest persecutions." [^30] A council was held, and after considering the persecutions in Missouri, the severe weather conditions ahead of them on the trail, and the shelter available in Rochester among local Latter-day Saints they decided to remain for the winter in Rochester. Only a partial list of the 53 who left Maine is available. From North Fox Island: Nathaniel Thomas, his wife, Susan Luce Thomas, and their children; Ephriam Luce, his wife Lydia McComber Luce, and five children; Ebenezer Carver, his wife, Mary Stinson Carver, and five children; Cyrus Sterrett, his wife, and three children. From South Fox island: Charles Brown, his wife, Mary Arey Brown, and five children; Alonzo Thurston. From Camden: Daniel Whitley, his wife, and four children. From Scarborough: Wilford Woodruff, his wife, Phoebe Carter Woodruff, and one child; James Townsend, his wife, Susan Davis Townsend, and four children. [^31]--> Only forty members of the total party are not known by name. The party had ten wagons and nineteen horses.

Some of those traveling with the Woodruff party left the group along the way. The Ebenezer Carver family left the group at Utica, New York. From there, the Carvers traveled by lakes and canals. Interestingly enough, they arrived in Rochester well ahead of the wagons and teams. The Sterretts and Whitleys elected to spend the winter in Buffalo, New York. The Thomas and Townsend families traveled by a different route. Consequently, only the Luce, Brown, and Woodruff families reached Rochester, Illinois, together on 19 December 1838.

Some of the Fox Island Saints gathered to Illinois on their own. Captain Justin Eames and his wife, Betsey Hudson Eames, Elder Woodruff's first converts on the north island, arrived in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1845. From the south island, Alvin and David Crockett went to Nauvoo in 1841. [^32]-->

The conversion of several people, the establishment of branches on both islands, and the gathering of Saints to Zion constitute an impressive missionary success story. This accomplishment helps make Wilford Woodruff one of the greatest Mormon missionaries. According to B. H. Roberts, "Elder Woodruff met with great success" [^33]--> in his work on the Fox Islands.

Wilford Woodruff did not achieve success only to leave the people to fend for themselves. He showed compassion and concern for those who chose not to gather to Zion but remained on the islands. In the years to follow he visited the members on the Fox Islands and attended to their spiritual needs. In fact, he was in Portland, Maine, enroute to the Fox Islands when he learned of the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^34]-->

Today the Fox Islands, now known as North Haven and Vinalhaven, appear different than in Wilford Woodruff's time. [^35]--> There are more buildings, the roads have been paved, electric utility poles and wires clutter the landscape, the roar of diesel-driven lobster boats is heard, and occasionally a modern jetliner streaks overhead.

Behind this facade of apparent change, however, North Haven (North Fox Island) and Vinalhaven (South Fox Island) remain basically the same as they were when Elders Woodruff acrid Hale preached the restored gospel there more than 150 years ago. Walking over the trails where Wilford Woodruff walked; observing the Baptist meetinghouse where he preached; sampling the wild raspberries that he enjoyed; gazing at the rugged, pristine beauty of the Penobscot Bay islands, the Camden hills, and the blue-green water of Penobscot Bay; one senses a closeness to Wilford Woodruff and his mission.

In the minds and hearts of the older islanders, Wilford Woodruff is, indeed, still present. Many of the elderly residents of the islands vividly remember tales of the Mormon missionaries and their activities on the Fox Islands. They recall how the Mormon elders converted many of the islanders and eventually how they left to go "abroad" to join with the Mormons on the mainland. They can point out the schoolhouses where Elders Woodruff and Hale preached, and the homes of such people as Nathaniel Thomas, who left the island to join the Mormons in Illinois.

The people of the Fox Islands have a strong interest in their heritage. They are busily engaged in the task of preserving and understanding their past. They have maintained, in remarkably good condition, the old Baptist Church on North Haven, where Wilford Woodruff and Jonathan Hale first preached in August 1837. The North Haven Historical Society has collected historical documents and has written and published the history of the islands. Some of the records of the past bear positive testimony to the signal success enjoyed by Wilford Woodruff and Jonathan Hale 150 years ago. For example, the official records of the Baptist Church show that on 19 January 1838 "at church meeting excluded Nathaniel Thomas and his wife Ruth Luce from the Church having joined the Mormons." [^36]-->

Surrounded by the overwhelming beauty of Penobscot Bay, one is almost compelled to ask, What made Wilford Woodruff choose these islands for the message of the Restoration? What caused Elder Woodruff to be so successful? As a frequent visitor to the islands and an avid student of Wilford Woodruff, I have formulated some tentative answers to those questions. Wilford Woodruff went on a mission to the Fox Islands because he believed in and followed the Spirit of God. His willingness to follow that Spirit guided him successfully through each phase of his mission. [^37]--> His success, however, cannot be explained simply in terms of the guidance of the Spirit. He not only received the impressions of the Spirit, he actively and courageously followed them. Within Elder Woodruff there existed a zeal which drove him to success. His own zeal, his own personal initiative, played an immensely important role in his missionary experiences on the Fox Islands. The combination of the Spirit of God and personal zeal insured a successful mission for Wilford Woodruff.

Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 1833-1898, 9 vols., (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983-84), 1:170. The original copy of the joumal is located in the LDS Church archives. Hereafter referred to as Woodruff Journal.

---
Notas:
[^1] James R. Moss, The International Church, (Provo, Utah: BYU Publications, 1982), pp. 297-98.
[^2] Journal History, 18 May 1903, p. 5.
[^3] Journal History, 16 March 1900, p. 7; 28 July 1900, p. 6; 12 May 1902, p. 1.
[^4] Improvement Era, 14 (June 1911):747; 15 (April 1912):546; 16 (Sept. 1913):1054.
[^5] Improvement Era, 16(March 1913):512.
[^6] Journal History, 1 July 1905, pp. 16-19, and 8 December 1905, p. 6; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 1965), 6:427-28; William E. Berrett and Alma P. Burton, Readings in L.D.S. Church History (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1958), 3:291-95; Church News, 26 December 1964, p. 24.
[^7] Journal History, 30 April 1906, p. 7, and 1 November 1907, p. 9; Junius F. Wells, "The Prophet's Birthplace," Improvement Era 11 (December 1933): 133-37.
[^8] Improvement Era, 17 (December 1913): 122-27.
[^9] Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith, (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 336.
[^10] Improvement Era, 13 (July 1910):845; 15 (Feb. 1912):375; 23 (March 1920):455.
[^11] Improvement Era, 21 (April 1918):548.
[^12] Improvement Era, 22 (March 1919):454; 24 (July 1921):844-45.
[^13] Improvement Era, 23 (Oct. 1930)1106; 24 (July 1921):847.
[^14] Mission Annual Reports, 1937 and 1938, MS Church Archives.
[^15] Interviews with Truman and Ann Madsen and with Donald Q. Cannon, 23 May 1985.
[^16] Mission Annual Reports, 1952.
[^17] Interview with the Madsens.
[^18] Laurel Lynn King, "Life in the Massachusetts Boston Mission Home," New Era, 5 (May 1975):30-31; Paul James Toscano, "The Boston Saints," Ensign 3 (February 1973): 14; Church News, 23 April 1955, p. 10, and 29 September 1956, pp. 2-3.
[^19] Interview with the Madsens.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid.; Church News, 4 January 1964, p. 4; New England Prophet, January 1964.
[^23] Interview with the Madsens.
[^24] Deseret News Church Almanac.
[^25] Church News, 29 September, 1962, p. 5.
[^26] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 6:319.
[^27] Church News, 26 May 1962, p. 4; 29 June 1968, p. 4; 23 October 1971, p. 7; and 26 March 1977, p. 13. Cannon interview.
[^28] Church News, 29 September 1962, p. 5.
[^29] Interview with the Madsens.
[^30] Cannon interview.
[^31] Church News, 1 October 1966, p. 11; 6 April 1968, p. 7; and 10 November 1970, p. 10.
[^32] Church News, 23 April 1966, p. 10; Eleanor Knowles, "The Saints in Canada' s Maritime Provinces," Ensign 4 (June 1974):50-55.
[^33] Church News, 21 January 1961, p. 5; 19 May 1973 p. 10; and 20 September 1975, p. 11. Paul James Toscano, "The Boston Saints," Ensign 3 (February 1973): 16.
[^34] Church News, 20 September 1975, p. 4.
[^35] For a discussion of the early history of the Fox Islands, see Donald Q. Cannon, "Wilford Woodruff's Mission to Maine," Improvement Era 73 (September 1970): 82-86.
[^36] North Haven Baptist Church Records, Book 2.
[^37] For a discussion of Wilford Woodruff's spiritual dimension, see Thomas G. Alexander, "Wilford Woodruff and the Changing Nature of Mormon Religious Experience," Church History 45 (March 1976):56-69.
