Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: New England ( 1988)

Yankee Saints: The Church in New England During the Twentieth Century

Richard O. Cowan

From the beginning New England has played a key role in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Three of its first four presidents were born there. It was the scene of almost continual missionary work during the 1830s and 1840s, and numerous strong branches flourished. With the Saints' epic trek to the Rocky Mountains, however, missionary work throughout the eastern sections of North America waned. It came to a complete halt in 1857 when a hostile army marched on the Saints' homeland in the Rocky Mountains and Brigham Young called on outlying settlers as well as missionaries to return, regroup, and prepare to defend their homes. For the next three decades there was almost no Latter-day Saint activity in the East. The struggle with the federal government over the Saints' practice of plural marriage tended to prolong this isolation. However, a period of increasing goodwill followed the 1890 Manifesto, and the Church reinaugurated activity in areas which had remained dormant for nearly a third of a century. In 1893 the Eastern States Mission, of which New England was a part, was reopened with headquarters in Brooklyn, New York. Thus the history of the Church in New England had virtually a new beginning just before the turn of the century.

While many features of Latter-day Saint progress in New England are unique, the Church' s growth in this area followed a pattern common to many other parts of the world. James R. Moss has spoken of three distinct stages of Church development: beginning, transitional, and established. In the beginning phase, small congregations meet in inadequate rented halls, most activities being conducted by the missionaries. During the transitional phase, branches often move into homes which have been purchased and remodeled to serve as chapels. As the Church enters its established phase, the local Saints assume full responsibility for their religious activities, paving the way for the organization of stakes and wards which meet in beautiful and well-equipped chapels. In the initial phase, the Saints are either ignored or dismissed as a peculiar sect. As the Church becomes well established, its members are increasingly regarded as respected citizens of the community. [^1]--> All three stages are reflected in the Church's New England development during the twentieth century.

As Latter-day Saint missionaries returned to New England during the 1890's, they found only a handful of scattered members. By 1903 there was but a single "New England Branch of the Eastern States Mission," centered in the Boston area. [^2]--> From this small beginning would spring the Church's growth during the present century.

The missionaries faced formidable opposition as they sought to reintroduce the gospel into New England. The opening years of the twentieth century were a time of misunderstanding and misrepresentation, most anti-Mormon attacks being directly related to the B. H. Roberts and Reed Smoot election cases. In 1900, for example, the Rev. J. D. Nutting, a Protestant minister who had lived in Utah, gave a lecture in Providence on "The Menace of Mormonism." That same year elders in Boston were denied permission to hold street meetings, and two years later ministers met there to plan work against the Mormons. [^3] The results of this opposition were not all bad, however, the elders reported that false stories helped them gain an audience. Many "liberal-thinking people" became "disgusted at the unfairness" of the attacks. "We have heard the question from the world' s side, and also the testimony of the 'Mormon' elders." These people now declared their determination to search out the matter for themselves. [^4] This opposition had been particularly strong in Vermont, the state of the Prophet's birth. Nevertheless through the missionaries' diligent efforts, the "prejudice of longstanding is slowly dying out." [^5]-->

The Joseph Smith Monument

A force for good among New England missionaries and Saints, as well as among the general population, has been the visitor's center at Joseph Smith's birthplace in Sharon, Vermont. Junius F. Wells, whose Father, Daniel H. Wells, had been a close friend of Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, visited Vermont in 1884 in order to locate the exact site of the Prophet' s birth. All he found was a hearthstone and crumbling foundation where the small home had once stood. From that time he devoted his energies to the project of having the Church erect a suitable monument to the Prophet on that spot. These dreams were realized just after the turn of the century when the Church, newly freed from debt, began purchasing selected historic sites. Through a series of four transactions the Church acquired 283 acres, including the homestead of Solomon Mack, the Prophet's maternal grandfather. By the fall of 1905 a modern "memorial cottage" had been constructed around the old hearthstone, and preparations to erect a monument nearby were nearing completion. It would feature a shaft of Vermont granite with one foot in height for each of Joseph Smith's 38 years of life. It was the tallest polished granite shaft in America at the time. When the shaft was loaded onto wagons at the South Royalton Railroad siding, they sank into the mud up to the hubs of their wheels. Heavy planks had to be placed on the road for the wagons to run on. Hauling the monument was facilitated when a strong cold snap froze the ground hard. Nevertheless, the 3-mile trip to the monument site took thirteen days. By 8 December the monument was in place.

A group of twenty-five Church leaders, including President Joseph F. Smith, traveled from Utah by special railroad car to participate in the dedicatory services, which were held on 23 December 1905, the one-hundredth anniversary of the Prophet's birth. A representative of South Royalton citizens greeted the visitors "in that broad spirit of toleration... Christian charity [or] brotherly love." In his dedicatory prayer, President Smith referred to the granite shaft as an apt "token of that inspired man of God whom thou didst make into a polished shaft in thine hand." [^6]-->

Junius F. Wells continued his interest in the memorial, returning to Vermont the next two summers to supervise beautification and related projects. Even though many Vermonters had opposed establishing the monument, he observed a "lessening of prejudice" as visitors felt the "reverent spirit in this beautiful place." [^7] In 1913 the caretaker of the memorial farm invited all the missionaries and Saints in New England to celebrate Pioneer Day in Sharon. Mission President Ben E. Rich spoke of the appropriateness of celebrating this holiday at the birthplace of the Prophet who foretold of the Saints' becoming a mighty people in the Rocky Mountains. [^8]-->

Visits to this site also provided a spiritual boost to missionaries. Elder B. H. Roberts, who served as president of the Eastern States Mission from 1922 to 1927, frequently took his missionaries there. On one occasion he knelt with them at the crest of a nearby hill which afforded a commanding view of the green Vermont countryside in every direction. He reviewed at length instances in former dispensations when the Lord had manifested himself on mountain tops. "As he prayed," his mission secretary Henry D. Taylor recalled, "his voice choked with emotion, tears filled his eyes, and a glow came into his face; his snow-white hair waved in the gentle breeze. As he continued pouring out his soul to the Lord, the veil grew very thin. Surely the Lord was near." [^9]--> This place appropriately came to be known as "Patriarch' s Hill."

The Work Spreads

Through the missionaries' efforts, the gospel was introduced into an increasing number of new locations. The Vermont Conference (or District) was organized on Pioneer Day in 1909. The first "cottage meeting" in many years was held in New Haven on 15 December of that same year; in subsequent months a series of these meetings had an average attendance of twenty-five. A small Sunday School was conducted in Providence, Rhode Island. By 1920 the branch Relief Society at New Bedford, Massachusetts, was able to hold a bazaar. [^10]-->

Elder James E. Talmage of the Council of the Twelve visited New England in 1916. At the semiannual conference held in Barre, Vermont, on 16 January he blessed the work in that area and predicted that "many people would receive the gospel" and that the entire state of Vermont would become "a shining light among all the other states." Only thirty people were present at this conference, the majority being members of the Church. Two years later, however, eighty-six, people attended a similar gathering, many of whom were interested investigators. [^11]--> The complete fulfillment of Elder Talmage's prophetic blessing would be slow in coming.

In 1919 a missionary wrote in the Church's Improvement Era magazine that in his opinion Maine and New Hampshire "have been considered the most impregnable, when it comes to teaching the plan of life and salvation, of all the states in our Country." Two years later, however, another issue of the magazine reported success even in these areas. On 15 May 1921, some sixty persons attended a conference held at Bangor, Maine on the banks of the Penobscot River. Following the morning sessions, sixteen converts were baptized and confirmed. Mission President George W. McCune spoke on Mormonism at a hall meeting that evening. The interest was so great, he gave a second discourse. [^12]-->

Street preaching meetings continued to be an effective means the missionaries used to reach a broader audience even though they continued to face some opposition. During the early 1920s, elders in Portland, Maine held a street meeting against the personal wishes of the mayor. The police chief told them he would not arrest them, but warned them to cut things short because "the sentiment of the people was against them." In Burlington, Vermont the police ordered the elders to break up a street meeting. A crowd quickly gathered, many taking the side of the missionaries. One of the elders reported that "many friends were made who never could have been reached without this little excitement." [^13]-->

A Separate Mission

For over a quarter century the entire New England area remained part of the Eastern States Mission. In 1919, however, the Canadian Mission was formed, and jurisdiction over the Maritime Provinces was transferred to this new unit. Then, in 1925 another new mission, the North Central States Mission, with headquarters in Minneapolis, was formed. Even this faraway development affected New England. The provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan became parts of the new mission, so within a short time responsibility for the work in Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont was assigned to the Canadian Mission with headquarters in Toronto.

As the work grew, Church leaders in 1937 decided to form a separate New England Mission with Carl F. Eyring as its first president. (See the list of mission presidents in appendix A.) The new mission received the Maritime Provinces and the upper New England States from the Canadian Mission, together with Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts, which were transferred from the Eastern States Mission.

At the end of 1937 there were 1,061 members in the New England Mission. Only 40 percent of them were located in the eight organized branches of New England: Boston, New Bedford, Fall River, Lynn-Salem, and Providence Branches in the Massachusetts District; and the New Haven, Hartford, and Springfield Branches in the Connecticut Valley. Another 20 percent were affiliated with smaller units that typically met in rented halls. Some 40 percent had no contact with any local Church unit whatsoever. Most of these people were located in the Vermont, New Hampshire, Maine, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia Districts, where no intensive missionary work had been conducted for several years. Keeping in touch with these scattered Saints was a major challenge. Mission President Eyring took steps early to assign missionaries to these areas where they could provide strength to isolated members. [^14]--> The magnitude of this challenge was intensified when one realizes that the boundaries of the mission extended some 1,500 miles: from the suburbs of New York City on the southwest to Newfoundland and Labrador, and at one time, even Greenland on the northeast.

Foundations for Growth

The importance of the work in New England was reflected in the fact that two of the mission's first four presidents were members of the First Council of the Seventy-Levi Edgar Young (1939-1941) and S. Dilworth Young (1947-1951). Two other General Authorities presided over the mission in later years-Elder Boyd K. Packer, an Assistant to the Twelve (1965-1968) and Paul H. Dunn, of the First Council of the Seventy (1968-1971).

In 1947, mission presidents around the world were authorized to call counselors for the first time. President S. Dilworth Young chose two able brethren to assist him in the new presidency: William P. Knecht and G. Roy Fugal. William P. Knecht later provided valuable financial counsel to the Church as a whole, and G. Roy Fugal became one of the original "Regional Representatives of the Twelve" in 1967. This strong mission presidency was able to provide sound leadership as the work in New England moved forward.

President S. Dilworth Young emphasized "country work," a practice he had experienced as a young missionary, laboring without purse or scrip in rural areas. The custom soon spread to other missions. Small-town New Englanders were naturally hospitable and eager to take care of the missionaries. This willingness to help led to gospel conversations and in many instances to conversion. The method had some definite problems, however, and was discontinued a few years later. Follow-up was difficult as there were few branches close enough for the converts to attend. Nevertheless, the program did bring positive results. During 1948, the year "country work" was introduced, the New England Mission baptized 100 persons for the first time. (Yearly totals for the three previous years were 38, 18, and 36.)

Many good people came into the Church because of "country work." More than a decade later, members in little towns outside Worcester, Massachusetts were described as being the "heart of that branch." One pair of missionaries met Chandler and Edith Abbott of Foxboro. The elders spent the night, did some washing, and left without saying anything about the gospel. That night when Mr. Abbott came home from work he said: "I have been concerned about the elders all day." "So have I," his wife responded. They got in their car, drove the distance the missionaries had been able to walk that day-perhaps fifteen miles-found them, and asked: "Why are you traveling around this way? What are you talking about?" They took the elders home, studied the gospel, and joined the Church. Mr. Abbott later became a member of the mission presidency. [^15]-->

As the mission began to grow, the need for adequate places of worship became critical. At first the Church purchased stately old homes which were remodeled into meetinghouses. The "first modern chapel," a comparatively small building, was dedicated at Hartford in 1952. [^16]-->

Perhaps the single most important building project during these years was at Cambridge. In December 1941, mission president Levi Edgar Young heard that the Longfellow estate was for sale. He immediately contacted a real estate agent in Boston and indicated he wanted to buy the property. He had not had time to clear this action with Church headquarters. When it was learned that the Mormons were interested in the property, there was opposition and even demonstrations. Bowing to this pressure, the agent called President Young and announced: "If you are not here with a check by noon, there is no way you can have that property." This was a condition he felt sure the mission could not possibly meet. "I'11 be fight there," President Young declared with determination. He put on his hat, took the subway downtown, walked into the agent's office and wrote a personal check for more than $20,000 on an account in which he had only "peanuts." When the agent questioned the check, President Young responded with confidence: "Call my bank." When bank president Orvill Adams received the call and learned that it was Levi Edgar Young who had written the check, he knew that something important was at stake so responded: "I'll honor his check in any amount." In this way the Church obtained what was regarded as the best location in Cambridge for a future chapel and mission headquarters. [^17]-->

On the property was a three-story, thirty-room mansion, which was dedicated in 1943 as the New England Mission home by David O. McKay, then a counselor in the First Presidency. It was located near Harvard University on Brattle Street, noted for its magnificent homes and known as "Tory Row" because of those who lived there during the Revolutionary War era. In 1955 the home was moved around the corner to a new location on Hawthorne Street. The building had to be cut in half for the move and was the largest such operation in New England history. The move made way for the new Cambridge Chapel, which also housed mission offices and the Institute of Religion. In 1956, David O. McKay, now President of the Church, returned to the Boston area to dedicate this beautiful edifice. With a slender copper spire over one hundred feet high, the building's colonial architecture featuring red brick and white wood trim blended in well with other structures in its historic neighborhood. [^18]-->

An Era of Growth

In 1962 Truman G. Madsen was called, with his wife Ann, to preside over the New England Mission. At the close of their farewell, President Henry D. Moyle put his arms around both of them and declared: "There will not have been a greater era in New England than yours." [^19]--> This Prophetic promise was fulfilled in a number of ways.

The Madsens had lived in the area previously; they were well aware that, as the cradle of the nation (and of the Church), New England was "thoroughly traditionated" and that there was "great resistance to change." This prevailing attitude was captured in a highway sign: "Entering Vermont-Last Stand of the Yankees." Nevertheless, they were convinced that "the shell around New England" could be cracked. They went to work assuring the missionaries that the shell was more around them than around the New Englanders. [^20]--> They creatively devised new ways to reach out to the people, and found unprecedented success in using the mass media.

New England is noted for its many educational institutions, some eighty located in the Boston area alone. Having earned his Ph.D. at Harvard under Paul Tillock, a noted Christian theologian, President Madsen offered to discuss the theology of Tillock at numerous schools in the area, provided there could be an informal question-answer session following his presentation. He would always mention the Church and would have a group of elders present to answer questions. [^21]--> Under the Madsens' dynamic leadership, the missionaries baptized 999 converts in 1963, exceeding the previous record by more than 360. The following year a total of 1,131 were baptized, a record that would be exceeded only in 1980 and 1981.

A milestone in the lives of many New England Saints was the special Christmas conference held in 1963. Some 2,200 members, missionaries, and investigators met in the Boston Music Hall Sunday evening, 22 December, for the largest Latter-day Saint gathering in New England history. Many of the Saints had come from isolated areas and had never seen more than two or three members together at any one time. Tears flowed freely as these Saints felt the spirit and power of the huge congregation. They had no idea there were so many members in New England. President Hugh B. Brown, a counselor to President David O. McKay, was the featured speaker. At the conclusion of his remarks he left a special blessing on the people of New England, rededicating the area "for the gathering of the Saints [and] for the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^22]-->

While in the area, President Brown also conducted a special missionary meeting. The Relief Society room in the Cambridge chapel was crowded to overflowing. In the spirit of prophecy he declared: "There is one or more here who will sit in the presiding councils of the Church." President and Sister Madsen made careful notes of who were present. One who was in the building at the time was Loren C. Dunn, who was residing and working in the Boston area. [^23]--> He subsequently became a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy.

During the 1950s and 1960s Church membership in New England grew from 4,250 to 30,000, approximately tripling the worldwide rate. During these two decades the Latter-day Saints' share of the total New England population increased from .02 percent to .2 percent. However, there is still a long way to go despite this rapid growth. Another statistic suggests a different kind of challenge. In New England only 48 percent of the adult male members hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, compared to 71 percent in Utah. [^24]--> Hence there is a definite need to strengthen Church activity.

John E. Carr, who served as mission president during the early 1960s, stressed the importance of strengthening Church organizations and programs in preparation for the creation of stakes. During his presidency, the number of elders quorums grew from two to nine. [^25] The first stake in New England was organized at Boston on 20 May 1962. Many Saints regarded this event as a fulfillment of the prophetic declaration made by Joseph Smith in 1844, just two months before his death: "I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth, wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches to the Lord throughout the States, there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, etc., there shall be stakes. It is a glorious proclamation, and I have reserved it to the last. [^26]--> (By 1981 there were ten stakes in New England (see appendix B).

In accordance with the typical pattern, the majority of New England stake presidency members came from the centers of Church strength in the West. A striking exception was the Maine Stake, organized in 1968. All three members of the original stake presidency were natives of Maine itself. Business and professional assignments were more likely to have brought people from the western states to the Boston area or to Connecticut than to Maine. [^27]-->

As stakes and wards multiplied, the need for chapels increased. President Carr stressed a building program. "This will make a difference in the minds of members, friends, and investigators," he believed. "New Englanders hold a close relationship between church buildings and the doctrines taught in these buildings." [^28]--> When President Henry D. Moyle was in New England for the 1962 organization of the Boston Stake, a local Church official asked for permission to purchase a building site in Hartford, explaining that there were two pieces of property under consideration, one in East Hartford and the other in West Hartford. President Moyle asked how much they cost and learned that each cost about $25,000. With evident vision of future Church growth in the area, he confidently directed, "Buy them both." Not long ago the stake in Hartford was divided, so each property is now the site for a stake center. [^29]-->

President Madsen had some optimistic long-range plans of his own. He decided to build one of the largest buildings in all New England at Portland, even though there was only a small branch there and not much else in the whole state of Maine at that time. To encourage the local Saints to move this project forward, President Madsen made a personal donation to the building fund. Thanks to his vision, this building was erected and has been "a real blessing" to the Church in Portland, having served as a stake center and as the meeting-house for as many as three wards at a time. [^30]--> During the three years Truman Madsen presided over the New England Mission, more than half of the convert baptisms came in branches which had built new chapels.

Recent Activities

Members and missionaries have taken advantage of a variety of opportunities to reach out to a broader audience. Missionaries during the later 1960s increased the distribution of the Book of Mormon from 2,800 to 15,000 copies annually. They set up flannel-board displays near the entrance to the Concord battleground. They used display boards shaped like the Salt Lake Temple to attract the interest of those passing on the street. The Church became the major institutional supporter of the Boy Scout program in New England. Such efforts, together with the growing number of beautiful chapels and the increasing influence of individual members, made the Saints much better known throughout the area. [^31]--> Displays at Joseph Smith's birthplace were revamped during 1968 to more effectively bear testimony of his prophetic calling.

The Church was not only becoming more visible, but also more respected. Wilbur W. Cox, the original president of the Boston Stake, witnessed a "remarkable change" since he came to Boston in 1950: "The Church is now looked up to as one of the great religions of the world. This has come about through the example of the people, the impressions made by the Tabernacle Choir [which visited Boston during an eastern concert tour in 1958], and the mass media reaching the people." This improved image was not limited to such major centers as Boston. In Canada's Maritime Provinces, where the Church's programs had not flourished much before the 1970s, the Saints were increasingly being accepted as respected members of their communities. [^32]-->

The Saints' influence was felt in a variety of ways. By the early 1960s they had joined the traditional Christmas caroling in historic Louisville Square on Beacon Hill. Beginning in 1970, a three-day "open campus" educational program in Boston featured as many as fifty displays or lectures on such religious and secular topics as Genesis, food storage, dance, current affairs, and investments. In 1973 George Romney was a featured speaker. In 1975 more than a thousand attended this annual event. Under the leadership of President Richard L. Bushman, "Project 48" provided newcomers with up to two day's housing at the modest cost of three dollars per night, together with information needed by those just moving to Boston to work or attend school. Proceeds went into the missionary fund. When a group of Church workers completed microfilming state vital records, the governor of Massachusetts proclaimed a "Mormon Records Day." [^33]-->

New England also became noted worldwide as an important source of information about Mormonism in two rather different ways. William Robertson Coe, a native of England who became a successful New York financier, moved to a ranch in Wyoming. There he collected pamphlets and other literature from the region, including many valuable writings by or about the Mormons. He donated his materials to Yale University beginning in 1942. The Coe collection is regarded as one of the outstanding libraries on the Latter-day Saints anywhere in the world. [^34]-->

In 1962, the Church purchased international shortwave station WRUL at Scituate, Massachusetts. This station owned five of only seven commercial shortwave radio transmitters in the nation (the majority of such facilities being operated by the government' s official "Voice of America" or "Armed Forces Radio Service"). WRUL beamed Church related programs to Europe, Africa, and Latin America.

New England, then, has played a key role in Church his-story. During the twentieth century it has not only reflected, but in various ways has also influenced developments elsewhere. New England has provided educational training and other experiences to hundreds of professional and business people who have gone out to serve around the world. All indications are that the Yankee Saints in New England will continue to grow in strength, and that the Church will continue to flourish in the region which gave birth to its founder.

Appendix A: Mission Presidents

New England Mission (Massachusetts Boston Mission after 1974)

1937-1939Carl F. Eyring1939-1941Levi Edgar1941-1947Young William H. Reeder, Jr.1947-1951S. Dilworth Young1951-1955J. Howard Maughan 1955-1959Junius M. Jackson 1959Edgar B. Brossard 1959-1962 John E. Carr1962-1965Truman G. Madsen 1965-1968Boyd K. Packer1968-1971Paul H. Dunn1971-1974 John L. Clarke1974-1977Allen C. Rozsa1977-1979Jae R. Ballif1979-1982Richard B. Tempest 1982-1985Bruce L. Olsen1985-Kem C. Gardner

Canada-Maritimes Mission (Canada Halifax Mission after 1974)

1973-1976Thurn J. Baker 1976-1979Merlin O. Baker 1979-1982 James A. Kenning 1982-1985D. Ray Hassell 1985-David E. Sorensen

Connecticut Hartford Mission

1979-1982Gerald L. Erickson1982-1985Ira I. Somers1985-Richard E. Harris

Appendix B: New England Chronology

1893Eastern States Mission reopened.1903Single "New England Branch" reported.1905(23 December) Joseph Smith Monument dedicated at Sharon.1909Vermont Conference organized; first meetings in New Haven.1916(16 January) Elder Talmage blesses work in Vermont area. 1919Canadian Mission organized, including Maritime Provinces.1937(24 September) New England Mission organized.1941Site of future Cambridge Chapel purchased from Longfellow estate.1942 Mormon collection donated to Yale University Library.1948Baptisms reach 100 for first time.1956(23 September) Cambridge Chapel dedicated by President McKay.1958(6 November) Tabernacle Choir concert in Boston.1962(20 May) Boston Stake, first in New England, organized; shortwave radio transmitters purchased by the Church.1963President Hugh B. Brown speaks at mission Christmas conference.1964Baptisms exceed 1,000 for first time.1966(18 September) Hartford Stake organized in Connecticut.1968(23 June) Maine Stake formed with completely local presidency.1970(22 March) Merrimac Stake organized at Nashua, N.H.1973Canada-Maritimes Mission created.1976(11 April) Montpelier Stake organized in Vermont.1977(20 March) First stake division, Providence Stake formed.1979Connecticut Hartford Mission established.1981(30 August) Hingham (Mass.) and New Haven Stakes organized.1985(19 May) Halifax Stake, first in Maritime Provinces, formed; symposium conducted by BYU's Church History and Doctrine Department.

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard Hofstadter and William Smith, eds., American Higher Education: A Documentary History (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, n.d.), p. 2.
[^2] Ibid., pp. 8-9.
[^3] Peter J. Gomes, "No More 'Godless Harvard,'" Independent, 29 Nov. 1984, pp. 7-8.
[^4] Widtsoe was president of Utah State Agricultural College from 1907 to 1916 and president of University of Utah from 1916 to 1921. Later, as a General Authority of the Church, he was appointed Commissioner of Education, thereby presiding over affairs at Brigham Young University.
[^5] John A. Widtsoe, In a Sunlit Land (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1952), pp. 31-32.
[^6] Ibid., p. 34.
[^7] Ibid., p. 37.
[^8] Ibid., p. 33.
[^9] Ibid., p. 35.
[^10] Ibid., p. 34.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 39-40.
[^12] Bryant S. Hinckley, Hours with Our Leaders (Salt Lake City: General Boards of the Mutual Improvement Association, 1941), p. 74.
[^13] Widtsoe, p. 39.
[^14] G. Homer Durham, "Levi Edgar Young-Senior President: First Council of the Seventy," Improvement Era, August 1952, pp. 57 1-73.
[^15] Truman G. Madsen, "William James: Philosopher-Educator," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 4, no. 1, autumn 1961, p. 101.
[^16] Ray Allen Billington, "The Origins of Harvard's Mormon Collection," Arizona and the West, (1968) pp. 211-24.
[^17] Ibid., p. 214.
[^18] Salt Lake City Herald, March 12, 1914.
[^19] Billington, pp. 217-18.
[^20] Ibid., pp. 218-219.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Ibid., p. 222.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 222-23.
[^25] New England Mission and Cambridge Branch Chapel Building, Dedication Booklet (Cambridge: University Press of Cambridge, n.d.) p. 25.
[^26] Mrs. E.G. Peterson, Remembering E.G. Peterson, His Life and Our Story (Logan, Utah: The Old Main Society, October 1974,) p. 120.
[^27] Robert D. Hales, "The Mantle of a Bishop," Ensign, May 1985, p. 30.
[^28] Karl Bushman, "On a Mission for God," The Harvard Independent, 29 November 1984, p. 7.
[^29] Martha Nibley Beck, "Cultivating Faith, LDS Students at New England Universities," Ensign, July 1984, pp. 32-36.
[^30] Anne Busath, "Ivory Towers, LDS Students In Ivy League Schools," This People, October 1984, pp. 28-35.
[^31] Church News, 1 October 1966, p. 11; 6 April 1968, p. 7; and 10 November 1970, p. 10.
[^32] Church News, 23 April 1966, p. 10; Eleanor Knowles, "The Saints in Canada' s Maritime Provinces," Ensign 4 (June 1974):50-55.
[^33] Church News, 21 January 1961, p. 5; 19 May 1973 p. 10; and 20 September 1975, p. 11. Paul James Toscano, "The Boston Saints," Ensign 3 (February 1973): 16.
[^34] Church News, 20 September 1975, p. 4.
