For centuries, black powder was the most powerful explosive available.¹ It could launch cannon balls, but it wasn’t effective for most mining and road construction projects. It was just too weak to shatter rock.

In 1846 an Italian chemist named Ascanio Sobrero synthesized a new explosive, nitroglycerin. This oily fluid was at least a thousand times more powerful than black powder. It could easily shatter rock. Unfortunately, nitroglycerin was unstable. If you dropped it from a small height, it’d blow up. If it got too hot, it’d blow up. If it got too cold, it’d blow up. Even placed in a cool, dark room and left alone, it’d eventually blow up. Most countries banned its transportation, and many banned its manufacture.

In 1860 a Swedish scientist named Alfred Nobel began trying to stabilize nitroglycerin. After seven years of experimentation, he achieved his goal by absorbing nitroglycerin into a nearly worthless substance known as diatomaceous earth, or kieselguhr. Kieselguhr is a porous rock that can be crumbled into a fine powder. When mixed with nitroglycerin, kieselguhr absorbs the nitroglycerin, and the resultant paste can be shaped into “sticks.” In this form, nitroglycerin was much more stable. It could be safely stored, transported, and used with undiminished explosive power. Nobel named the combination of nitroglycerin and kieselguhr “dynamite.”

Dynamite changed the world.² It also made Nobel wealthy. Without a stabilizer, nitroglycerin was just too hazardous to be commercially valuable, as Ascanio Sobrero found out.³ By itself, as I mentioned, kieselguhr was of little value.⁴ But the combination of the two components made dynamite transformative and precious.

In a similar way, the combination of the gospel of Jesus Christ⁵ and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provides powerful and transformative benefits for us. The gospel is perfect, but a divinely commissioned church is required to preach it, maintain its purity, and administer its sacred ordinances with the Savior’s power and authority.

Consider the combination of the Savior’s gospel and His Church as established by the Book of Mormon prophet Alma. The Church was responsible for preaching “nothing save it were repentance and faith on the Lord, who [would redeem] his people.”⁶ Using God’s authority, the Church was responsible for administering the ordinance of baptism “in the name of the Lord, as a witness [of entering] into a covenant with him [to] serve him and keep his commandments.”⁷ The people who were baptized took on themselves the name of Jesus Christ,⁸ joined His Church,⁹ and were promised great power through an outpouring of the Spirit.¹⁰

People flocked to the Waters of Mormon to hear Alma preach the gospel. Though they revered those waters and the surrounding forests, the Lord’s Church was not a location or a building, nor is it today. The Church is simply ordinary people, disciples of Jesus Christ, gathered and organized into a divinely appointed structure that helps the Lord accomplish His purposes. The Church is the instrument through which we learn the central role of Jesus Christ in Heavenly Father’s plan. The Church offers the authoritative way for individuals to participate in ordinances and make lasting covenants with God.¹¹ Keeping those covenants draws us closer to God, gives us access to His power,¹² and transforms us into who He intends us to become.¹³

Just as dynamite without nitroglycerin is unremarkable, the Savior’s Church is special only if it is built on His gospel.¹⁴ Without the Savior’s gospel and the authority to administer the ordinances thereof,¹⁵ the Church isn’t exceptional.¹⁶

Without the stabilizing effect of kieselguhr, nitroglycerin had limited value as an explosive. As history has shown, without the Lord’s Church, humanity’s understanding of His gospel was likewise unstable—prone to doctrinal drift and subject to the influence of different religions, cultures, and philosophies.¹⁷ An amalgamation of those influences has been manifested in every dispensation leading up to this last one.¹⁸ Though the gospel was initially revealed in its purity, the interpretation and application of that gospel gradually took on a form of godliness that lacked power because the divinely authorized framework was absent.¹⁹

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints enables access to God’s power because it is authorized by Him both to teach the doctrine of Christ and to offer the gospel’s saving and exalting ordinances.²⁰ The Savior yearns to forgive our sins, help us access His power, and transform us.²¹ He suffered for our sins and longs to pardon us from the punishment that we otherwise would deserve.²² He wants us to become holy²³ and be perfected in Him.²⁴

Jesus Christ has the power to do this. He didn’t simply sympathize with our imperfections²⁵ and lament our eternal condemnation in consequence of sin.²⁶ No, He went beyond that, infinitely beyond that, and restored His Church to enable access to His power.

The core of the gospel that the Church teaches is that Jesus Christ bore “our griefs, and carried our sorrows.” He had “laid on him the iniquity of us all.”²⁷ He “endured the cross,”²⁸ broke “the bands of death,”²⁹ “ascended into heaven, and … sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy.” The Savior did all this because He loves His Father and He loves us. He has already paid the infinite price so He can “[claim] all those who have faith in him [and advocate]”³⁰ for them—for us. Jesus Christ wants nothing more than for us to repent and come unto Him so that He can justify and sanctify us. In this desire, He is relentless and unwavering.

The access to God’s covenantal power and His covenantal love is through His Church. The combination of the Savior’s gospel and His Church transforms our lives. It transformed my maternal grandparents. My grandfather Oskar Andersson worked in a shipyard on Högmarsö, an island in the Stockholm archipelago. His wife, Albertina, and their children lived on the Swedish mainland. Once every two weeks, on Saturday, Oskar rowed his boat home for the weekend before returning to Högmarsö on Sunday evening. One day, while on Högmarsö, he heard two American missionaries preach the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Oskar felt that what he heard was pure truth, and he was filled with unspeakable joy.

The next time he returned home, Oskar excitedly told Albertina all about the missionaries. He explained that he believed what they taught. He asked her to read the pamphlets they had given him, and he told her that he didn’t think that any of their future children should be baptized as infants. Albertina was furious and threw the pamphlets on the rubbish heap. Not much was said between them before Oskar returned to work on Sunday evening.

As soon as he was gone, Albertina retrieved those pamphlets. She carefully compared their doctrine with the teachings in her well-worn Bible. She was astonished to feel that what she read was true. The next time Oskar returned home, he received a warm welcome, as did the copy of the Book of Mormon he brought with him. Albertina eagerly read, again comparing the doctrine to that in her Bible. Like Oskar, she recognized pure truth and was filled with unspeakable joy.

Oskar, Albertina, and their children moved to Högmarsö to be close to the few Church members there. A week after Oskar and Albertina were baptized in 1916, Oskar was called to be the group leader on Högmarsö. Like many converts, Oskar and Albertina faced criticism because of their new faith. Local farmers refused to sell them milk, so Oskar rowed across the fjord every day to purchase milk from a more tolerant farmer.

Yet during the ensuing years, Church membership on Högmarsö increased, in part because of Albertina’s powerful testimony and burning missionary zeal. When the group became a branch, Oskar was called as the branch president.

Members of that Högmarsö branch revered that island. This was their Waters of Mormon.³¹ This was where they came to a knowledge of their Redeemer.

Over the years, as they kept their baptismal covenant, Oskar and Albertina were transformed by the power of Jesus Christ. They longed to make more covenants and receive their temple blessings. To obtain those blessings, they permanently emigrated from their home in Sweden to Salt Lake City in 1949. Oskar had served as the leader of the members on Högmarsö for 33 years.³²

The combination of nitroglycerin and kieselguhr made dynamite valuable; the combination of the gospel of Jesus Christ and His Church is beyond price. Oskar and Albertina heard about the restored gospel because a prophet of God had called, assigned, and sent missionaries to Sweden. By divine commission, missionaries taught the doctrine of Christ and by priesthood authority baptized Oskar and Albertina. As members, Oskar and Albertina continued learning, developing, and serving others. They became Latter-day Saints because they kept the covenants they made.

The Savior refers to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as “my church” because He commissioned it to accomplish His purposes³³—preaching His gospel, offering His ordinances and covenants, and making it possible for His power to justify and sanctify us. Without His Church, there is no authority, no preaching of revealed truths in His name, no ordinances or covenants, no manifestation of the power of godliness,³⁴ no transformation into who God wants us to become, and God’s plan for His children is set at naught. The Church in this dispensation is integral to His plan.³⁵

I invite you to commit yourself more fully to the Savior, His gospel, and His Church. As you do so, you will find that the combination of the Savior’s gospel and His Church brings power into your life. This power is far greater than dynamite. It’ll shatter the rocks in your way, transform you into an inheritor in God’s kingdom. And you will be “filled with that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory.”³⁶ In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

Notas

1.  Black powder is a mixture of potassium nitrate (saltpeter), sulfur, and charcoal. It is classified as a low explosive or a low-yield explosive because of its relatively slow decomposition rate, burning at subsonic speeds. High explosives or high-yield explosives detonate rather than burn, producing a supersonic shock wave.
2.  Dynamite enabled “an unprecedented surge in the creation of rail tunnels, sewer systems, and subways around the world—major engineering projects that would have been impossible to [accomplish] without the controlled explosions [that it allowed]. Almost all the iconic engineering triumphs of the [late 19th and early 20th centuries]—the London Underground, the Brooklyn Bridge, the Transcontinental Railroad, [and] the Panama Canal—relied extensively on the new explosive” (Steven Johnson, The Infernal Machine: A True Story of Dynamite, Terror, and the Rise of the Modern Detective [2024], 24).
3.  Because nitroglycerin itself was not commercially viable, Ascanio Sobrero did not become wealthy because of his invention. However, when Alfred Nobel built a dynamite factory at Avigliana, Italy, in 1873, Sobrero was appointed as a well-paid adviser in recognition of his discovery of nitroglycerin. Sobrero held that appointment until his death in 1888. (See G. I. Brown, The Big Bang: A History of Explosives [1998], 106.)
4.  For the history of black powder, nitroglycerin, and dynamite, see Brown, The Big Bang , 1–121.
5.  The gospel of Jesus Christ is synonymous with the doctrine of Christ.
6.  See Mosiah 18:7, 20 ; 25:15, 22 .
7.  Mosiah 18:10 .
8.  See 2 Nephi 31:13 .
9.  See Mosiah 18:17 ; 25:18, 23 ; Alma 4:4–5 ; Helaman 3:24–26 ; 3 Nephi 28:18, 23 .
10. See 2 Nephi 31:12–14 ; Mosiah 18:10 .
11. The Church is key to offering sacred covenants to Heavenly Father’s children. This is why, during the endowment in temples, members covenant to keep the law of consecration. This means that they “dedicate their time, talents, and everything with which the Lord has blessed them to building up Jesus Christ’s Church on the earth” ( General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 27.2 , Gospel Library).
12. See Russell M. Nelson, “ Spiritual Treasures ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 77.
13. See Mosiah 18:22 ; Moses 6:68 ; Guide to the Scriptures, “ Sons and Daughters of God ,” Gospel Library.
14. See 3 Nephi 27:13–21 .
15. See Articles of Faith 1:5 .
16. See Russell M. Nelson, “ Rejoice in the Gift of Priesthood Keys ,” Liahona , May 2024, 121; 3 Nephi 27:9–11 .
17. The Savior “gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers” so that “we [could] all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, … that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive” ( Ephesians 4:11, 13–14 ).
18. Syncretism is the technical term for the amalgamation of different religions, cultures, or schools of thought.
19. See Joseph Smith—History 1:19 .
20. See “ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library. The proclamation was read by President Russell M. Nelson as part of his message at the 190th Annual General Conference, April 5, 2020, in Salt Lake City, Utah (see “ Hear Him ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 91–92).
21. We can access God’s power by exercising faith in Jesus Christ, repenting of our sins, and keeping the covenants we make with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ in ordinances such as baptism, the endowment, and the sacrament.
22. See Guide to the Scriptures, “ Justification, Justify ,” Gospel Library.
23. See Guide to the Scriptures, “ Sanctification ,” Gospel Library.
24. See Moroni 10:32–33 .
25. See Hebrews 4:15 ; see also footnote a .
26. See Doctrine and Covenants 19:15–18 .
27. See Isaiah 53:4–12 .
28. Hebrews 12:2 .
29. Mosiah 15:23 .
30. Moroni 7:27–28 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 45:3–5 .
31. See Mosiah 18:30 .
32. See Inger Höglund and Caj-Aage Johansson, Steg i Tro: Jesu Kristi Kyrka av Sista Dagars Heliga i Sverige 1850–2000 (2000), 66–67.
33. Doctrine and Covenants 115:4 .
34. See Doctrine and Covenants 84:19–21 .
35. If you receive what the Lord’s Church offers, you can be perfected in Christ before His Church is perfected, if it ever is. His goal is to perfect you, not His Church. His goal has never been to, metaphorically, turn kieselguhr into diamond; His goal has been to refine you into pure gold, to save and exalt you as a co-inheritor with Him in the kingdom of our Heavenly Father. But that needs to become your goal, too. It is your choice.
36. Helaman 5:44 .
