Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

Introduction A Look at Adversity

"Why a book about adversity?"

"Why not a happy book?"

"What gives you the right to speak out on this dour subject, anyway?"

Such have been the questions asked when I shared with others the subject of this book. My answers are simple.

First, I have written a book about adversity because it is something everybody is into these days. Or so it seems.

A book about adversity is important since perspective helps when we're struggling. Coping effectively with trouble by applying principles of the gospel to life's trying times is a God-given truth to live by. It makes great people, and the world needs great people. But not everybody is great tinder duress-at least not at first. When there is lack of understanding of lifesaving principles, big problems can grow from small ones. Hopefully a book like this can help stem the tide of error.

Second, as paradoxical as it may sound, this is really a book about happiness. Winter can prepare us for the loveliness of spring-prepare us to value it, as well. Trouble can heighten our sensitivity to things we might otherwise miss.

I believe that there is no such thing as a problem without a gift in its hands, and the gift is the kind that brings ultimate joy. We need more joy in the world, more lift to the spirit of man, more closeness with God.

Third, my right to speak out on this subject comes from experience. I, like you, have been there. Many, many times. And as a result I know some things that I didn't know before!

But there is more. I write of adversity because it can be inspiring. Over the years I have become aware of brave, gallant, undaunted people plagued by adversity in one form or another. I marvel at them. The refiner's fire can be so very good for people.

I recall being filled with a kind of wonder as a young girl when I read excerpts from the personal writings of Robert Louis Stevenson. In my maturity I am even more impressed at Stevenson's courage and determination to overcome adversity. He wrote under the most trying conditions. He wrote chilled to the bone because he had only an unheated fiat to live in. He wrote fevered with a dread disease. He wrote lying on his couch sickened with fever, weak with illness and hunger. He wrote wracked and retching. But he wrote! To Stevenson there simply was no other way. To give up was unthinkable to a man with purpose in life.

Adversity in our own lives can bring life's purpose to mind. Bad times have certain scientific value, according to Emerson. In his "Conduct of Life" essays he says that the trying times are occasions a good learner would not miss. One can learn a great deal. Can it be, then, that if one doesn't kick against the pricks, increased understanding comes-the nature of God, the importance of the adventure of life?

It would seem so.

Studying people who are struggling can be motivating. For example, there was a gentle, wholesome woman whose husband became involved in a financial scare. They were publicly disgraced and impoverished. How did she react? She kept her pleasant demeanor by pushing her inner strength into gear. She let no one know how deeply she was hurting. She took action, too, carrying two morning newspaper routes. She shared portions of her journal with me for that period. It included an accounting of the family finances which showed a steadily growing bank account from money made delivering papers before others were awake. Her conquering spirit heightened her self-esteem; newfound value within her brought a kind of happiness and a sense of well-being.

Small souls shrink with trouble, but great ones stretch above it.

There was the youth I knew who stoutly defended his alcoholic mother and devotedly shouldered additional burdens of family life in her stead. The father had long since fled the home. This young man scrounged for income and for time to do homework. He set youth aside. In the process he had to endure his mother's ugly and inappropriate abuse. But he doggedly did his duty. Time passed and he has grown into a distinguished and compassionate citizen.

There was the terminally ill single woman, deprived of the traditional fullness of life-marriage, children, professional service-who inevitably rose to the occasion. When visitors came to comfort her, they were the ones comforted. They left having been lifted and taught by her radiant faith and her accepting patience.

Patience is a heavenly virtue. Few need patience when the sun is shining and the breezes are mellow. However, when stress impacts a life, patience can be learned.

There was a dashing man whose wife developed a personality that to him was incredibly annoying and strident. As these traits surfaced over the years, he began to detest her and to hate his life with her. (And that may not be a strong enough description for what he felt!) To make matters worse, she was suddenly stricken with a debilitating disease-and she didn't die. She lived. She had to be cared for!

For the husband, life hadn't turned out the way he had planned. He had character beneath his sophistication, however, and he did not elect to abandon her with excuse. Rather, he learned to believe and behave like a man of God. He served her dutifully, sacrificing many important aspects of his own life. And as he applied God's principles with increasing understanding, love bloomed. He serves her now with generous love. She receives it with gratitude and an increased confidence about her own worth.

Oh, what I have learned from such people! Those who bear up under crushing burdens rob misfortune of its power.

How do they do it? Tried to their limit, tested where it hurts most, these people rise to choice levels. How do they keep from making bigger problems out of an original trial? We will discuss this question later in the book.

Some people give in, close up, sob, and sulk. Some complain to one and all, wringing their hands in self-pity and decline.

We will talk about attitude-not to judge but to lend perspective.

Some troubles come unbidden and unannounced. Others we bring upon ourselves. This book points up the foolishness of looking about for someone else to hold responsible for what's happening. Some look for anyone, including God, to blame for their burdens. They seek a scapegoat for sin, grief, lack of fortitude, sagging morals, poor choices, disappointment, and persistent ignorance of the principles of the gospel and the value in living them.

One can learn, as well, from negative examples.

Thus, we can see the ballooning of burdens when we wallow in adversity or when we react without nobleness and wisdom, without God's guidance. This will only compound adversity. Often we reap the whirlwind, suffering more deeply than we might have in our season of testing.

We will present examples of adversity in this light in later chapters.

The purpose of this book, Adversity, is not to define the word. It is not to describe endless problems of life. You already know these things. The purpose is to share perspective about different kinds of people, different kinds of problems, and different ways people deal with these problems. We will consider the good that can come from the bad things in life. We hope to stir up a remembrance of blessings from Heavenly Father. And we will remind you of eternal principles, God-given, which can surface one day again when you need them most.

In The Vicar of Wakefield by Oliver Goldsmith, we learn this: "The greatest object in the universe is a good man struggling with adversity; yet there is still a greater, which is the good man that comes to relieve it." Many people need help in overcoming adversity. One purpose of this book is to stimulate good feelings and bright ideas, as well as a determination in the heart of the oppressed to live outside themselves in love and service to others; such living is an antidote to suffering and struggle.

Finally, it is our purpose to reverently but emphatically leave a testimony not only that God lives and loves but also that he cares! He is mindful of what is happening to us, of our heartaches and our frustrations and our hopelessness. Even if we have brought these things upon ourselves by our own sin or foolishness, he cares. The scriptures prove this. God knows our weaknesses. He counts on our strengths. He requires us to use our talents, experience, and example to bless his other children on earth. He waits to bless us in ways that won't impinge upon our free agency and personal growth.

Adversity can bring us closer to God in spirit. It can help us gradually become more like him.

In the stories related in the following chapters, some of the names have been changed and details altered to protect the privacy of the individuals involved, but the stories are based on fact. The heartbreak and the wrestle under pressure of severe problems has been valid in every case.

Some situations and their accompanying burdens are more life-threatening or deeply serious than others mentioned. Some examples may seem too lightweight to be included in a book titled Adversity. Some are about troubles people bring on themselves. They are included because people are at different levels of learning, and upon one strength another is given. Line upon line we learn.

The principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are implicit in the examples.

Jesus endured the mighty testings in all aspects of life. He was "tempted of Satan" in the wilderness, and he resisted. Then "Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit" (Luke 4:14). This, it seems to me, is the pattern of our own adversity. We will be tried in a variety of ways. If we meet these demands in strength according to God's will and his example, we, too, will come forth in the power of the Spirit. As he was proven, we can be.

Because the Savior had real life experiences, he understands. He hungered when he fasted forty days in the wilderness. He was attacked, both verbally and physically. He was rejected and was eventually betrayed by one of his chosen associates. He knows! He knows! That should comfort us.

Our ultimate goal is to be like him so that we may dwell in the presence of God throughout all eternity. And meanwhile, we'll know inner joy and greater peace as we push through the problems of this life. Thus, we should welcome opportunities to learn and to show greater devotion to his will and the will of the Father.

Solving our problems according to the principles of the gospel and in the attitude of a contrite spirit is a certain way of building what Oliver Wendell Holmes described as "more stately mansions" of our soul. Hence the symbol of the nautilus shell used throughout this book.

I am grateful to the Lord for his unfailing support, for his love, and for the saving principles of the gospel. I am grateful, too, beyond adequate expression, for the comfort and the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

I am indebted, as well, to the people who have helped me in particular ways, in particular times with my struggles. Aren't you?

Perhaps, after all, that is the second major thrust of this book (the first being our own goal of learning to cope appropriately with inevitable adversity)-to be effectively useful when someone else is suffering.

Understanding the struggle, finding answers to the questions about life and God that trouble introduces, is impetus to personal progress. Being quick to appropriately meet the need of others about us who suffer is to emulate the Savior.

Unless we consider that life is school and there are things for us to learn not only about behaving ourselves in times of happiness but also about the need for obedience, unless we sock to understand the critical benefits of obeying gospel principles-unless we do these things we can bring adversity upon ourselves.

We can needlessly turn choice blessings such as health, peace, family unity, and personal honor into burdens of physical weakness, guilty conscience, divorce, financial disaster, and estrangement from God.

Take a hard look at those things which we needlessly turn into burdens when they were meant to be blessings.
