Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

1

How to Turn Blessings Into Burdens

Nobody really wants to make trouble for himself or herself. Sometimes, however, that is exactly what we do-we turn blessings into burdens through our actions and attitudes.

Here are eighteen ways we can turn rich blessings into dreadful burdens. Of course there are other ways, but consider these for a moment.

Look to your habits and attitudes. Look to your responses to situations. Don't choose to be a problem. Be a problem solver. Be a burden lifter. Value the word of God and the place of God in your life.

To err is human, but to make unnecessary mistakes in life is not smart. One might even suggest that it is stupid. Surely it can be painful. It is how to turn blessings into burdens.

To take a perfectly good blessing and turn it into a burden through sin or stupidity is courting trouble. One might even call such a course self-imposed adversity. Ignorance of the law or disobedience of fine principles promises problems. And who needs burdens when we could have had blessings?

Consider this simple example: One day I was making a cake to use as a visual aid in a meeting. A committee had a task to perform, and I wanted to show that with proper planning it would be easy-a "piece of cake" as the saying goes.

I arose early and attacked the project with virtuous enthusiasm. I would make the biggest and best cake I had ever produced-a six egg cake, light as down and delicious to eat. Just as I began breaking the eggs into the mixture, the telephone rang. The call from the East Coast person in a state of trauma was made according to her time zone and not mine. I listened while I went on with the cake because I was feeling the scrunch of time to finish my visual aid.

It would have been better if I had stopped the mixing altogether. In my concern for the caller, my brain short-circuited. I began tossing egg shells into the mix and eggs into the sink. This fact did not become clear to me until the cake was baked. It was not the lightest cake ever, and there were crunchy shells where one least expected them to be.

I used the cake as a visual aid, all right, but I made a point different from the "piece of cake" idea. I used the cake failure to show how something very nice can become awful when we are not in control, when we don't think through to the result of certain action, when we don't consider that what we are doing is different from what we ought to be doing, and when what we are doing brings disappointment-even trouble.

Here are some scriptures to study that reinforce the idea that we can turn blessings into burdens of our own making:

Inasmuch as you are found transgressors, you cannot escape my wrath in your lives.

Inasmuch as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. (D&C 104:8-9.)

I remember when someone I loved was cut off from the Church. A friend called with a comfort and a warning: "It will be worse yet, for a time, while the buffetings of Satan invoke real trouble. I know. I watched it with my own wife. After her excommunication the buffetings of Satan became real and terrible. Christ supports us but Satan tosses us about when we step into his arena. If people knew this, they'd stay far away from sin."

It proved true.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God (D&C 84:21-22).

I recall a missionary who had sinned, confessed to his mission president, and been sent home dishonorably discharged. He came directly from the airplane to our house. We had watched this neighbor grow up and struggle only to make repeated fresh resolves. His wail when he fell into my arms weeping was, "If I couldn't make it as a set-apart missionary, how will I ever make it now without such support?"

And what a battle he has had-he who turned his priesthood-supported blessings into burdens has a difficult battle turning burdens back into blessings. Good advice is given in D&C 10 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work. Behold, they have sought to destroy you. (D&C 10:5-6.)

There was a priesthood leader who admitted that he was unprepared for the intensity of the drive within himself to get wealth, to prove to his peers that he could "make it big." He didn't consider that his actions were not in hand with gospel principles and commandments of God. The man lost balance and the modifying influence of being involved in the gospel because he was immersed in the scramble for wealth, at any price. He now has time in prison to think about the way he turned his blessings of home and family and respectability into the burdens of confinement and shame.

The more wicked part of the Nephites were destroyed.

For the Lord would not suffer, after he had led them out of the land of Jerusalem and kept and preserved them from falling into the hands of their enemies, yea, he would not suffer that the words should not be verified, which he spake unto our fathers, saying that: Inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall not prosper in the land.

Wherefore, the Lord did visit them in great judgment; nevertheless, he did spare the righteous that they should not perish, but did deliver them out of the hands of their enemies. (Omni 1:5-7; italics added.)

This reference is a jewel of an example of people who manage to turn their blessings into burdens. Such action brings terrible adversity.

Why look for trouble? Why bring it on ourselves when we have our hands full with life already?

In considering adversity in our lives, in daring to take a deep look at misery, we learn that God's principles help us deal with everyday challenges and temptations. Knowing how to walk in wisdom's paths is necessary for the successful, fruitful living of which adversity is part.

In Hel. 12 is an outpouring worth reading again: "O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, arc the children of men; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the world!

"Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths!

"Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be their guide." (Hel. 12:4-6.)

Now, that is a sermon of worth! The negative attitude it describes is the essence of how blessings get turned into burdens.

Since we are not perfect and we are forced to interact in life with others who are not perfect, and since we have a moral purpose to use our talents to avoid self-imposed adversity, let us get on with the challenge.

Hopefully we'll do better in the future with the blessings God has given us so abundantly. Hope is a positive attitude and a powerful, pushing force. It is the opposite of despair. Let us hope, and let us move forward.

Elder Marion D. Hanks once told a group of students not to let the sorrows that inevitably result from sin disqualify them from their blessings or contributions. He said, "Don't shrivel inside when you hear the pointed sermon or lesson; don't turn from the brotherhood of the Saints or the path of the Lord because you have made some mistakes. Don't give up and die spiritually. Christ suffered 'these things' that we might not eternally suffer, on condition of our repentance."

The great wonder of the gospel of Jesus Christ-a wonder that much of the world doesn't understand-is that heartbreak and misery can be assuaged through Christ. Also, he will help us become what in our hearts we want to be-as he is. With God nothing is impossible. That is a good thing to keep in mind.

The Lord has told us to watch and pray always. He comforts us, saying that if we will draw near to him, he will draw near to us. The experiment should be ours. It can protect us from turning our blessings into burdens.

My personal witness, my experience with agony of soul, with blessed relief, and with growth is that he is there for us.

I have seen countless reenactments of the prodigal who at last turns homeward toward the father who rushes forth to meet him. Heavenly Father will do this for us if we turn to him and seek his help as well as his forgiveness.

Ours is the mission to keep from turning blessings into burdens. We need daily refreshment of the Spirit and firm resolve to keep from breaking God's commandments and thus turning blessings into burdens. When repentance and change come into the life of the sinner, when God's principles are applied to trying situations, blessings pour from heaven.

I recommend pursuing truth and seeking heavenly help so that we may live life with serenity, faith, and positive outcome of the trials, temptations, and despair along the way.

It has been said in the scriptures, sung in the hymns, and written in the volumes of wise men that "sweet are the uses of adversity."

How can this be? Adversity-who needs it?

We are here on earth to be proven, here on earth to endure until we are safely dead.
