Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

3

Adversity Proves Whom God Can Trust

Adversity proves whom God can trust. Who of us, as Job did, will stand firm, be obedient, and love God no matter what comes into our lives? We are proven through adversity.

A few years ago I was talking with some people of Rexburg, Idaho, about the devastating flood following the bursting of the Teton Dam.

The story of one woman is especially interesting in terms of this chapter's focus. I asked this woman if her family had been seriously affectcd by the flood, She drove me to a hill overlooking the city to which citizens had rushed when the flood warning was given. From there they could watch the wide path of raging water and follow the destruction of their own homes in its wake.

"Yes," she exclaimed, "we were seriously affected. But first let me give you some background."

Then she told me that the family had struggled for years to get adequate housing for their growing family. At last there came a day when a fine house was finished with appropriate bedrooms and storage. They had worked out a remarkable facility for their year's supply of food and commodities.

One morning shortly before dawn broke, they smelled smoke. Their new home on rural acreage was consumed by flames. The fire took everything but their lives and the night clothing they were wearing. Everything-including the food storage gathered at the counsel of a prophet.

"But, Sister Cannon, it was wonderful to see the Lord's blessings unfold," she continued. "Before the day was over we had clothes to wear and places to sleep with neighbors. Within a year we were able to build another house and fill it with our children and our newly acquired year's supply of staples." "That is wonderful," I agreed.

"Yes, but shortly after we moved in the Teton Dam broke. We were right in the path of that raging mile-wide broom that swept this valley clean. From this hill where we stand, we watched our house go. We had binoculars, but because we were crying they weren't much good."

A neighbor who didn't understand gospel principles had scoffed at this family's futile preparations for some future time. When trouble came, their food storage had burned or washed away. Now that neighbor said to the family, "What good is it to collect all that food storage, all those emergency supplies? If you go through that ridiculous process again, that is your business, but don't tell me about it. It hasn't done you any good. Why go to that trouble if you can't eat it when you need it?"

My friend was thoughtful before such an accusation. Then she firmly replied, "Nobody told me I had to eat it."

And she is right; she had been told only to store it, and she had been obedient. In spite of adversity her spirit was sweet.

I thought of Joseph Smith's response to trouble during a certain period of his life. It was 1842, just two years before he was murdered by his enemies. He was in hiding and wrote:

And as for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life; . . . God knoweth all these things .... Deep water is what I am wont to swim in. It all has become a second nature to me; and I feel, like Paul, to glory in tribulation; for to this day has the God of my fathers delivered me out of them all, and will deliver me from henceforth; for behold, and lo, I shall triumph over all my enemies, for the Lord God hath spoken it. (D&C 127:2.)

Like Joseph we can triumph over our enemies, surmount our problems. We can do it with God's help.

The Lord has told us that if we can be trusted to behave like Saints and disciples using wisdom, all will be well with us. In the D&C 112:13 we read his words, "And after their temptations, and much tribulation, behold I, the Lord, will feel after them, and if they harden not their hearts, and stiffen not their necks against me... I will heal them."

Following a church assignment I filled in Wyoming, a woman asked if she could talk with me for a few minutes alone. She didn't want to brag or to be inappropriate in any way by sharing a personal experience. She wanted only to testify of the goodness of God to his children in trouble, and she wanted me to listen to her for a moment. She gave me permission to use her story.

This family had always enjoyed a large vegetable garden. The father loved to till the earth. Repeatedly, from planting through harvest, he pronounced that it was good for a man's soul as well as his stomach to prepare the soil and nurture the seedlings into a delicious crop of produce.

Then there would come a morning when Dad would go through the house calling, "Harvest time!" And the family would laughingly race each other to the strawberry patch, the pea vines, or the corn stalks to find the first ripe offerings of each crop.

It had been hard work squeezed into very busy lives of family members, but on each succeeding time of harvest, it was all worth it. Dad had taught them well.

Suddenly, their happy world crumbled. In many ways trouble heaped upon trouble. The father was critically injured in an explosion at his place of employment. He lived, but it would be many long months before he could work again. A married child was having troubles and desperate for ongoing help. The young family members needed security and guidance. The mother's strength was running thin as she tried to juggle driving long hours back and forth to be by her husband's hospital bed, and meeting the needs of other family members, plus keeping up on household chores.

At last Dad came home-but so did a grandchild. Each of them needed an incredible amount of care. There wasn't time for work outside. The ploughed field sprouted June grass where vegetables used to be. The woman apologized to her husband for failing him in this way. She sighed, "There will be no garden this year."

Ten-year-old Matt was listening. "But we must have a garden, Mother! You heard President Kimball at conference. He said everybody should have a garden. He is the prophet! We must have a garden."

"The child was the teacher of the parent," my new friend continued. "And though it was weeks late for planting a crop, I knew we had to try."

They soaked the seeds in warm water before placing them in the ground. And they prayed in family circle over the planting, over the fields, and over the elements of nature, as well as for the father's health and the well-being of the family struggling with so many problems.

That year the good weather lasted longer than usual-long enough for the crops to mature.

One morning late in the season, the family was awakened by a joyful father calling, "Harvest time!"

And it was a harvest time, for produce they sorely needed for the winter ahead and for the blessings they had received from Heavenly Father in answer to fervent prayer.

This fine family proved that they would be valiant and follow the word of God and the counsel of his prophet even in times of terrible hardship. These people are witnesses that the Lord will help with our burdens if we try to do what we are supposed to do.

Whom can God trust? Who will suffer appropriately in order to learn the lessons, be the example of a believer and a witness to the hand of God in the affairs of man? Who will endure trials to help in the work of the kingdom of God on earth?

During the mid-seventies the Church membership expanded rapidly across eastern Canada to the state of New York. There was an amazing ethnic mix of people living in that area, pet)pie with many different kinds of needs and problems. One of the most pressing needs was church buildings close to where the people lived. They needed easy access to church training and programs, and they needed guidance. They needed buildings to welcome new members and investigators.

Rented halls of various kinds and some public school buildings were the norm, but they didn't promote a good image of the Church and its converts, nor did they allow the full Church program.

The stake president was certain that before the stake could grow sufficiently to multiply into other stakes and to shrink the far-flung boundaries, there had to be suitable buildings erected and dedicated. He initiated a five-year plan for this goal.

It was too slow. People didn't respond.

So the stake president decided to test the people with a crash cash effort to fund at least some building in a short time. It was a courageous move-doomed to failure some said when consideration was given to the period of inflation they were in and the financial burdens on the people.

According to the stake president the Spirit moved him mightily. There was no other choice. They had to try!

As he prepared for the stake gathering at which the challenge would be issued, he felt impressed to bestow, through the power of the priesthood, a blessing with a promise upon the members of that stake in this undertaking.

People had been asked to fast and pray-to prepare themselves before coming to this conference. The people felt the Spirit of the Lord in that meeting as the stake president pronounced a special blessing upon them. If they would labor diligently to meet this crisis, the Lord would indeed pour out his blessings upon them. He would help them. They would be able to meet their obligations and contribute to the building program.

So it was said. So it was fulfilled. Later, many reports proved the remarkable blessings from heaven that came as people prayed for help in meeting the need.

One man, for example, was closing his business because times were hard. After prayer he suddenly received an idea to improve it. He followed the prompting and sales rose to a record volume. He could pay his part for the building fund, and more, if need be.

Another man's struggle to meet the assessment included fervent prayer on his knees by his office chair. The idea came to him afterwards that he should ask for a raise to cover the amount he needed above his own resources to respond to the stake president's challenge. He asked for that amount. It was given to him with a retroactive clause! He was able to pay the full amount of his obligation sooner than he might otherwise have been able to.

It was a wonderful spiritual awakening for the members in that area. It was a strengthening time as the unfolding of little miracles happened in numerous families. People without work got work; seemingly worthless investments became profitable; forgotten bank accounts came to light; creative ideas that were remunerative flourished.

People who proved that God could trust them were blessed, and they met the stake's financial goal. Within three short years three stakes were made from that original one. More than buildings or numbers resulted from this period of sacrifice and struggle-people grew.

On the other hand, the study of the scriptures teaches us that if we do not take adversity as a person of faith should, it will not be well with us. We will be in Satan's arena. Life is full of evidence to support this.

What is trust? What does it mean to be trustworthy under the weight of temptation, the burdens of illness, poverty, misunderstanding, disappointment, loneliness, handicap, heartbreak, persecution?

From life itself we can draw a comparison. We use trust every day. It is critical to life. It is illustrated in the case of the loving parent who hires a baby-sitter. It is seen in the case of the owner who leaves a new clerk to mind the store. It is evidenced every time we mail a precious package for a loved one.

Trust implies responsibility, dependability, accountability, stability, honesty, commitment. Webster defines trust as faith.

When we understand the glorious work of God and our place in it, these examples might seem too simplistic. Yet, they help us realize that trust is imperative to order and progress, as well as to peace of mind.

Remember, God's work is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Our work is to help the Lord with his work. Doing this work is imperative to our personal joy.

Now, the devil's work is to try and thwart the Lord's work. And at this moment the old and stirring hymn comes to mind, "Who's on the Lord's Side?" (Hymns, 1985, no. 260).

In April 1830, when the Church was again organized according to God's will, instructions from God were given as to the duties of leadership and the duties of members. Among other sacred guidance, this counsel was given: "There is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God; therefore let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation" (D&C 20:32-33).

Also, elders and priests were counseled that God's children are to be taught all things concerning the Church "to their understanding, previous to their partaking of the sacrament. · .. And the members shall manifest before the church, and also before the elders, by a godly walk and conversation, that they are worthy of it, that there may be works and faith agreeable to the holy scriptures-walking in holiness before the Lord." (D&C 20:68-69.)

This is powerful instruction to dwell upon when trouble hits us. We are to respond as one with faith agreeable to the holy word and way of the Lord.

Recently I sat in sacrament service and pondered the sacrifice of Jesus. I wondered, too, about the bitter cup my husband and I had been pressed into taking lately. It was little compared to the cup of our Lord, but we had struggled and suffered, fasted, prayed, waited. No answer. There were the despair, the tears, the sleepless nights with pacing and praying, the scripture study, the striving for patience. There were times of counseling together as well as listening to others who had endured similar heart-ripping trauma. Finally, when the resolution of a trial, a test, came, we were grateful that we had survived the traumatic time with our faith intact. In fact we were filled with a new closeness to God. On this particular day I took the sacrament in humility and gratitude for his suffering for us. How good God is. We had felt his sustaining presence even while he allowed us to go through an ordeal in order for us to grow. I was thankful as well that we hadn't made a bigger problem for ourselves by not being trustworthy. Giving up, complaining in self-pity, questioning-in any way turning away from God is not appropriate for one who has made sacred covenants!

I took the sacrament that day with a new commitment to the Lord's work, to the plan and the principles. In spite of- perhaps even because of-sadness and agony in trial, I could praise God.

Struggle proves the presence, the reality of Christ, his mission, and his sacrifice for us. Surely, with such a gift to us we should be trustworthy before God.

God will help us in a variety of ways. He has told us that by doing the things that we are supposed to do when we are supposed to do them, the "gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good" (D&C 21:6).

The gospel is more than a system of ethics. It is doing- experimenting upon the word, living according to God's way and his will. That means all the time, in good times and bad times alike. It means working with increasing effectiveness to keep from bringing trouble upon ourselves by not living the gospel, by turning blessings into burdens.

But however trials come, all of them can give us experience and be for our eternal good.

Neither here nor hereafter are we suddenly going to emerge with qualities of character and a level of living for which we have not prepared ourselves.
