Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

5

Adversity Brings Us Closer to God

Adversity can bring us closer to God. When we arc in deep need, prayers usually are more fervent and frequent than when we are not.

"Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God," said Jesus to his Apostles shortly before he picked up the cross to walk to his crucifixion. Then he prayed for them-out loud- so that they could hear him. "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent." (John 14:1; 17:3.)

These promises from God can comfort and sustain us through any kind of demand upon our soul. When we turn to God in prayer-with a needful spirit and a contrite heart and a desire to learn, we will feel the Spirit, the healing.

Sometimes praying is difficult because we haven't developed a close relationship with God. Praying without a relationship with our Father is like trying to have an intimate heart-to-heart talk about your fondest dreams with the ticket-taker at the football game.

With God, it is different, of course. He knows us! He is waiting to be gracious to us, but he does not force his way into our lives. He waits upon us-until our growth and choices make us ready for him.

One of the things we seem to need most in life is a friend who is with us always, upon whom we can count, who loves us unconditionally, and who would never turn against us; a friend whose guidance is based on wisdom and truth. Oh, what a friend to have!

Jesus is such a friend. As we study his life and his teachings, we come to know him. Then we gain confidence before him, and we quickly and surely feel his unfailing love for us.

He wants us to draw close to him so that he can draw close to us. Tribulation is good for us in the sense that it can bring us to our knees as we seek his comfort and guidance; it draws us close to him.

I once asked a group of missionaries what they had learned in the mission field that would help them during the rest of their lives. Many answers came. All of them were supportive of the great learning that the missionary experience brings. But there was one answer that taught me something valuable.

"I have learned something about prayer," one young elder said. "I know that I should prepare to pray and then stay on my knees until I feel different! You know, it is like tracting-if I were to go out tracting without my shoes on, I wouldn't last very long. If I seek the Lord without being fully ready, prayer doesn't work either."

Preparing ourselves and then actually praying is a blessed possibility when we are in the midst of affliction.

Involved in a hopeless conflict with a dread enemy, the Nephites begged Mormon to lead them one more time into the war. Mormon's response was sorrowful: "I was without hope, for I knew the judgments of the Lord which should come upon them; for they repented not of their iniquities, but did struggle for their lives without calling upon that Being who created them" (Morm. 5:1).

Aren't we often like these Nephites? We turn to our neighbor, we confess on the golf course to a buddy, we cry to the bishop, we anxiously read the advice column or make an appointment with a counselor. Any or all of these steps may be helpful in some way, but surely calling upon God who created us should be our first and primary response.

The murderer-king in Shakespeare's Hamlet had a problem, too! During his mental anguish he uttered these telling, dramatic words: "Bow, stubborn knees; and, heart with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe."

Ah, there is an image-a new-born babe-to help us when we struggle to go before God with our heartaches.

It takes time to learn these things, of course, but the sooner we begin the sooner we become.

I recall standing in a hallway with Sister Camilla Kimball, who was waiting for President Spencer W. Kimball to be free of well-wishers. I had noticed a young couple a short distance away who were staring at Sister Camilla. The couple spoke to each other heatedly for a few moments and then suddenly the young wife, heavy with child, positioned herself squarely in front of Sister Kimball and said, "Sister Kimball, my husband says I ought to be exactly like you." Tears took over.

"My dear," comforted Sister Kimball, "O, my dear!"

Then in her practical and self-effacing way, Sister Kimball added, "I wasn't like this at your age, either."

I love that hopeful comment.

I am certain that praying for endurance, for self-improvement, or for strength and guidance to reach special goals requires perspective.

A friend of mine was going into a second marriage and someone told her the story about another woman in the same situation who turned to her son and asked him, "Son, will you give me away at my wedding?"

"Give you away?" the son exclaimed. "I can't give you away, I haven't finished with you yet!"

Like this son with his mother, God isn't finished with us yet. With our hand in his we will grow.

Consider King Benjamin's counsel to his people: "Believe in God; believe that he is, and that.., he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend" (Mosiah 4:9).

We need to understand that God understands things we don't understand yet. We need to remember that he is the creator of all things, including us and the plan of our testing, growth, and reward.

During Alma's ministry he visited an area where people discriminated against their own brothers and sisters simply because these Brothers and sisters were poverty-stricken. So far away from gospel living had the affluent ones drifted that they had lost all love for those less fortunate than they. Alma had little missionary success with these wealthy discriminators. Some of the poor strugglers, however, came to him for help. These people were "esteemed by their brethren as dross; therefore they were poor as to the things of the world; and also they were poor in heart" (Alma 32:3).

When Alma heard their story, he turned with joy toward the spokesman for the group. He explained to these people that because of their afflictions they were blessed-they were made humble and now they were prepared to hear the word of God.

Alma said, "It is well that ye are cast out of your synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom" (Alma 32:12). He taught them that because they were humble and had turned to God they would be blessed. Then he went on to teach the mighty lesson we should all learn. He explained that being humble prepares us to learn. But bow much better off we are, if we seek God's will, word, and way without being forced into humility. As Alma says, we will be "more blessed" (v. 14).

There are many blessings as well as purposes in prayer. Drawing close to God is a way of witnessing his hand in our lives. Even if our requests aren't answered exactly as we had hoped they might be, we eventually feel the Spirit of the Lord with us even in our disappointment.

Prayer is often the avenue through which we receive the promptings of the Spirit in our affairs: we can be comforted or our conscience can be pricked, and we'll feel restless and uneasy. The following story of Lee and Sandi illustrates this.

Lee's problem wasn't one of those nice clean trials, such as financial disaster or terminal cancer. People finally get over things like that-one way or another.

Lee's on-going problem was his marriage. The relationship was anything but satisfying, and it was the cause of stressful suffering and deep unhappiness.

Backgrounds of the marriage partners can sometimes create problems. Lee had gone to Brigham Young University on an athletic scholarship. He wasn't a Latter-day Saint. In fact, his life had been geared to something quite different from the sheltered discipline of Mormon values and standards. But once at BYU, Lee had "gone with the flow." When in Happy Valley, do as the citizens you like do. So he did. And being basically a good and sensitive person, Lee liked the new way he was living. He didn't really understand the details of the gospel, but when the challenge to become baptized was given, Lee accepted. He could go to church with his friends.

After a time, Lee's friends began marrying in the temple, so he wanted to marry in the temple. And he did; it was the thing to do.

His bride, Sandi, was a girl with a background as far removed from Lee's as her home state was from his home state. She came from a five-generation Mormon family who had always lived in the same little Mormon town. They were stalwarts and leaders in the stake.

Lee came from a glittering metropolis with all the accompanying temptations. His family was broken and scattered. He was on his own to do what he wanted. He had ideals and goals but no guidance.

Sandi was grateful to have a chance to be married in the temple-a lot of girls didn't make it. Sandi had her temple marriage. Lee had his bride. He now fit in perfectly with the rest of his former roommates.

Opposites may attract in some cases, but the bloom was soon off that "appropriate" marriage. It wasn't what either of them had expected.

Sandi wanted a man who would be first to volunteer for the welfare farm assignments or temple sealing sessions and who would stand at the ward pulpit on Sundays in a position of authority. She wanted a man exactly like her father-a public figure, an example. Sandi prayed that Lee would change.

Lee, on the other hand, hadn't had a father like Sandi's. What Lee wanted was what he had not had in his own early years. He wanted warmth and gentle caring, all the love and companionship and stable serenity that he had hungered for always. He didn't know much about rules and regulations governing Mormon families or what temples and welfare farms had to do with marriage, but he was interested in being a good husband, father, and provider. He used careful planning for the family's future. And he loved his children and wanted them to love and appreciate him for what he was good at.

Sandi seemed an ideal LDS mother. Her house wasn't always immaculate but she loved her children and devoted herself to church work. It was her whole life. And everybody including Lee knew it. Lee, however, thought he should come before some "extra" church activity and be at least on an equal basis with the children. It hurt him deeply when the choices went against him.

As the relationship soured, Lee suffered because he was without a secure support system and because he did not have a deep understanding of the gospel. He fell into despair. Like a cripple who at last accepts that he will never walk again, Lee finally realized that happiness for him wouldn't come with this woman.

Sandi fell out of love with Lee because he didn't meet her particular vision of the ideal LDS man. He didn't do anything wrong; he just wasn't as anxiously engaged as she wanted him to be-and she continually reminded him of it.

Their solution had been to put up a good front in public but to shut each other out in private. They lived lives of quiet desperation. As the children grew into awareness of the conflict, the situation darkened.

One day Lee became aware that his anguish and sleepless nights had taken an ugly turn. He felt that the only way out was divorce or suicide. The only thing that saved him, for a time, was his high emotional and financial investment in his family. He couldn't afford divorce, yet he was hurting and frightened. There just had to be another alternative.

Lee began to pray just to hang on. Even endurance is a form of growth.

As for Sandi, one day she and I were discussing their situation. With resounding tones Sandi said to me, "My sole purpose in life is to see to it that my children get to the celestial kingdom." Virtue was shining about her.

I ignored this holier-than-thou demeanor for the moment and questioned, "Don't you want a partner for all eternity? Don't you want to be in the celestial kingdom with your family?"

Sandi was shocked at the question. Until that moment, she had blamed all of their troubles on Lee, forgetting that he supported the family very comfortably, forgetting that he worked with honor as a professional at Church headquarters, forgetting that he was a loyal family man and regular church goer-even attending tithing settlement. Forgetting these things, Sandi complained that Lee simply wasn't the same kind of Mormon that her father was. He hadn't grown. How could he get into the celestial kingdom?

Her view, of course, was narrow.

To try to help her, I ventured that no amount of success with one's children-who also have their free agency-can make up for failure with temple covenants. Celestial kingdoms were about marriage! Surely she had some responsibility to help her husband make it to that glorious place which she herself seemed so confident of reaching. How could she fail; she had a host of Church jobs.

Laughingly I reminded Sandi of Camelot when Guinevere had been listening to Lancelot brag about his virtues and then asked him, "Have you jousted with humility lately?" Humility is a virtue, too.

Then in a more serious tone, I urged Sandi not only to read but to ponder D&C 25, paying particular attention to verses 5 and 14. This is the Lord's counsel to Emma regarding her relationship and duties to Joseph: she was to be a "comfort unto Â· .. thy husband, in his afflictions, with consoling words, in the spirit of meekness Let thy soul delight in thy husband."

The section ends with the statement, "And verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my voice unto all" (v. 16). Even unto Sandi.

Love is the first law of the gospel, as is learning to abide basic laws. Sandi and Lee needed to look to their loving and their learning. They needed to cultivate understanding patience with each other.

The story of Lee and Sandi is the story of all married couples, in a way. Even people born in the same home town with similar backgrounds are different, aren't they? They, too, have to overcome and accommodate. They must seek God's direction and an understanding of his principles so that his will can be done for their family.

At this writing, the family of Lee and Sandi still stands. For the sake of the children it stands. Because of prayers for endurance, it stands. But they must yet learn real love.

Walking a rough path of enduring is one way. The higher principle is to pray for growth and understanding, direction and proper action-while one is enduring! Drawing closer to God in times of trouble means listening to his will.

The matter of listening to God when we do seek him in prayer can be valued better if we consider the counsel that Alma gave to his son Helaman. It is good counsel for us, too. "I beseech of thee that thou wilt hear my words...; for I do know that whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up at the last day" (Alma 36:3).

If we refuse to listen to God, our prayers are empty. Fulfillment cannot come. That is the condition of prayer.

Because we don't always know what is in store for us, cultivating proper prayer, drawing close to God even when circumstances of life aren't particularly demanding, can prepare us for inevitable problems along life's path. We are already in touch with God.

Our family knelt around the master bed during a period when all of the children were home. There were eight of us then whose lives were inextricably intertwined by birth, choice, and temple sealing. We had just moved from our crowded little house to a larger but shabbier place. Our work was cut out for us, but our budget was tight. We had discussed these realities of our lives one more time just before we knelt to pray.

We wanted this move and the risks involved to be right for us, of course.

We wanted all things pertaining to this change in our lives to be according to God's will for our family.

We wanted his watch over our investment.

We wanted the Holy Spirit to dwell there and permeate our lives.

We wanted protection and peace.

But we also wanted our house to be handsome one day. The basic structure of the big, old house was fine. However, it needed a tremendous amount of work to make it an environment in which we felt we could flourish. While we weren't out to impress anybody with what we had, each child and adult had definite dreams about what the house should ultimately be like.

We also wanted to be able to afford the renovations and redecorating. Does all this sound familiar?

Naturally we had some large challenges, not the least of which were to keep our value system up front, to keep contention low, and to stifle foolishness, falseness, selfishness, fatigue, and delusions of grandeur.

We needed to pray. Besides, churches and temples were dedicated to God, so why not our home? Kneeling around the master bed, then, we dedicated our home.

My husband was head of our home in a very real and vital way. He asked each of us to take a turn in these little dedicatory services. I prayed first. Then in the order of their birth, each of the children prayed, expressing their feelings and commitment about the new home. Then my husband gave the dedicatory prayer.

It was wonderful. We were of one heart and one mind. The sweet spirit of the Lord filled every soul. And it was amazing to us that in prayer the details of our various expectations became clear to all.

Time passed. This house was never really "finished." There was never time enough nor money enough to refurbish it in the manner we had dreamed of when we moved in and prayed our dreams before God. In fact, our finances got worse instead of better. There were other demanding, diverse trials during these years.

But that day of dedication helped us immeasurably. Through our struggles along the way, we kept referring to the dedicatory prayer when dreams were fresh and spirits humble. We were in these circumstances together from the start, with God, and we pulled together.

That house became our corner of heaven on earth. It was not a show place, after all. This was the period when missions, weddings, and grandchildren happened. We felt so close to heaven there because we needed God's help often-not to decorate a house but to solve life's problems with eternal reach, according to his will.

The importance of praying in anticipation of inevitable testings in life was part of our dedication ceremony. It is part of the message of this book, too.

Some time ago I was wheeled back into a hospital room following surgical procedures that required that I lay absolutely quiet and unmoving for eight hours. My surgeon roused me from the effects of the anesthetic and took my hand while he spoke distinctly and emphatically to be certain that I heard and understood. He told me that I must not move-no matter what-for the specified period of hours. He sternly said that my life depended upon it.

Again he asked, "Do you understand, Elaine? Your life depends upon it!"

"Easy!" I mused. Understand? Why I welcomed such bliss. I had come into that hospital one tired lady. Eight hours of uninterrupted rest was welcome. I'd have no trouble not moving.

As soon as nurses, family, and doctor left the room, I was wide awake. Naturally, with the chance to sleep on and on, my mind wouldn't cooperate. I counted flaws in the ceiling as well as lambs in some make-believe field. Soon I ached for a more comfortable position. Later I decided that just a very slight shift in position couldn't make any difference-nobody would knowÂ�

Fortunately, a get-away-with-it-if-you-can attitude is a rationale that won't work when the echo of "your life depends upon it" comes to mind.

So I gritted my teeth and endured, not moving. Soon my jaws ached along with the rest of my body as I lay in a flat-back position with sandbags along each side to keep me in place.

It was tough. And because what I did mattered, I prayed for help. As the hours dragged on, my own will weakened. My prayers became anxious pleas. After a time a flash of understanding came to me. Enduring-simply enduring under stress was unrewarding. I decided that the time would pass more pleasantly and profitably if I directed my thoughts. So I remembered joyful times; I counted blessings. Then I drew close to the Lord and talked some things over with him that were important to all the rest of my life.

My attitude of mere grit changed to one of willing submission geared to constructive learning. That change in attitude made all the difference in how I passed the time.

Life is like that. When we can't change a circumstance, we can either grit our teeth and hang on with clenched jaws, or we can submit cheerfully until change occurs. And with God's help we can learn some important lessons. We can feel peace.

As we look at the various kinds of trouble and stress, the trials and heartbreak that people today are tested with, some problems seem more serious and harder to take than others. But God has promised us that we will not be tested beyond what we can endure-even if we bring trouble to ourselves- because he can help us climb back out. He helps us with his principles and he helps us with his encompassing Spirit and he helps us through his agents.

It seems to me that the most important knowledge available to mortals is that we are children of a living God, that Jesus is our Elder Brother, our Redeemer. He cares about us and has all power to help us in the ways most important for us.

Overwhelmingly, people testify of this. When they have suffered and turned to Heavenly Father in a sweet hour of prayer, they do witness his caring. I know that this is true.

The price we pay to become acquainted with God and his will and his ways inevitably proves to be a price well worth it.

Consider these beautiful words written by President Ezra Taft Benson:

It is a great blessing.., to have an inner peace, to have an assurance, to have a spirit of serenity, an inward calm during times of strife and struggle, during times of sorrow and reverses. It is soul-satisfying to know that God is at the helm, that he is mindful of his children, and that we can with full confidence place our trust in him. I believe that all the truly great men of the earth have been men who trusted in God and who have striven to do that which is right as they understood the right. (Improvement Era, June 1954, p. 406.)

One of these truly great men was my husband's grandfather, George Q. Cannon. He was a member of the First Presidency of the Church under Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff. He was speaking about the 98th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 1 through 3, when he said, "Though your prayers may not be answered immediately, if they are offered in the name of Jesus and in faith, nothing being left undone by you that is required, they will live on the records of Heaven and in the remembrance of the Lord and yet bear fruit" (Millennial Star, Vol. 25, pp. 74).

However and whenever peace may come, it does come. It comes according to God's wisdom. It may come with a sweeping feeling within us. It may come through another person's help or counsel. It may come through scripture study when a passage stands forth with unusual clarity. But it comes because of our closeness to God and because of his goodness to us.

Spiritual maturity is understanding that we cannot blame anybody else for our problems.
