Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

6

Adversity-What's in It for Me?

Adversity-what's in it for me? Well, consider the remarkable accounts of prisoners in concentration camps. Of what worth was such a trial?

Life was dreadful in those infamous places of suffering, abuse, humiliation, and hopelessness. It was the Nazi era of World War II and man's inhumanity to man seemed at its worst. Fear and despair were the constant companions particularly of those in the "death section." For one group, things changed somewhat when Corrie ten Boom, an unusual Dutch lady, came into their midst-Corrie and her little Bible! She had miraculously smuggled her Bible into the barracks, past guards so searching that total nudity had to be endured. But she managed to keep the Bible, and adversity was turned into a blessing.

Death camps were well named, but as Corrie began reading God's word to the ever-growing circle of listeners, hope came with learning. Life after certain death-and all that means- became a comforting promise. It would be all right, whatever happened now.

Their schoolroom was a pitiful, crowded, uncomfortable, cold, sparse, dim barrack. The subject was survival, at least of the soul! In adversity they were ready to learn.

In her book, The Hiding Place, Corrie wrote about the secret and simple services that were held each possible evening for Bible reading:

A small light bulb cast a wan yellow circle on the wall, and here an ever larger group of women gathered.

They were services like no others, these times in Barracks 28. A single meeting night might include a recital of the Magnificat in Latin by a group of Roman Catholics, a whispered hymn by some Lutherans, and a sotto-voce chant by Eastern Orthodox women. With each moment the crowd around us would swell, packing the nearby platforms, hanging over the edges, until the high structures groaned and swayed.

At last either Betsie or I would open the Bible. Because only the Hollanders could understand the Dutch text we would translate aloud in German. And then we would hear the life-giving words passed back along the aisles in French, Polish, Russian, Czech, back into Dutch. They were little previews of heaven, these evenings beneath the light bulb. I would think of Haarlem, each substantial church set behind its wrought-iron fence and its barrier of doctrine. And I would know again that in darkness God's truth shines most clear. (Corrie ten Boom, The Hiding Place [New York: Bantam Books, 1971], p. 201.)

Viktor Frankl learned many important lessons and has shared them over the years following his own period of trial in concentration camps. Though he was a Jewish prisoner, restrained without cause, he came to realize that even in the worst of times, life has vital meaning if we will but look for it. He learned that "everything can be taken from a man but one thing; the last of the human freedoms-to choose one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own way." (Viktor E. Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning [New York: Simon and Schuster, Touchstone Books, 1962], p. 65.)

An amazing peace can come, even a lift to the spirit, when we put our minds in the mood of selective learning. Complaining about a problem only rehearses the pain. But sorting out the elements of the trial can reveal valuable truth.

Resourcefulness and unflagging faith-finally achieved- can move people forward in times of trial. There's another reason why we may need adversity in our lives. For example, Connie moved with her family to a Third World country when her father's business assigned him there.

She was fifteen, and the adjustment was difficult. School was the worst. Of course, she missed her friends at home, but that wasn't the real problem. The youth in this land strange to her thought she was strange. They mimicked her accent. Her lunch hours were lonely, and she became the target for jeers- "Yankee go home!" And she wanted to. She was hurt and angry-even resentful toward her father. Making friends and having fun was so much of what life was supposed to be about at this age, and it wasn't happening there.

When I visited that country, Connie and I talked about turning a negative into a positive. I told her about my years in the fabric business with bolts of colorfast fabric all around- except the Indian madras, a cotton fabric of inimitable quality that was not colorfast. At first people wouldn't buy it. Then we hit on an idea for sales. The fact that colors were guaranteed to fade and run when the fabric was laundered was promoted as part of the fabric's appeal. It was a sensational success. People looked at madras in a new light and bought it.

Connie caught the message. Instead of trying to blend in with the natives, unsuccessfully, Connie appeared on campus as the all-American girl in western togs. She was deliberately different. She carried American magazines for youth (including the New Era) and willingly shared them. She shared her cassettes of American music. She laughed at herself along with them. The other students became fascinated. And then the family began serving typical American food to Connie's new friends so they could see how these "foreigners" ate. Banana splits, hamburgers, and chocolate chip cookies were favorites.

In another instance, a young career woman, whom we will call Jane, moved to a small Utah college town after a brilliant beginning in a big city. Her credentials were excellent: a college education, a mission, corporate experience with an executive-level income, enhancing adventures with theater, dining, opera, and travel. She'd had it all-almost. She hadn't had what she really wanted-a husband, a home, and children.

The years passed, and she found herself with a new job at the local university, living in a house in a neighborhood of struggling families. She was a chic dresser among women locked into maternity clothes or grubbies. The serene decor and orderliness of her home were a sharp contrast to the others' two-bedroom places crammed with children, cribs, and a year's supply of confusion.

She was different. At best, neighbors were certain that with so little in common there could be no real relating. She might even be a threat. She could stir restlessness.

Single and successful in that familial environment spelled deep loneliness for Jane. The ward setting wasn't a big improvement. She had looked forward to being in a standard ward after years of being with singles. But here the topics for sermons and class discussions seemed to program her out. They were strictly family oriented.

Bitterness began creeping in. Where was her "Mr. Right," with whom an exchange of cherishing could happen? Where was personal worth in a society based on the number of babies a woman had? Where was fulfillment of her patriarchal blessing about celestial life? And, practically speaking, what was a single girl with heart and dreams and needs and goals supposed to do in a place like this after working hours?

She could have cried a lot, pacified herself with fattening treats, excused away self-indulgence at the local cinema, or hidden away with a romance novel and become increasingly neurotic. But she hadn't-yet. Then one Sunday she let self-pity take over.

The morning dragged painfully. Loneliness closed in upon her, and by the time her ward's meetings were supposed to start she had come to a decision. She wasn't going back. Never again would she sit in church all alone on the back bench watching all those families marching in wearing parenting like a red windsock wafting overhead.

What good was there in going to church? She felt worse when she went than when she stayed home. For weeks she'd fought resentment. She'd managed to stifle the urge to stand up in church and tell those people the awful truth about themselves and their narrow, excluding vision.

She'd tried to make friends. They didn't have time for her. She didn't fit in. They had nothing in common-she couldn't talk endlessly about labor pains.

This Sunday this rehash of hurt brought tears and Jane gave in to sobs, throwing herself on the bed in utter despair and self-pity.

At last, spent emotionally, she rose and went into the kitchen to get a little something to eat. As she responded to childhood training to ask Heavenly Father to bless the food for which she was grateful, Jane was flooded with her need for God's help. She dropped to her knees by her glass-topped table and poured out her heart.

Oh, she had always prayed regularly, but this time was different. This time her heart was broken, her spirit contrite. But most of all, her decision to give up the Church frightened her. She needed God's help.

Her prayer was swift and direct. "Heavenly Father show me the way. There is no other help but thee. Please, Father, show me the way!"

Now a series of things happened. A knock at her door stirred her from her prayer. One of the little children on the block needed a ride to church. She was late. Daddy was out of town, Mommy was ill, the neighbors had already gone. Could Jane help? Jane could!

At church the topic of a sermon was the story of the prodigal son. Jane knew the story well, but this time, as the speaker applied the parable to life now, her heart began to pound.

"The prodigal arose and came to his father," explained the speaker.["[And] when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him" (Luke 15:20).

It wasn't a pat on the shoulder; it was a feast and a showering of gifts; it was a mighty rising to the occasion. Would God do less for his children?

Jane vowed a vow. She'd solve her problem with Heavenly Father's help. She'd get herself ready to go to the temple for her endowments. (In the temple, differences aren't as marked as they are in neighborhoods.) She'd study the scriptures for support and direction. She'd really converse with the Father in prayer rather than merely reciting familiar phrases. Instead of leaving the Church, she'd return to the fold in spirit as well as in body.

Her fervent prayer before church that Sunday and the swift events following it served her spirit well. There was help and there was hope.

Jane hasn't married yet, but she has found peace and a place in her neighborhood.

There is an exchange of learning and teaching each other along the way. She helps with home decoration and household organization. They help her with food storage. As a guest at family home evenings, she is learning another side of the gospel as well as the miracle of growth in life from infancy.

Now she has regular "Pasta Parties" at her home for neighbors-married and single. They're informal affairs with the guest list thoughtfully structured to encourage a comfortable mix and good conversation, and even to proselyte a nonmember friend from campus.

She is the best birthday party giver for the eight-year-olds the block has ever had. And she is "our friend Jane" to tired parents and starry-eyed children alike. She's joined in ward camp and ski trips. Jane is far from lonely any longer.

The bread of charity cast upon a soul or a neighborhood comes back a hundredfold into a lonely heart.

Lonely people in any situation can go on being lonely and miserable, or, if they are humble and contrite enough during adversity to really listen to what God is saying, they can grow in strength, comfort, and usefulness.

In D&C 18:19, we learn that if we do not have faith, hope, and charity we can do nothing. The opposite is, of course, true-with them we can do anything.

Losing hope, being hopeless and helpless, is to deny the power of God. He knows us and our timetable in growth and purpose. Our heartache is his.

Louise lived alone, trapped in a wheelchair. A parade of problems plagued her. She had only one lung and no use of her lower body. Her finances were in a constant state of crisis. Her marriage dissolved, and she had a little girl to rear alone. Her loss of personal beauty startled her and tugged at her self-esteem. Her independent nature and personal pride had to give way, publicly and privately.

Then she Began applying gospel principles to her adversity. What could she learn from this trial? Louise went through the paces of spiritual growth, meeting her test. When the time carne she was Beautifully prepared to meet Heavenly Father, leaving behind her many grateful people to remember her example.

Each morning over the years Louise practiced what she labeled her exercise in joy-a kind of fervent blessing counting session. Upon awakening she would address our Heavenly Father in gratitude for another day. Each day was a bonus, she said. Each day was a chance to learn something more and to hone herself spiritually, to understand the plight of others, whatever it might Be. She would commence her exercise in joy at the top of her head, and thank God for hair-some people don't have any on their heads. She had that! She'd move through eyes that could see and a mind that could think, and so on.

Trapped physically, she soared spiritually, well beyond people who hadn't suffered such adversity.

Imagine, an exercise in joy! She didn't curse God and die, though she was akin to Job. She gave thanks and lived- anyway. And she'll walk again in another life.

LaRue Longden, a former counselor in the general presidency of the Young Women, was a ward Young Women president at the time of the serious illness of her little daughter. Babies were hard to come by in that family-this little daughter was the first one, and now she was threatened. Fear clutched at the hearts of Brother and Sister Longden as they knelt in prayer during a crisis of the illness. Then, at that very moment, word came that their little daughter had passed away. It wasn't what they had in mind. Why hadn't their prayers been answered? Why not the miracle?

It happened that after the funeral, in tribute to their beloved ward president, young women and their leaders held flowers and formed an aisle for Sister Longden and her husband to walk past them.

During this time of intense emotion, LaRue became aware that the girls were watching her. "I had to live what I had been teaching," she explained. "I had to be an example of what I really believed before these impressionable girls."

So, she lifted her chin and smiled upon her young women, her eyes swimming in tears for the daughter who wouldn't grow to be their age in this life. Adversity heightened her awareness of the precious gift life is for young women.

A fourteen-year-old girl survived a serious bout with cancer, but she'll never be able to bear children. Being a mother was all she'd dreamed about as she played with her dolls, while other girls ran for the baseball field.

"The Young Women motto helped me," Molly told me. "The Lord is the strength of my life" (Ps. 27:1). The motto became more than words to recite with her class or to embroider on a wall hanging. She lived by it. It helped her meet her test and determine to be a super teacher of children. She could do it, too, with God's help all the way.

Already this young woman is in constant demand as a mother's helper because she brings into the home a special love and skill.

Geneva, a gifted friend, whose illness for years has kept her from walking, would not give up her Relief Society visiting teaching assignment. She owed too much to Heavenly Father -in spite of (or because of!) being denied the miracle of healing. As a visiting teacher she had unique problems because of her physical condition. But she managed. She phoned her ladies ahead of time. After being loaded into her special vehicle, she drove to their homes, honked the horn, and welcomed them into her car. There the message was given, the focus on heaven enjoyed, the example set, and the burdens lifted because of the outpouring of the spirit that such caring creates.

For many years Rich struggled, almost fruitlessly, to make a living. He had a fine wife and five good children who had become breadwinners in a real sense. The family survived because of their industrious ways. They sold produce from the home garden. They carried paper routes, delivered groceries after school, tended children, helped with household chores for families who could afford to pay them for this service.

The more they added to the family income, the more Rich resented the fact that he needed their help, the more certain he was of his failure as a provider and as a father. He could bring children into the world, but he couldn't take care of their worldly needs.

He was thinking about this one day as he sat in his truck on the edge of a lookout point. It was some distance from their little home. The view of the ocean and islands and port activity was spectacular. The Northwest had the loveliest scenery anywhere, Rich admitted darkly, but it didn't have a place for him in its economic system.

Rich had driven to this viewpoint late in the afternoon of a particularly bitter day, fully intending to drive his battered pickup over the high cliff and end this ridiculous existence. The only thing he could say about himself was that he'd been faithful to his wife. It seemed a small comfort.

As his thoughts took him to his wife, he warmed to memories of their early life together. Mostly it had been good, but the struggle had gotten to her, too. His whole being ached in anguish as he thought of how heavy her load was. The shame of his failure as a husband brought the unfamiliar sting of tears to his eyes.

Do grown men cry? Or were tears just another sign of his own weakness? As he wept, Rich reached for the tissue box his wife kept in the truck cab. It was what he'd once described as silly. One of the children had made it for Mom's Christmas. In quick-stitch around the cover were the words, "You are a child of God, too!"

He studied the words. He felt a faint inner stirring. It was meant for him, too!

The plan to drive off the cliff and lose his life so that he didn't have to face it any longer was out of step with a child of God, Rich suddenly realized. But what could he do? Where was help?

He cried out to God. His prayers were urgent, his heart heaving with emotion and awareness and need.

At last, when he drove back home, he felt a certain peace. If his family could take it, he could too. Life wasn't over yet.

But things didn't get better for Rich. They got worse. A few weeks later, his wife was killed in a head-on collision. Rich became the sole parent in the home.

Rich's prayers then were full of need for comfort and understanding and support. But there was deep gratitude there, too. He knew God lived. He knew that he had been stopped from taking his own life by a higher power than his own will. He knew that he could be helped again for the sake of the children.

Interestingly enough, the neighbors and ward members shifted into a new gear. Through Rich's adversity, they grew in some important ways, too. They had judged Rich harshly before. Now sympathy and understanding surfaced, and they were there to help this family over its hurdle.

Rich was given an opportunity for employment with a suitable wage that would allow the children to run the family home as the mother once had, instead of being out of the home long hours to earn wages.

But even more significant to Rich was the return of sweetness in the home. There was a sureness that God loved them- as well as their neighbors-and that he was mindful of them in their adversity. They were more determined to always be people whom God could trust.

What's good about adversity in life? Besides personal growth, it is a time when we can be proven trustworthy before God. One thinks of Job 23:10: "He knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold."

When adversity strikes in any of its forms, seek to learn something from the experience but also look for the blessing, the hidden gift.

Every burden on the back can be a gift in the hands.
