Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

7

Adversity-A Blessing in Disguise

Testing and troubles give us the blessings of experience and of drawing closer to God. Through adversity our character is proven. When considered in this light, every burden has a gift in its hand. When we cope with adversity according to God's laws, ultimately we'll sense the gift.

Perhaps you've seen the bumper sticker that reads, "Am I having any fun yet?" That may be a good question to ask ourselves when we get belted with a difficult test or a crashing disappointment. An even better question we could ask is "What possible blessing is there in this ordeal?" That kind of perspective can help us to cope more effectively and to find the gift, the blessing in adversity.

Countless remarkable Saints have proven that living of gospel principles modifies attitude which, in turn, modifies adversity into blessings. Ordinary people become extraordinary ones.

Some years ago we were having some kitchen remodeling done. The foreman on the job brought a carpenter to meet me. The carpenter folded his arms across his chest and stood there looking me up and down, as he acknowledged the introduction.

"So, you're Elaine Cannon. Well, let me tell you something. My wife has had seventeen children, and she looks better than you do!"

We laughed together, and I knew we were going to get along fine. He was proud of his wife, and he was honest! As the days passed I learned a lot about Joe. His story is a great example of the blessing of adversity.

Joe explained that he had been a partner in a construction company until a few years before. Then his partner had lost control of his life-he withdrew the fifty thousand dollars in the company account, charged heavily on the company cards, and skipped town in a new luxury car. Joe was left with a had credit rating and no capital with which to run the company. And he couldn't find work because it was a time of severe economic slump.

The oldest two of Joe's seventeen children were in the mission field; the third was ready to go. The family's resources reached the crisis stage, and the spiritual fiber of the family dwindled as well.

They fasted, they prayed, they tried to get their lives more in order. It was hard to be loving and patient with this kind of pressure and failure plaguing the family.

Finally they were forced to accept Church welfare for a time. Joe's pride suffered, but there was no other way.

One day Joe had taken his pickup truck out to the valley west of Salt Lake to Welfare Square to pick up the supplies for his large family. As he drove along the freeway toward his home, helplessness overcame him. He was a man who had worked hard all his life, and to be subjected to the humiliation of depending upon others for his keep seemed more than he could bear.

"It was then that heartbreak hit full force," said Joe, with tears beginning to well in his eyes. "I looked at those hands for a moment, then took them off the wheel and held them toward the sky, shouting to God. 'Look at these hands,' I cried out loud. 'Look at them. God, give me work!'"

Joe was thoughtful before he continued the details of this remarkable experience. Then he said softly, "You know, Sister Cannon, right then I heard a voice inside of my mind, just as you are hearing mine. It said to me, 'Be still, and take it!' And when I had learned humility, patience, and gratitude, I found work. And you know," Joe continued, "soon after I found work I was called to serve in the bishopric. One of the first things I had to do was help one of those formerly privileged rich ones accept welfare when the bottom dropped out of his business."

In this world full of adversity, I am struck by the importance of this story. Joe and his family had prayed and fasted, yet it seemed that heaven was deaf to their need.

When Joe was at last brokenhearted and contrite enough to really cry out his anguish before God (and the condition of the heart not the loudness of the cry determines whether we are ready), he heard the voice. Now, the voice didn't tell him to drive to such and such a street and go in a building with tall columns where a job would be waiting; it said to be still and take it!

His experience was helpful to others. His adversity was a preparation; it was a blessing to more than himself.

Adversity, when we look for the blessing in it, can prepare us to be an effective part of the Lord's work here on earth in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Adversity takes on many guises, and God needs many helpers to do his work each day. We forget self when our compassion is stirred for another who is more needful or who has fewer inner resources or less understanding of life and the plan than we might have. We stretch ourselves in their behalf. We reach, we touch a life, and for both of us, our troubles are modified.

We lose our life in the service that lifts someone else. Then we find it, this life of ours! At last, we may even come to be grateful to God for our troubles-we wouldn't trade ours for the trials of others!

At a luncheon of old school friends a woman whose husband had died suddenly of a heart attack was complaining with her friends about her hardship. "If only he would come down and talk to me for a moment," she sobbed. "There are so many things I don't know anything about. Why doesn't he come to me?"

"Maybe I can help you," another woman said softly, "Since we last saw each other years ago, I have buried two husbands. I know something about grief, confusion, and heartbreak. Let's talk about it after."

Two husbands! That ought to prepare a person for reaching out in compassion as well as wisdom to a newcomer to grief. It also gave her opportunities for graduate school training and years of valuable contribution to the community as she worked in top executive levels. And she reared two fine children besides.

Many times the matter of stewardship comes into my mind as I watch people struggle with trouble. I hear so much of heartbreak and anger and depression that when I watch someone going through the phases of a certain kind of trial I want to whisper encouragement of another kind to them. "Be a good steward of this opportunity. Learn the lesson well! Gather wisdom and skill to share. So many out there need your kind of know-how."

Life is tough. So is becoming useful. So is growing.

C. S. Lewis wrote of the need for people to get a higher vision of themselves and what the Lord has in mind for them. The suggestion is a familiar one to many:

Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently He starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of- throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage: but He is building a palace. (Mere Christianity [New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., Macmillan Paperbacks Edition, 1960], p. 174.)

Life is learning obedience.

Even Jesus learned obedience by suffering. We can learn obedience.

We can learn compassion.

We can learn to think and plan and ponder the paths of our feet, as suggested in Prov. 4:26.

We can learn the goodness of people and their willingness to sacrifice for us.

We can learn that gospel principles suffice.

We can gain a vision of the purpose of life and the magnificence of its opportunities.

We can have our appetite whetted for the promise of glories now beyond our understanding.

We can learn that God lives and loves us anyway.

There are countless examples of people who lived in other times in other places whose trials and tribulations have proven them as trusted servants and witnesses of God. And they have been a blessing to their peers.

Daniel as one of the choice sons of Israel was taken captive by an enemy nation to be raised up for a wicked king's own purposes. The best of the lot of captives were to be fed from the king's own table. This was supposed to be a favor but for Daniel this meant trouble. Wine and meat were against his standards as a man of God. Though his life was at risk he reasoned with the guard to serve him grains for a period of time. At last the guard agreed. Daniel withstood the test and was blessed with physical well-being and hidden treasures of knowledge. He found favor with the king, and thus was able to serve his people.

Enoch, slow of speech and lacking confidence, was greatly tried when he was called to serve the Lord in a public way. He worried, "I... am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:31).

His was a test of obedience, and whether he liked the test or not, Enoch showed through his willingness to respond to the call that he could be trusted. And one day "as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled, and could not stand in his presence" (Moses 6:47). He was blessed for meeting his test in ways he could not have dreamed of at first. We can draw strength from his strength. Our faith can deepen by remembering his sturdy faith.

Father Lehi explained to his son Jacob about the importance of keeping faithful under affliction and being trustworthy in spite of persecution. He said, "Jacob,... thou knowest the greatness of God; and he shall consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain. Wherefore, thy soul shall be blessed, and thou shalt dwell safely .... For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Ne. 2:2-3, 11; italics added.)

Job's struggles are well-known. His story has become state-of-the-art suffering. He endured what he had to-appropriately, on God's terms. Even Job's wife wondered why, after such enormous heartbreaking problems, Job didn't "curse God and die." Job replied, "Though he [God] slay me, yet will I trust in him" (Job 13:15).

Wanderings, displacement of entire communities, have been a familiar trial for God's children since the beginning of time. Such an undertaking is a grand test because sacrifice and struggle of every kind are required.

Who will be valiant through such testing? Who will obey? Who will love God anyway and keep the faith? Who will gain precious experience needed for a higher level of eternal life? Who will become experienced enough to effectively help others in their tests?

Noah and his ark of sevens and pairs had to be ready to start the world again wherever they were when the floods subsided. Just because Noah was a prophet didn't make the task easy. His preparations were ridiculed and scoffed at.

Jared and his brother guided their people in strange barges they had built and then filled with seeds, fish, flocks, fowls of the air, and even swarms of honeybees. These barges were built with God's specific instruction-sealed "like unto a dish"-and ceaselessly "driven forth before the wind" to the promised land (Ether 2:17; 6:8). But there were mighty struggles to accomplish the escape from Babel.

Lehi with God's Liahona led his extended family and selected friends in an exodus from Jerusalem that was marked with trauma and suffering. Moses and the children of Israel were tried with all manner of suffering. Manna was their meal and new commandments shaped their lives. It was not easy.

And the Latter-day Saints' pioneer trek west was one of the most ambitious undertakings in the history of God's mobile children on earth. Again this organized migration from a people's familiar surroundings and homes was in response to God's commandment. It was a mighty trial with a purpose. It was a program for adversity of every kind. The man held accountable before God for this mass movement was Brigham Young, who entered the valley ill with fever.

Mass migration is a mighty test. The upheaval of communities, the untimely and even violent death of loved ones, the discomfort and martyrdom, the loss of precious possessions and privacy, the vanished dreams for personal achievement, and stressful relationships were part of these migrations and the history of man up through our own time. Jews under Hitler, peasants in the time of the Czar, Cambodian refugees, black slaves, pilgrims, and many others across the earth have had to face this ultimate ordeal of mass migration.

The Lord has said: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom" (D&C 136:31).

There it is: adversity is something we need to help prepare us to receive God's glory! There are blessings in disguise in adversity.

Adversity is something we need to respond to appropriately because it is part of life's preparation and proof of our obedience to God.

When we are hurting, when we are sick and suffering, when we feel weak-willed and discouraged, when our hearts are wrenched and depression and confusion are closing in, we should be on guard! As searchlights marking a path in the sky, as lights ablaze on an entertainment strip, or as whistles blowing, and sirens screeching-signals, attention getters-so trouble should signal to our mind, TEST! TRIAL! THINK! When the first sign of trouble, temptation, or testing comes into our life, the trained spirit within us shifts gears. We quicken our guard. All of our antennae are up. We check our fine-tuning.

"How must I respond so as to prove that I love the Lord anyway, and that I will not take up anger against him nor prove myself weak and untrustworthy?"

"What principle will help me now?"

"What am I to learn?"

"What do I need to know that I never dreamed I'd need to know?"

"After this experience, who needs the kind of help I now can give?"

When trouble comes, these are good questions to ask. I am not talking about simple nuisances or demands that are woven through daily life. I am talking about the kinds of trials that demand the best in us.

God becomes not only important but absolutely necessary to our survival and our learning through adversity. The Lord has said, "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing-yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of the earth."

And the next verse is a joyful verse! "Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness?" (D&C 19:38-39.)

God becomes not only important but also absolutely necessary to our spiritul growth. And to our joy. Shakespeare reminded us in Much Ado About Nothing, "How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!"

Draw close to God, then, when your life and heart are burdened. Draw close to him, and he has promised to draw close to you. Adversity has blessings beneath its cloak, when you put your hand in the Lord's. And you can even become a witness to unexpected miracles.

We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair.

-2 1 Cor. 4:8
