Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

8

Adversity and the Miracle of Prayer

Through adversity we can come to know God, to love him, to value the plan and gift of life, to see his hand in our blessings.

Think of it this way: if we didn't suffer some, if we had everything that we wanted and most of what we needed without asking of Heavenly Father, we might drift away from God in our lives. Surely we wouldn't grow in our understanding that we are in debt to the Lord for all our blessings.

It is through adversity and the answers to our prayers that we become a witness to miracles in our time.

Adversity and the miracles wrought through fervent prayer because of that suffering is a blessing for people of all ages.

Tippy was the most precious possession in the life of our eight-year-old son. Tippy was a wiggling, lovable puppy with black, curly hair. But, unless our son Tony cuddled him, he yapped constantly. He was in a way like a newborn baby. I'd had six children in close marching order, and right then a yap- ping puppy was not number one on my list of priorities. But Tony adored Tippy.

One day Tippy disappeared. We searched the neighborhood for him without success. No doubt someone had carried this appealing black bundle off, I explained to Tony, and added that maybe puppies weren't such a good idea on our busy street anyway. I reasoned and comforted and tried to pacify this precious son of ours with his favorite treats. But he would not be changed in his determination to find Tippy.

"More, may I say my prayers early today?" he asked when we reached home again after scouring the streets in our area.

"Of course, Tony. You may pray whenever you like, as often as you like." I was tempted to take this teaching moment and discourse on prayer to a ready eight-year-old but he quickly interrupted me, "Will you come pray with me?"

Together we knelt by his bunk bed. My heart was warm and tender at the little boy's outpourings, but it was fearful, too. What if the puppy couldn't he found, couldn't find its long way home after so short a time with us? Would Tony's faith in Heavenly Father falter?

As it turned out, it was my faith that faltered. My need wasn't as great perhaps. I would have forgotten about that puppy and welcomed the peace from its yapping, except that Tony wouldn't let me. We had an "extra" prayer each day when he came home from school. Each prayer had as its sole purpose the pleading with God to bless the puppy and bring him home safely "some day." Tony was resolute.

Many days passed. One day I sent Tony out to the curb to bring in the trash cans. Moments later he came bounding into the house with the puppy in his arms. Tippy was an emaciated, bedraggled dog with curled fur matted by dried blood. He'd had some terrible adventure. All the way to the veterinarian we cried tears of gladness and Tony kept repeating over and over, "I knew Heavenly Father would bring Tippy back. I knew it!"

Oh, to be so positive about outcome to prayer! So tireless in waiting for the Lord's timetable.

It was many weeks after this incident that I was giving a talk in a neighboring stake Relief Society. I told about Tippy and Tony's unfailing faith. The next day one of the women in that meeting knocked on my door. She handed me a fat roll of her famous caramel pecan candy. It seems that my story stirred a memory in her, and she came with candy and a confession. She said she was driving past our home one day near the vacant lot and felt a thump. She didn't stop to check because she just assumed it was a piece of old tire or a stray cat as she saw the black object flip into the tall weeds of the vacant lot. She drove on her way. She was a woman in a hurry to a doctor's appointment.

Tippy had been injured seriously (indeed, the vet confirmed this) and apparently had been recuperating in the field while Tony's prayers were answered, keeping the dog alive. On that last day, Tippy had made his way as far as the trash cans when Tony found him.

In 2 Ne. 26:15 we are promised that "the prayers of the faithful shall be heard." My personal testimony is that this is so.

Mary had always enjoyed a close relationship with Heavenly Father and the Savior. She was a praying woman and a woman to whom gratitude was as natural as breathing. She had climbed mountains with the soul-testing experiences in her life, and because of the way she responded, she was honed into an exemplary woman.

Mary is in her nineties now, but life isn't over until it is over. Our tests aren't clone until the last hour.

Mary is still being tested! She has been wracked with the anxiety, confusion, and sadness of change in life. One day she shared with me a choice experience that she had after a long period of pain, struggle, and sleepless nights.

"I had prayed many times before during this miserable period of my life. This time it was different. I was in a state of terrible mental confusion. I felt out of control. I was so needful and frantic that there was no help except God's help or I would surely be in the hands of the adversary!"

As the pressure built within Mary, she rushed to her bedside, fell upon her knees, and wailed out loud, "Oh, God, hear me! Hear my prayer. Give me peace!"

Her anguished cry echoed in her bedroom. "Immediately, in the same instant that I cried out, I felt the evil confusion and darkness peel away from me. It started at the top of my head-in my brain where the frightening muddle had persisted-and it moved in an orderly manner right clown my body and out my feet! You have seen those keys that you twist around a can of meat to open it, it was like that with me then. The consuming darkness came peeling off of me, and out of me, from head to toe, leaving my spirit and my body refreshed."

Then Mary added, "Can you imagine my deep gratitude to my Heavenly Father? I know he cares about me!"

We talked about how easy it can be to get out of control because of burdens. Mary's testimony is that when we lay our life in the lap of God, when we are truly brokenhearted and contrite, God grants us answers to our prayers.

"We are like Abraham," Mary explained. "He had to go to the full limit of the test, and then, only then, did God intervene." God's purposes and his timetable for us are not always easily recognized by us. However, he does not forsake us. If we turn to him in prayer when adversity comes, we will know this.

President Ezra Taft Benson taught the congregation at Elder A. Theodore Tuttle's funeral that he might be healed. Fervent prayers of the Saints can make a difference, he continued, but then added the reminder that in all prayers for favors, we submit, saying, "Thy will be done." Whatever happens then, we are to be comforted knowing God's will can only be for the ultimate good.

Emerson wrote that "no man ever prayed heartily without learning something." That is an interesting phrase-to pray heartily. It is true that the more we pray the more we'll understand, especially if we do it heartily.

Not long ago a young woman and her mother kept an appointment with me at our home. Debbie was not married. She was of high school age and expecting a baby. It was a terrible heartbreak for the family. The sin was distressing, but there was conflict in what to do about this forthcoming infant. The mother's first choice was that the "father" be forced to marry Debbie. If that didn't work, she felt the child should be kept in the family-in spite of what people would think.

Debbie was a sensitive, bright young woman who had plans for her life. She wanted a temple marriage some day. She wanted an education so that she could be a good wife and mother. She realized that she had made a mistake more dreadful than she had ever before suspected. Now that she was caught in the problem, she was repentant and wanted to move forward with her life. She also felt very keenly about doing what was best for this baby.

We talked about marrying this young man and then preparing for a later sealing in the temple. She was sure that he wasn't someone with whom she wanted to share the rest of her life. "Nonsense," argued the mother, "he can change."

"Maybe," I added. "But two wrongs don't necessarily make a right. In other words, marrying the wrong man simply because you had sinned with him is not necessarily a proper response to the problem." In this case, it seemed that it would not assure the infant a proper home and years of security.

The next thing we talked about was that a mistake of the flesh is no excuse for denying a spirit child of Heavenly Father (which would be assigned to inhabit the baby's body) the best possible environment to grow up in on earth. A spirit child of our Heavenly Father is precious. Personal sacrifice might be necessary on the part of both Debbie and her mother in order to allow this spirit child's growth and the fulfillment of God's purposes.

These were tough decisions. Abortion, of course, was out of the question, though it had been considered.

Cramming for help during such adversity isn't as wise as living each day to be ready for whatever test might come- including temptations. But it is better to "cram" than never to learn at all. At last Debbie and her mother agreed to take their problem before God. They would prepare themselves for prayer. We talked of a priesthood blessing, fasting, wrestling with themselves for forgiveness and wisdom, searching the scriptures. It is good to do what we ought to do before we ask the Lord for direction and for his Spirit.

We think of Oliver Cowdery and his desire to translate and his accompanying failure. It is the classic example for us all, as we consider that the Lord said to Oliver, "Study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right" (D&C 9:8).

I reminded Debbie and her mother of this system for getting guidance. Some time later Debbie called for another appointment. The baby had been born just days before, and she wanted to talk about it with me.

While she was in labor, both Debbie and her mother asked for and received an incredible priesthood blessing through their bishop. Then when the baby was born, the feeling came over both Debbie and her mother that it was absolutely right to give this child up for adoption. Her mother's agreeing with her was an additional answer to Debbie's prayers.

Debbie shared with me the sweet knowledge that came to her that there was some family being prepared especially for this child of her flesh and the spirit child of Heavenly Father. Now she understood! She felt a real sense of partnership with God.

The adoption agency described three different families to Debbie, without revealing names or locations. Two of the families left Debbie feeling blank or numb. But, she said, when the third family was barely mentioned, her heart began to pound. Her body tingled all over. She knew in her heart and in her mind that this baby, fresh from heaven, belonged in that family.

Debbie knew, too, that her repentance and sorrow before God was accepted. She felt forgiven. Heavenly Father filled her soul with peace. Mother was comforted, too.

Now, consider the other part of this growing problem of babies being born out of wedlock.

A young mother stood in fast meeting the day her adopted son was given a name and a father's blessing. She told the story of the unusual circumstances surrounding this baby's being given to them. Her husband was out of town at the time the baby was born and couldn't be reached. She had to make the decision on her own without his counsel. Her prayers to Heavenly Father were fervent. It wasn't just a decision that affected their family; it also affected the baby boy. When she brought the baby home and looked into the face of the tiny stranger, she prayed again that she might know for certain that this little spirit belonged in their family.

As she held the newborn a powerful spiritual moment comforted her. She suddenly knew that this child was meant to be theirs. "It was a direct and definite spiritual confirmation that he belonged with us," she said. "I did not need an angel to come down and tell me personally that this was so. I knew it within me, and I thank God for such a precious answer to prayer."

During the fast and testimony meeting in which the baby was blessed and named, this young mother said that this same welling up of the Spirit filled her as her husband prayed over the baby. It was a precious underscoring of her previous answer to prayer.

Such is the power of God.

If you have lived very long, you know that life hands a variety of challenges into our lives before our day is done. Included among the assaults with which we might wrestle are temptation, infidelity, discouragement, disappointment, rebellious children, quarrelsome neighbors, senility in a family member, financial disaster, a seesaw marriage, a challenging Church assignment, physical handicaps. It is impossible to tackle such testings without God's help and expect a successful outcome as well as personal growth.

It is small consolation that all God's children have troubles. People get fiat tires, too, but when it is your own deflated wheel or your flooded basement, for example, you have to deal with it. So it is with other kinds of trials. That's why careful prayer is such a blessing-it is personal help of the loftiest kind.

Many of us have similar testings, yet solutions-like growth -must come individually.

Kanako was a beautiful young friend of mine from Japan. We asked her to give the closing prayer at one of the general women's meetings broadcast across the world from the Tabernacle on Temple Square. Kanako was studying temporarily in Salt Lake City, Utah. It was exciting for us to have her and, we thought, for her to have this unusual opportunity.

As the day of the meeting drew closer, Kanako became increasingly nervous. She even talked about backing out. There were many reasons. Being a Japanese woman, she felt strange to be performing in public. She was young and in a strange country. She suffered about representing her people in the general church setting. She was fearful that she would embarrass her family.

She even considered the possibility that she would faint right there on the podium before the world who would be watching on television!

The night of the meeting Kanako looked particularly lovely, dressed in her traditional Japanese ceremonial robes. We requested this dress to give an international flavor to the meeting. At the prayer meeting before the broadcast, I slipped my arm through hers to walk upstairs to the Tabernacle stand. She was trembling. She whispered in my ear her concerns. I assured her that the Lord would bless her in a manner appropriate for the occasion.

I knew that she had a strong testimony of the Savior. I knew that she was bright and could converse quite well in English. I felt certain that she could pray in public, so I relaxed about her and focused on my own responsibilities for public appearance at the meeting.

When the time came for Kanako to take her place at the pulpit, it was a beautiful moment. The Japanese people are so very deferential and gracious. She stood reverently with her head bowed. But then minutes passed when she stood silent, not starting the prayer. When at last she did speak, we couldn't understand the words, yet we felt a powerful spirit.

Weeks later I received a letter telling about the miracle of the prayer by Kanako. Someone had brought to the Tabernacle a Japanese woman who was investigating the gospel. When the woman saw Kanako and heard the prayer in her own tongue, the Spirit quickened her. It was an answer to her own personal prayer for a witness at this meeting that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was true and was where she belonged.

Another woman told me of a different kind of experience with prayer and Heavenly Father. It, too, has a message for us as we consider adversity in our lives.

Linda and Ralph loved each other. They were young, and Ralph's career was moving along successfully. Their new home was empty of furniture but full of good spirit.

Then calamity struck. Ralph was diagnosed as having a critical disease and the prognosis was negative. The disease worked its destruction on his body swiftly, and Ralph suffered incredibly. Linda was bereft. She felt threatened and helpless. Ralph needed constant care and constant prayer just to get him through the agony. As Ralph would struggle to endure, Linda would inevitably fall to her knees by his bedside and pray for Ralph's strength. She prayed for greater wisdom in the attending physicians. She prayed most of all, over and over again, that the miracle of healing would happen. She always prayed for forgiveness for her own weaknesses and lack of sufficient faith to bring about the desired healing.

One night as she knelt there, she prayed out loud as they had done together each bedtime since their marriage. In the midst of Linda's pleadings to God, Ralph touched her arm and said weakly, "Honey, don't go through all of that, just pray that I can sleep through the night.., just pray I can sleep."

Linda wept. Of course.., take each thing a step at a time. Right now, Ralph just needed sleep and escape. Linda mellowed as she humbly asked Heavenly Father to help Ralph to sleep that night. Immediately Ralph drifted into a deep sleep. Linda was able to get some much needed rest, as well.

In the morning when Linda checked, Ralph was dead. He had passed away in his sleep. For him, it was the answer to prayer. For Linda it was an acceptable heartbreak because she was filled with that incredible gift of peace as she looked upon her husband in his final sleep.

She told me that she dropped to her knees by his bed again and placed herself and her life in God's hands. Then she thanked him fervently for the comforting witness of love from heaven that flooded her as she prayed.

Over the years I have gathered countless wonderful stories about prayer, God's closeness, people's being comforted even when things don't turn out the way they wanted, of miracles, of spiritual support during struggles, and of peace and hope and assurance.

One of the strongest influences in my life came when I was a seminary girl under the wise shepherding of William E. Berrett. I remember a lesson about Parley P. Pratt on a sea voyage. Things on the sailing vessel took a bad turn when the prevailing winds died down and the ship was stranded for days in an unusual calm. Supplies were running seriously short. Matters were getting desperate, At last, people came to Elder Pratt who was asleep on deck. They knew him to be a missionary, a man of God. They stirred him and begged him to ask God to make the winds blow.

Elder Pratt had the passengers kneel on deck while he prayed very simply, as a man of complete faith can do. He asked God to bless them with "patience until the wind blows."

At the dedication of the Denver Temple, one of the stake presidents went to great trouble to squeeze a place in the celestial room for a single girl with a serious problem. Space was tight because of the large choir and the television equipment. Only General Authorities, their wives, and certain local leaders were privileged to sit in that room.

But the stake president managed a place for Jenny. This young woman had suffered greatly most of her life. Her crippling and painful disease made her life miserable twenty-four hours a day. She had only one leg now, too. The pain in her arms made it impossible for her to use crutches. She lived with a father and an unmarried brother who took care of her, but in the temple she sat in a wheelchair, alone.

This story has an inspiring history. Jenny had been deeply discouraged until an idea struck her. The temple was to be dedicated, and that meant the prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, would be there. If she could just touch him, she would be made well. She knew it! She didn't ask for a blessing. She would pray to God that she would somehow be able to touch the prophet, and then she would be free of pain. That's why she had to sit in the celestial room at the dedication, so that she could be near President Benson.

President Benson knew nothing of the young woman or her plans. On the day of dedication Jenny sat in her place in the celestial room waiting for the General Authorities to come in for the meeting. Jenny suddenly was filled with an exhilarating sweetness and lift of spirit. She looked around. President Benson was coming along the aisle where she sat. As he passed her place, Jenny reached out an aching arm and touched President Benson. Immediately she felt healing powers in her body.

"I haven't had a moment's pain since then," Jenny affirmed. "Now I can walk with crutches. God loves me. He loves me, and he hears and answers prayers!"

This incident reminds me of a similar one that happened with my own husband when he was a missionary in the Hawaiian Islands. He was called to a home where a little son was desperately ill and plagued with a very high temperature. The parents despaired but the boy was certain that if he could hold my missionary husband's Bible next to his body he would be made well. Jim left the Bible with the boy who slept with it. The next day the Bible was returned with the good news that the boy was healed,

Some years ago I sat in a sacred testimony meeting in the Tabernacle with a select group of LDS college students. Several General Authorities were there, too, as well as leaders from some of the areas of the Church that the student delegates represented at this convention.

One of the speakers was a man from California who told of the day his wife called him at work, frantically reporting that their family home was threatened. The winds had changed and the flames from a fierce canyon fire had driven people from their homes. Police had put up a barricade.

Richard left at once for the street where his home was threatened. He broke through the police blockade. He raced toward his house noting that other homes up and down the street were already in flames, The landscaping about his property was on fire already. Richard took the garden hose and tried to put out the flames, but the fire was too strong. He took the garden hose and climbed to the roof, wetting the area down as he went. It was no use. The fire was too much for a single garden hose.

But it was not too much for the power of God!

Richard remembered this as he dropped the hose. For a moment he thought of the great recreation his ward members enjoyed in their home. It was the only fun in many lives pressured with little income and much struggle as they studied at the university. Richard was the bishop of that ward and his spacious home was an oasis for his needful ward members. He talked this over with the Lord in those tense moments on the roof. He didn't need the home for himself and his wife. He needed it for the people in his ward. It would be a witness that God was mindful of them if the house could be saved.

Richard then raised his arm to the square, and through the power of the priesthood of God which he holds, and in the name of Jesus Christ, Richard blessed the house against the encroaching flames and all other destructive elements,

Richard's home was only scorched while other homes burned on that street of devastation. He weeps when he thinks of God's attention to details and to the needs of simple people in a small dot of a place on all the earth.

The press reported the miracle and a public witness of Christ changed many lives.

Years ago a certain class in the Church was discussing the handcart phase of the pioneer movement. There was much criticism expressed against those early Church leaders for allowing people to move west so ill-equipped so late in the season of storms.

As the class members warmed to the subject and the spirit of the meeting turned negative, an old gentleman, who had kept his silence until he could stand it no longer, stood and courageously chastised the group. He told them that they were wrong to speak so freely of things they knew nothing about. He admitted that there were mistakes in judgment and that people suffered and died in great numbers because of that. But that wasn't the entire story, according to him.

He said in essence, "I was in that handcart company. My wife was in it, too. We suffered beyond anything you can imagine in starvation and exposure and exhaustion. But tell me, did you ever hear a survivor of that company utter a word of criticism? Not one of that company ever apostatized or left the Church, because every one of us came through with the absolute knowledge that God lives. We became acquainted with him in our extremities."

His outburst continued: "I have pulled my handcart when I was so weak and weary from illness and lack of food that I could hardly put one foot in front of the other. I have looked ahead and seen a patch of sand or a slope and I have said, 'I can only go that far and there I must give up.' But when I reached it, the cart began pushing me. I knew that the angels of God were there. Am I sorry that I chose to come with that handcart company in that season? No! Neither then nor any minute of my life since. The price we paid to become acquainted with God was a privilege to pay." (This story was recorded in the Relief Society lessons included in the January 1948 issue of the Relief Society Magazine, page 8.)

I love that story. I have heard this same kind of testimony from people who have endured public disgrace, excommunication, terrible struggles with health, personal hurt, spiritual slack, deprivation, or even torture and abuse. All across the earth we hear stories of trials that have been solved or withstood with the help of God and through application of his principles. And the wonder of it is that great or small miracles do come in the Wake of adversity.

Do you recall these fine lines from The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, by Samuel Taylor Coleridge?

He prayeth well who loveth well Both man and bird and beast. He prayeth best who loveth best All things both great and small. For the dear God who loveth us, He made and loveth all.

This we believe, that God lives and loves us and will help us. But even so is it ever all right to cry?

I will control myself, Or go inside. I will not flaw perfection with my grief. Handsome, this day: No matter who has died.

-Edna St. Vincent Millay
