Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

9

Adversity and the Weeping Eye

Many tears are shed during adversity, and considering the amount of adversity in the world today, that is a lot of water. Like Jeremiah lamenting the miserable estate of Jerusalem, there was a time when I was lamenting the miserable state of my life at that time. That meant tears. And a lot of good tears are.

One day, I consulted the scriptures for a Primary lesson I was preparing and came across Lam. 3:26, which says: "It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord." I vaguely wondered if that counsel applied to women, too.

You see, I was the wife of a new bishop, the young mother of many. To help with the family finances, I wrote a daily newspaper column and had a weekly television show. Life was full and pushing around me. My husband, it seemed to me, was always gone. To sit and wait for the salvation of the Lord to get me out from under the burdens that tried my strength, spirit, and wit, seemed too much to ask of God.

I needed help; there was no doubt about that. I was certain God could help, but I was not certain that he would or even that he should. I felt hopeless. I was on a treadmill with my legs getting shorter and my breathing turning into gasps. ÃÃ 104

There was a lot of self-pity, too, and one day I was wallowing in it. I contemplated making a double chocolate cake and not giving any to the children until I had eaten my full. I was looking up the recipe when there came a gentle rapping at my door.

Janet was there, my dear friend who taught at the university. She had stolen a moment between classes to visit me. Her own little ones were being cared for at home by a husband sorely stricken with arthritis and unable to work any longer. It was midmorning, and a visit at this hour of the day was most unusual. Surely she was sent on a ministering angel's errand, for I was in the depths. I needed a new way of looking at my own troubles for a moment, then, according to her words, I'd be able to "pick up my wagon handle again and head west!"

I welcomed her with joy, but she couldn't come in. She merely handed me help on a scrap of paper and went back to her car. I looked at the message in my hand. It was just a "Peanuts" cartoon with the Charlie Brown crowd. And I had hoped for hope, comfort!

Then I read the dialogue.., and caught her message. Lucy had set up a packing box as her "psycho shop." Most kids use such a setup to sell lemonade, but Lucy was selling psychiatric counsel for five cents. The sign announced that the "doctor" was in.

Charlie Brown approached. He explained that he wanted to be liked, even admired. He wanted to be the life of every party and the hope of every person. When he asked Lucy if she understood these desires, she said she understood perfectly. Then she added, "Forget it!" (See Charles M. Schulz, "Peanuts Treasury" [New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1968], p. 13.)

This precious perspective my friend shared with me was a reminder not to take myself and my problems too seriously. Forget it-for the time being laugh and forget self.

While laughter is good medicine for the moment, life is mostly very serious business. We can't exactly giggle through it with any sense of reality or responsibility. But preoccupation with our own view of life can smother hope. Self-pity can stifle wisdom. Easy tears, as these poetic lines affirm, can blind perspective:

Weep not! be loved, for that rush of tears Is like a liquid veil upon thine eyes. What matter if another dawn brings sighs Another hostile day its press of fears. Weep not, a weeping eye can never see How great a web of comfort may be drawn Out of another heart into thine own Nor even my two hands stretched out to thee, What if the dawn that web of comfort break, Mock at the dawn, beloved, for my sake.

-W. B. Yeats (from Ah, Sweet Dancer [New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971], p. 134)

So we dry our eyes and we get on with life, no matter what it holds for us each day.

One of the quickest ways out of the doldrums is to consider with whom you'd trade places when it comes to trouble. Everybody these clays seems to have a mighty portion of it, whether by their own making or from something beyond their control.

You stop weeping for yourself when you consider the plight of some people. Here are some lines to awaken your best perspective:

Blessed are they who understand My faltering step and palsied hand. Blessed are they who know that my ears today Must strain to catch the things they say. Blessed are they who seem to know That my eyes are dim and my wits are slow. Blessed are they with a cheery smile Who stop to chat for a little while. Blessed are they who never say, "You've told that story twice today." Blessed are they who make it known That I'm loved, respected, and not alone. Blessed are they who know I'm at loss To find the strength to carry the Cross. Blessed are they who ease the days Of my journey Home in loving ways.

-Esther Mary Walker

While I was serving as general president of the Young Women, I received an anonymous note with a crisp twenty-dollar bill enclosed. In the letter a woman confessed that she'd stolen that amount from the cash box when she was at a Young Women's girls camp twenty years ago. She had suffered all these years from that dishonest act. Every time she went in for a temple recommend interview she worried and wept. She felt unworthy, though she kept her problem to herself and got her recommend.

One day she read something President Spencer W. Kimball had written about repentance and forgiveness and peace. Suddenly she saw things in a different light. There was a way out. She didn't need to cry inside any more and fear the future. She could do something about it.

Her problem was a special kind of nagging that got worse as she learned more about the gospel and wanted to live more exactly, resolving all problems according to the Lord's will.

The harder we try to be good, to be like Christ, the clearer our faults can seem to us. This good sister decided to tackle her problem-to not fret over it any longer. She found a way to wipe out self-destructive behavior and get on with her life.

Another woman, following the untimely death of her husband, called our office for an appointment with me. She was grieving over her loss. But it wasn't just loneliness that brought her tears to the point of despair; it was the thought that she might not be worthy of joining her beloved partner in the next world.

She repeatedly prayed for help. At last, she resolved to quit crying and to prepare herself for the day of reunion. Her preparation included righting every wrong.

As we talked and wept together, she expressed the details of an old problem. Years ago she had been untruthful about earning a special award in one of the Church programs for young women. She came to my office to return the award. The burden of separation from her husband was lightened as she took positive action by examining her life and preparing herself for life after death.

The death of a husband is a sorrowful, personal experience. There are tears indeed at such a time. But there are ways to sublimate the feelings that arise from such a separation or to take the sting out of it. Even the passage of time can blunt death's sharp edges, but ultimately only reunion can fully assuage it, So, more than mere comfort is needed when eyes brim with tears during this ultimate test of loneliness. The fob lowing examples show how some women found the peace they needed.

"My world seemed shattered when my husband died suddenly in his sleep," recalled Sister Elva Cowley. "I had always loved the outdoors. But even on a sunny day the sky seemed dim to me after he died. I'd look at people and wonder how they could walk down the street smiling."

She wept and grieved for months and at last accepted a position as a receptionist at the Primary Children's Hospital. That was the beginning of finding joy in life again. She compared her own lot with the trouble of others. And in that hospital there is adversity enough to dry anyone's tears.

"Some people can take trouble," she explained. "Some people learn lessons from these experiences and press on. But some folks just buckle under. I was buckling under until the day a young mother came into the hospital ,,with the most pitifully deformed baby I had ever seen. I was amazed that she was in such good spirits. I asked her how she managed such a trial."

"She replied, 'l know that my Heavenly Father loves me because he knew that he could send this little spirit to me and that I would really love it and care for it.'"

Sister Cowley continued, "That was the day I saw with new eyes. I began counting my store of blessings that proved Heavenly Father loved me, too. I knew that I must not give in to the negativism that Satan tempts us with."

Weeping can endure for a time, but when tears and self-pity are prolonged, we are targets for greater trouble. Our progress is hampered.

Some months after the death of Elder Richard L. Evans of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, I visited with his wife, Alice. I wanted to know how she was getting along without her husband and the lovely experiences they had enjoyed in their position in the Church.

"Let me read to you from Ether 12:6," responded Sister Evans. She opened an impressively worn Book of Mormon and read," 'Wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith.' Losing the husband you've loved for so long is the ultimate trial of one's faith, I now know. This matter of faith is all you have to fall back on at such a time. We've taught our four sons the importance of abiding faith. I've given little talks and shared my testimony about faith. Then, out of the blue, my big test came with Richard's death. The most helpful thing in this tremendously difficult period of adjustment has been my sure knowledge that Richard, like Christ, lives! I don't know what people do without this faith."

A General Authority and his wife are in a position to see that people have problems-even people who look as if they have the world by the proverbial tail. So Sister Alice Evans spends a good part of her time sharing her marvelous warmth and goodness in careful concern for people with problems, especially widows and single women. "When I think of the circle of love I've lived in," comments Sister Evans, "and compare my loneliness now to that of the older, unmarried woman, I know that her problem is worse than mine. I suppose there are many ways we have our faith tested. It is up to each of us to meet that trial of our faith."

Another sister, Barbara, was a physical education major looking forward to a career as a teacher. The summer before her senior year at the university she was injured in an automobile accident, which left her paralyzed from the waist down.

Barbara was faithful, inevitably faithful, in her life. That's the kind of girl she had always been. This, of course, was her first experience with severe adversity. But she was undaunted. Family prayers and personal prayers to God, whom she knew lived and loved her, would be answered. She'd get well. She was a determined and a cooperative patient. But faith brought only dashed dreams. All the blessings, therapy and treatment had readied her, at best, only for life in a wheelchair.

One day, alone in her hospital room, she quietly pleaded with God that in the therapy session that afternoon she would feel something-some sign of healing.

A deep darkness crowded her heart. Suddenly she knew she was not going to be whole after all. The tears came, the weakness of spirit, the desperate need for comfort and understanding, the overwhelming emotion that she would rather be' dead.

Then, long minutes after giving in to despair, Barbara wailed inside herself, "Oh, God, dear Heavenly Father. Help me! Help me to take this terrible tragedy. Thy will be done."

She no longer said, "Help me to walk." Barbara placed herself totally in God's hands, her inner will succumbing to his greater knowledge of her life. Then came the sweetness of the Spirit welling up within her.

Barbara's change in attitude was not simply resigning to the inevitable; it was submitting willingly to God. "Thy will be done" is an attitude of supreme faith, saying that whatever God wanted for her was what she wanted, too. She would be all right. She could do it. She wasn't alone.

Her faith and acceptance didn't take the course of placid resignation. She made plans. And those plans included being a kind of ministering angel to other patients with similar problems but without her kind of faith.

She's gone on to become a superb servant in the work of the Lord. She's also completed a doctorate in her chosen field of health and physical education. She is a popular teacher and public speaker.

And she could have merely wiped her weeping eyes again and again.

Maggie's divorce wasn't what she had in mind. Neither was her husband's faithlessness. Maggie's struggle to be Christ-like through her struggle required much soul- and scripture-searching.

When they married in the temple, Maggie was sure that she and Todd would be together forever. Later, his actions and the excommunication that followed seemed to wipe any remembrance from Todd's mind of their goals and covenants. Maggie wanted to forgive and forget and to try again. Todd insisted on a divorce.

It was done. It was humiliating and heartbreaking and devastating in countless ways. Her personal rejection was heightened by the fact that the "other woman" was her neighbor, who was bearing Todd's child.

Details are tiresome-the story is such a familiar one these days. But what makes Maggie's story worth talking about in a book on adversity is what she did about what happened to her.

What she did was to hide the tears and embark on a plan to turn a burden into a blessing. It was her only avenue to survival, let alone happiness. With God's help she set about implementing her plan. She'd solve life's problems according to God's principles.

First, she needed a lifting attitude, an idea to cling to that would chase the blues away. She decided to have a wonderful dinner party with the theme "I'm Free Again." (As if such freedom were what she wanted all the time!)

Second, she needed people around her who understood. She made up a guest list of other young mothers who had been abandoned by adulterous husbands. They were women who loved the Lord, who loved the gospel, and who lived it.

Third, she needed a perspective on her life so that she wouldn't make the same mistakes again.

At the dinner a linen handkerchief marked each place. Maggie explained the theme: "I'm Free Again!" She also talked about the goals the group might set. The handkerchief was the mood-maker. It was to be used to wave a salute to freedom for another chance and a better life. They'd all learned something through their heartbreak. They could wave a handkerchief in a fun gesture of celebration.

If some wanted to use the handkerchief to cry on, so be it; they must, however, do it on their own time. They all had been rejected. They all had wept over dashed dreams. A rehash of the details of sordid struggles wasn't what anyone needed now.

This was a blessing-counting occasion and a time to look forward.

They discussed a plan to grow on. The plan included getting skilled help for their particular kinds of problems- single parenting, financial planning, legal rights. But more than that, they wanted spiritual help. They were in a position to wonder about the Lord's purposes for them and their little children. They wanted to know more about what the Church provided and the gospel promised. They wanted their values shored up so that there wouldn't be a rebound into another poor situation.

It was a turning point for many of them. Over the months they carried out plans of learning, and they enjoyed compatible company with new friends who understood.

This companionship kept them growing, pressing toward the ultimate eternal goal. They kept up on personal appeal and in time, each woman married a fine new husband!

Another trial that might cause us to weep is a forced move. Breaking up a family home usually breaks somebody's heart. So much that has meant security, tradition, identity, and happiness is sifted, sorted, boxed up, portioned off, or cast away. Tears are shed as memories surface. Traumatic decisions must be made.

What can be the blessing behind this kind of adversity? Where can comfort come in such a threatening change? What attitude or course of behavior can dry the weeping eye?

Financial disaster wiped out the resources of our family. We were forced to move from our three-story home to an apartment. Conditions would be crowded at best, so we couldn't take most of our belongings.

Years of family growing, celebrating, serving, studying, and acquiring cluttered each room and storage place. We now had to make decisions about every item.

After a family counsel-a prayer and a rehearsal of God's ultimate purpose for his children-we decided that instead of having a commercial yard sale, we would share the things we couldn't use-the treasures as well as the "precious trash." In our time of unhappiness, we could bring delight to others.

We held a come-and-get-it affair. We did it in style, too. The dining room table was spread with the best cloth, baked pastries, and lemonade. Blossoms from the garden banked the entrance hall. It was a festive time.

Neighbors, close friends, and extended family members of all ages were invited to wander through the various bedrooms to see displays of the items to be given away. Guests could choose to take whatever they wanted! Books and records were available in the library. Games and hobby equipment were found in the family room. And so it went, all through the house.

Of course, people were startled-almost disbelieving-at first. But soon it was fun-and a very practical solution to our problem. People not only left that family home laden with gifts but they also had an idea of what one might do about certain kinds of adversity in order to turn tears into joy. It was a time of remembering God's goodness, too, and it was a time of heartwarming exchange. This had been a happy home where good lessons were learned right up to the last day. "Out of the abundance of the heart," indeed!

Severe trouble tends to underscore the kind of relating people engage in. Our family was active in the Church. We supported each other in Church-related duties as well as in those chores about the house or in the community that were required of us. We loved each other and when trouble came we were bound even more closely together. Of course, everyone felt brokenhearted about leaving the family home. Admittedly tears came easily until we hit upon our plan to bring joy to others. That plan turned the whole experience around. The remarkable thing is that down the road several years, what had seemed a terrible burden and disappointment (breaking up and leaving behind our family home), proved to be a powerful preparation for other more challenging experiences family members later faced.

Rather than just shedding tears, strive for gratitude-for a chance to grow closer to God, to prove worthy of his trust, to learn lessons that can help us help others. This should be our attitude and goal. Yes, this is more easily said than done, especially at first, but with proper practice we can become good at flourishing under adversity.

The letter that follows was sent to me a few months ago. I had given a talk at a multi-stake gathering and used this scripture: "And I will encircle thee in the arms of my love. Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God." (D&C 6:20-21.)A gentleman in the audience was touched by it because of a sacred experience he had had a year before. Hearing a scripture describe what happened to him prompted his letter in which he shared the details of an answer to prayer. It might help you.

"About a year ago.., my wife and I had become deeply weighed down in spirit because of our financial struggles. I remember asking in my prayers for the strength and comfort to continue through the rough times. I shed tears of grief and frustration. I begged for relief at the hand of Heavenly Father.

"One night in prayer, my heart felt overwhelmed with the cares and burdens of my world, and I saw no end in sight. As I lay sleeping, someone entered my bedroom and, calling me from the bed, told me that I was to receive added responsibilities in Church work, and that I was to have an interview in the temple before the work could be given to me.

"Momentarily, I found myself standing within a room (in which temple it was, I don't know, but I was admiring the decor). I had a feeling of apprehension, as one always does before an interview. My back was to the door of the room. While I was thus waiting, the door behind me opened, and at that moment I became conscious of the fact that I could spiritually discern, or see, everything and in every direction within the room, even though I had not physically moved.

"The Personage who stood in the doorway radiated love and warmth and light, so much so that it filled the room and permeated every fiber of my being. His very Presence testified. I knew both body and spirit, both mind and heart, that I stood in the presence of my Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

"I was so overwhelmed by the power of His love that I could do no more than just stand where I was and weep. I had not the strength to move.

"I saw Him! With my spiritual eyes I saw Him!

"He made His way across the room to me. No words were uttered. No words were needed. He came up to me, and from behind, encircled me in a loving embrace. I will never forget the touch of His arms around me, nor the press of His embrace.

"Then the moment was over, the interview ended. I found myself in bed again, crying silently to myself.

"For weeks afterwards, even a casual thought of this sacred experience brought great tears to my eyes and I would remember His love. I would be overwhelmed for a time again.

"I wish I could say the terrible trials ended then. They didn't. In fact, things got worse. But the point is, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter! Because I would go wherever He called me, suffer whatever He gave me in the way of chastisement, growth, changes, or hardships, knowing that He is with me and loves me. That knowledge eases the burdens. It doesn't take them away (and I have never asked to have trials taken away altogether), but my heart is eased and my mind at peace. I can suffer the troubles with cheerfulness and gratitude.

"I am still the same man-just an ordinary man. God has seen fit to answer my prayers and honor our fasting. He has given me a gift beyond price or measure. He will give the same gift to anyone who needs and seeks it properly. I so testify."

In Isa. 30:20-21 is the following counsel: "And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers: And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it."

This kind of counsel has a way of drying the weeping eye so that we can see God's purposes more clearly. In the midst of affliction we can move forward, finding a solution to our problems, or developing an attitude and endurance that echoes our faith.

The idea is to keep from making bigger problems.
