Elaine Cannon, Adversity ( 1987)

11

How to Turn Burdens Into Blessings

In the first chapter we discussed that through faulty behavior or lack of understanding we can turn blessings in life into burdens. Now, let's turn it around-by living the gospel we can turn adversity or burdens into blessings.

There is a novelty bookmark for sale these days which features Garfield, the smart-alec cat. The inscription suggests, "Read the ending first. Life is so uncertain."

As uncertain as life is, there are some things we can count on-trouble, trials, tests, tribulations, disaster, heartache, sin, and adversity. At times we stumble, make mistakes, bleed, hurt, agonize, berate ourselves, lash out at others. Though errors are part of being human we still suffer. At other times we are quietly going about our business and burdens are dumped on us.

It helps to remember that "this life is the time to prepare to meet God" (Alma 34:32), and we are rapidly becoming what we are going to be. So, if a burden comes, it is to our important advantage to turn it into a blessing somehow. If we have a plan to deal with trouble in a winning way, no trouble will be all that bad, in the end.

When all the philosophizing is finished, when all the sermons have been preached, when all the psychologists have had their say, we are still left to respond by ourselves to what is happening to us at any given moment of crisis. Depending upon a number of factors, our dealing with adversity can benefit us.

But we need a plan. Here are some tried and true ways to turn burdens into blessings. They are part of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they can form the basis of such a plan for you: Pray; study the scriptures and find which of the gospel laws irrevocably decreed will help; bridle your passions by practicing self-control; repent by examining your life and putting it in order before seeking God's forgiveness; take charge of your life by developing compassion for others but demand more of yourself; seek truth in order to flourish; count your many, many blessings.

Pray

When adversity in any form hits, pray. Usually we think of prayer in the life and death traumas. But small problems can become bigger ones if we haven't made a practice of turning first to Heavenly Father for whatever it takes to solve, survive, and deal appropriately with our challenge at the moment. Prayer is a great blessing.

When I was a little girl, a young couple moved into our ward and opened up a new world for me. They sang duets. I thought their singing together was wonderfully romantic, so I listened intently to their music. One of my favorite numbers was their version of "I Walked in the Garden Alone." To me, none have sung that old Christian heart-warmer as well as J. Stuart and Clara McMaster. I learned then that earnest prayer can be a song of the heart.

For years my brother Aldon and I tried to imitate the McMasters with that song. We'd harmonize all the way to wherever and back. Being scrunched all together in the family car wasn't as miserable when we sang.

The chorus went something like this:

And He walks with me, And He talks with me, And He tells me I am His own. And the joy we share As we tarry there None other has ever known.

My brother and I still harmonize on this simple prayer in song, even though we are anything but children now. Our voices have changed, of course. And so have our prayers. Even the love of God seems different-it is more marvelous to me now than it was long ago when I didn't truly understand. I've been through some things since childhood, and I've come to value the magnificence of God's love.

I wonder how people manage life without taking their burdens to the Lord. He may not give us immediate relief from the problem we're struggling with, but we can get a lift in spirit. We can sense direction. We can feel God's love. We can be greatly strengthened. We can be aware of his sustaining influence. We can be heartened to go forward.

If you are burdened, pray. You will feel comforted.

If you are dying, pray. You will have peace.

If your husband goes off with another woman, pray. Pray for comfort, for guidance, for patience, for forgiveness, and the soul will heal.

If your teenager is in desperate trouble with drugs, sex, dishonesty, rebellion, or grades, pray. You'll know that God cares. He'll sustain you in your efforts to help the troubled youth.

If you lose your job and the bills are piled high, pray. Pray until your faith is firm. Then your mind is ready to receive God's will.

If you are depressed and hopeless, pray. Hope is the other side of faith. Pray, and know that God lives. Everything will ultimately be all right.

Even Cary Grant, a Hollywood star who seemingly had everything, believed in prayer. He once said, "If you don't have faith, pray anyway. If you don't understand or believe the words you're saying, pray anyway. Prayer can start faith, particularly if you pray aloud. And even the most imperfect prayer is an attempt to reach God."

Read again in 1 Sam. 1 about Hannah's fasting and praying in the temple so that she could have a child. Read again Morm. 5:2 about the foolish people who "did struggle for their lives without calling upon that Being who created them" (italics added).

Don't struggle aimlessly-pray!

God will hear your prayers, and you will know that he has heard.

Now, that's a blessing. With all the troubles any one of us has in a lifetime, we should think of the blessings that will be ours if we turn to heaven for help. Don't forget the promises regarding prayer. The scriptures are full of them. Here are a few that refer particularly to praying about problems: Matt. 5:44; Alma 13:28; 37:37; Moro. 7:48; D&C 9:8; 98:1; 112:1 10.

Remember, however, that while nothing is impossible with God, faith without works is dead. Part of solving any problem -even with prayer-is to do something about it yourself. Don't leave everything up to God. Study the word of God as contained in the scriptures and as revealed through his ordained servants. Prepare yourself now to act in wisdom.

Study the Scriptures

Danny was a fine man I met on a Church assignment. On the ride to the stake center he and his second wife, Anna, each bore witness to the value of scripture study in their lives.

Anna had filled a mission. The years passed, and she thought she would never marry. She suffered the accompanying heartbreak that often comes. She was tender as she spoke of keeping close to the Lord and maintaining a seeking, positive spirit through daily study of the scriptures. Finally, when eternal purposes and earthly timetables were right, she met Danny.

"I wouldn't have been ready to be mother to his five children or to be his loving wife, really, if I hadn't kept growing through scripture study."

Then Danny spoke: "There came a time in my life when things just didn't seem peaceful within me. A certain restlessness, with no apparent reason, made me feel a need to study the scriptures diligently. I even attended the stake class on the standard works, which was taught by an institute teacher. I kept the scriptures with me and read during my lunch hour or while I waited for appointments, and I listened to tapes here in my van while battling freeway traffic. For some reason, unknown to me then, I was intent upon learning all I could. And I came to love the scriptures. Then about ten months after I started my study, my wife was killed in an auto accident. I was devastated."

He wept sharing this part of his story, then continued. "The problems of my personal loss and of a motherless family were lifted by my knowledge of God's love for us and his wisdom. It is wonderful how I have been guided to all kinds of proper attitudes and decisions through scripture study- including marrying Anna."

In stormy seasons it helps immensely to read the scriptures reverently and prayerfully, pondering them for understanding. It helps in times of calmness to read with thanksgiving for blessings and peace. As you read, the plain and precious truths become known to you, mysteries unfold, wisdom floods your being.

Scripture study gives you instruction in righteousness, direction of duty, understanding of God's purposes and principles, examples of people and problem solving, comfort and strength. Study the scriptures so that you are prepared to meet adversity. The following scriptures may help you understand how important the scriptures can be: Isa. 40:8; 2 Ne. 4:15; Mosiah 4:9; 3 Ne. 10:14; D&C 33:16; 130:18

When you have made prayer and scripture study a part of your life, particularly in problem solving, the next step is to tidy up your life-repent, behave, become more conscientious about living exactly the word of God.

Study the scriptures to get answers and to get assurance. Don't forget the promises of God, because they give hope. Diligently searching the word of God and pondering what it means to you personally and listening with your inner soul can be an incredible benefit. I have had such joy from scripture study. Often it is as if the Lord himself is saying the words into my mind-such is the strength of the word of God, in print, to us.

Bridle All Your Passions

Shortly before my mother died, she began to wear down because of the struggle. She was nearly ninety. She had been ill for several years. She was in a convalescent institution, and much of the time she was miserable. But she refused to make other people miserable, too. So she bridled her passions as we are counseled to do in Alma 38:12. One of the last things I heard Mother say was, "I don't like it here much. I don't like what's happening to me. But I will behave, Elaine. I will behave!"

And she did.

That burden of dying became a blessing of beauty because of her attitude and her self-control. Mother had faith in God, all right. Prayer was her daily source of strength. She was a lifelong student of the scriptures. Still there are some things a person has to do largely alone. Being ready and dying right fall into that category. Mother wanted to die in the right way. "Do what is right; let the consequence follow" was her motto ("Do What Is Right," Hymns', 1985, no. 237).

Mother wasn't a fist-clencher or a molar-grinder about life. Mother was a smiler. When things came to a crisis, Mother would lift her chin, brightening her eye, and smile. She'd consciously pause a moment in the thick of trial, and she'd smile- and behave.

You might say that Mother had learned to bridle her passions, to try to keep the problem-causing attitudes mostly under control.

If you grieve overlong, if you lust, hate, envy, anger, criticize, pity self, or do anything similar to un-Christlike behavior, the Spirit of the Lord, which is love, is shut out. Bridling such attitudes makes it possible for you to receive the loving, healing gifts of God.

I have come to feel that this scripture, this godly counsel is powerful direction for polishing up our lives. And here is another one with a promise that helps us want to solve problems appropriately lest we shortchange future opportunities: "Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you" Josh. 3:5).

Bridle your passions, sanctify yourself, and you will be ready for the Lord to do wonders in your life and in your heart.

Repent

Sin is a burden.

We know that the plan of life calls for choices between the way of Christ and the way of Satan. Sin is forbidden because it is harmful. The wrong choice, then, is a burden of our own making.

If we want to turn the burden of sin into a blessing, we need to repent.

A young father and I sat in a fashionable restaurant in a fashionable city among animated people in fashionable clothing, celebrating the lunch hour. In the midst of the world we were apart from it. Our purpose in meeting and the tone of our talk had the deepest spiritual connotation.

He had sinned, had taken the route of confession, agony, excommunication, and finally, restoration of blessings. He had picked up the pieces of his life, church work, and family relationships. He'd married and had children.

Subsequent study and devotion to gospel life had brought about a mighty change in him. Now, matching himself against the Saints among us and the Savior as the ideal, he was suffering new feelings. Awareness of the risks he had taken with ugly sinning (that at one time had seemed so needful to him) frightened him. He was shocked now, that he had ever let it happen. Though he had been forgiven and welcomed back, he could not forgive himself. He was aghast at his actions and deeply sad. "I feel like Alma the younger," he explained. "Now that I have found myself again I panic to think what might have happened. I know how important it is to guard against any kind of estrangement from the Lord. This is my burden."

He went on to explain that he had been somewhat inactive and had participated in very questionable activities before he prepared for his mission. He served a fine mission and lived up to Church standards for a year or so after his return. "Gradually," he continued, "I was caught up in the enticements of the world-in all of this!" He gestured about us.

"It's difficult, isn't it?" I said. "Reentry into the real world from a spiritual life is a cultural shock, so to speak."

It was Emerson all over again-that it is easy to live in the world after the world's opinion, and it is easy to live on your own after your own. The challenge, oh, the painful challenge, is to live in the world and keep the pureness of your own values.

In today's world only a very committed person makes it. This young father wanted to come to grips with a deep problem that he needed to keep under control. He did not live in a vacuum, and in his best moments he did not want to place his exaltation in jeopardy.

Misery is not happiness.

Succumbing to temptation is not peace.

Wickedness, the scriptures affirm, never was happiness. The young father was anxious to talk for two reasons: he wanted to guard against further temptation in the area of deviate behavior, which was his weakness, and he wanted to be done with even the thought of it! He wanted to fortify himself spiritually and to watch and pray always.

And he wanted to help others from falling into the traps he had been caught in.

I speak of this incident in a section on repentance because repentance is the core of righting our life in order to bring peace. Trouble is sometimes of our own making. It may be a sin of impurity, or disobedience of some kind, or lack of love, or contention.

True repentance and peace come when we refuse to allow the things that matter most to be threatened by the things that matter least.

The young father I talked with can be very helpful to others who might be the target of Satan's team, which seems to be working overtime these days.

It is better never to have brought adversity upon ourselves at all by sin in any form. But if we learn from our mistakes and fortify ourselves against further sin, blessings can be found in service to others. As we succeed in avoiding the very appearance or thought of evil doing, we will be conscious of increased support from the Lord.

I shared an interesting quote from President Brigham Young with the young father fighting his way into confidence before the Lord and strength in the marketplace.

Said Brigham Young, "Keep your follies that do not concern others to yourselves, and keep your private wickedness as still as possible; hide it from the eyes of the public gaze as far as you can." "If you have sinned against one individual, take that person by yourselves and make your confession to him. And if you have sinned against your God, or against yourselves, confess to God, and keep the matter to yourselves, for I do not want to know anything about it." (In Journal of Discourses, 8:362, 361.)

I also shared with this father words from this lovely hymn:

The wintry day, descending to its close, Invites all wearied nature to repose, And shades of night are falling dense and fast, Like sable curtains closing o'er the past Pale through the gloom the newly fallen snow Wraps in a shroud the silent earth below As tho 'twere mercy's hand had spread the pall, A symbol of forgiveness unto all.

-Orson F. Whitney

Helping others when you've experienced adversity may include not talking about your personal problems in detail!

This counsel should not interfere with the established processes declared by prophets. When we have sinned-when we've done something that brings a particular kind of burden to loved ones, to our fellowmen, or to the Church, we must meet the requirements of that process so that our repentance may be complete.

When we have sinned, weeping may endure for a period of time, but joy comes with God's forgiveness in the beautiful morning after repentance. We should accept that gift and get on with life.

There isn't anyone who won't be tested. Even people whose lives seemed charmed have their day. Perhaps those who seem especially blessed are those who have learned to turn their burdens into blessings, who have learned to praise the Lord even in times of difficulty.

Scriptures regarding turning the burden of sin into a blessing through repentance should include all of 4 Nephi. The importance of repentance is stressed at least seventy-one times in the Doctrine and Covenants. Search for your favorites.

Forgiveness

When it comes to bridling our passions, repenting from sin, and turning burdens we're carrying into blessings for ourselves and others, forgiveness has to top any list of resolutions.

I visited with a man at his place of business on the day the newspapers had spread ugly reminders of the anniversary of his son's murder.

"How are you doing?" I asked him. "How do you cope- how can you stand this kind of heartbreak and frustration?"

"There is only one way to survive this kind of adversity," he replied. Then he leaned to whisper his answer in that public place. "Forgive," he said. "Forgive! And the blessings from heaven flood your life." It was the secret of his strength, his way of turning a burden into a blessing.

This man is an example of the believer in Christ.

What about irritating assaults on our peace; can we turn these burdens into blessings? Can we forgive the rebellious child? Can we forgive the persistent mother-in-law, the aggressive Church leader with whom we must serve? Can we be patient and understanding-forgiving-with the boss who is insensitive, the husband who doesn't understand a woman's work load, the wife who overspends?

The following scriptures can help us see how forgiveness can turn burdens into blessings: Ezek. 18:22; Matt. 18:21; 1 Cor. 10:11; 1 Tim. 4:12; Alma 36:12-20; D&C 58:42; 64:10; 98:40.

Seek Truth

Filtering truth out of the piles of information being circulated in our world is a major task. It is the object, in part, of problem solving. Whether your problem has to do with finances or relationships, sickness or sin, truth of the matter should be your goal. Seek not only what is right and what is wise, but what is truth. Eternal. God-given.

Wouldn't it be well for us, when adversity strikes, to remember the following:

Some scriptures to study regarding truth and problem solving include John 8:32; 1 Jn. 1:8; 2 Ne. 9:40; D&C 93:24.

Take Charge of Your Life

When trouble comes, take charge of your life.

You can sulk and weep. You can run to the beleaguered bishop. You can talk over your problem with a neighbor or with others in the halls at church. You can make an appointment with a professional counselor. Or you can pray, study the scriptures, get your life in order, and then move forward to solve your problem with confidence before God.

Here's a story shared with me by a friend, Bill Ziegler. "An old cowboy said he had learned life's most important lessons from Hereford cows. All his life he had worked cattle ranches where winter storms took a heavy toll among the herds. Freezing rains whipped across the prairies. Howling, bitter winds piled snow into enormous drifts. Temperatures might drop quickly to below zero degrees. Flying ice cut into the flesh. In this maelstrom of nature's violence most cattle would turn their backs to the ice blasts and slowly drift downwind, mile upon mile. Finally, intercepted by a boundary fence, they would pile up against the barrier and die by the scores.

"But the Herefords acted differently. Cattle of this breed would instinctively head into the windward end of the range. There they would stand shoulder-to-shoulder facing the storm's blast, heads down against its onslaught.

"'You always found the Herefords alive and well,' said the cowboy. 'I guess it's the greatest lesson I ever learned on the prairies-just face life's storms.'"

Now that is what is meant by taking charge of your life. Face up to it. Gird up your loins, pick up your wagon handle, and head west!

Or, like Edison, enjoy the drama and then get on with rebuilding your life.

I recall being impressed when President Spencer W. Kimball reminded women, "Each of you sisters has the right and the responsibility to direct your own life. But be not deceived; you must also be responsible for your choices. This is an eternal principle. The law of the harvest is ever in evidence." ("Privileges and Responsibilities of Sisters," Ensign, Nov. 1978, p. 105.)

So it is with problems and solutions.

You reap what you sow. You can also do what you want to about what happens to you-either adversity brought on by your own actions or the kind of trouble that comes unbidden, unannounced, or as a direct challenge from God.

Turning a burden of any kind into a blessing means shifting into high gear. We take charge of our life, which requires action of mind and body. Here are ten suggestions to help:

The following scriptures will help you take charge and endure trials well: Matt. 10:11; 3 Ne. 15:9; D&C 121:8; 14:7; A of F 1:13.

Count Your Many Blessings

"And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more" (D&C 78:19).

There is so much to be grateful for-even blessings from burdens are proof of that. We all know that happiness isn't the absence of adversity and suffering; it is the presence of God.

When such nice things come from such difficult struggles, we are almost coaxed to welcome adversity.

I listened intently to the story of an unhappy woman whose husband died and who had to work to support the family. All the time Shirley was praying for help, she heard the counsel to her spirit, "Go back to school." What she was praying for was more money to run her single-parent household!

Finally, though, she obeyed the prompting. She went back to school. That was the beginning of a distinguished career with children who needed special education. Oh, the good she did and the awards she's won for innovative programs and selfless hours in behalf of the handicapped.

A choice blessing came from her burden of death of a spouse. Shirley is the first to admit God's hand in her life. Things didn't turn out at all as she had planned as a dreamy-eyed girl. But life has been wonderful and rewarding. She has learned things that will stay with her eternally.

My much beloved mother-in-law died when the sixth of our children was about to be born. He was a big baby. One look at my large stomach proved that. And my large stomach created a problem-I didn't have a suitable wrap to wear to Nana Cannon's funeral. It was bitter cold weather. I could have swathed myself in a blanket, but prominent people would be participating and attending the funeral of a woman who had been the wife of an Apostle. I wanted to go, but I knew that I couldn't unless I had suitable clothing. I had a lot to be thankful for, but I wanted another blessing-I wanted to go to that funeral of the woman I loved wearing suitable clothing for my state of pregnancy!

I had heard a story once about an early general president of the Young Women of the Church. It seems that when she had a problem, she would tell her children not to disturb her as she went into her bedroom to "talk some things over with Heavenly Father." This story about Martha H. Tingey surfaced in my mind during the sad time before the funeral.

The day before the services, I told our children that I was going to talk with Heavenly Father about my needing an appropriate wrap to wear to the funeral for Nana. They were to be very, good and not disturb me.

In my prayer, I explained my need. We were financially strapped. I loved Nana. I didn't want to embarrass the family by going with a blanket wrapped around me. I said that if someone could be of help in solving my little problem then I'd be mighty grateful. If that couldn't come about then would Heavenly Father please bless me with my struggle of pride and my disappointment!

When I came out of the bedroom, the four little children under six were crowded there. I had been somewhat conscious of their whisperings and jostlings while I was praying, I must confess. I noted that as I came out Christine went immediately into the bedroom and looked around. She was sure she'd see Heavenly Father. When she didn't, she asked me what he looked like!

The day of the funeral, when the early morning mail was delivered, there was a check among the letters from a magazine publishing company in New York. I had sent a manuscript to them many months before and had forgotten all about it- until the check came. It was for the exact amount of a coat I had been looking at the day before and simply did not have the money to buy. I hurried down to ZCMI and bought that coat just in time to go to the funeral.

This was an answer to prayer and I knew it! My heart was full of the knowledge that God lives and answers my prayers. He was mindful of a poor young mother filled with pride of appearance. That evening the children knelt with us in a prayer of thanksgiving for Nana and also for a witness of a loving Heavenly Father.

If I'd had a coat or money in the bank, our whole family would have been denied that blessing of faith when a mother's simple prayer was answered so promptly.

For those of us who are dependent upon a God we know and love, one to whom we turn when adversity strikes, it becomes increasingly clear that he lives and cares. The miracle stories, the sweet low-key responses to prayer, and the wondrous ways in which God deals with his troublesome children are proof of his goodness.

The way to turn burdens into blessings is to do all the things we have talked about in this book-when it is appropriate to do them. But always and forever, count your blessings. This is a great way to chase the sorrow, beat the blues, and lift the burden. There is hardship and anguish but look at all else that is going for us!

As you turn your burdens into blessings by counting your many blessings, include among them the following:

Finally, as we consider the adversity in our lives, we may find strength in the following scriptures. "He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength .... They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isa. 40:29, 31.)

"But we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulations worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope: and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad" (Rom. 5:3-5).

Over the years I repeatedly have been comforted and directed by such scriptures as the above. But there is one section of the Book of Mormon that absolutely has been my joy to refer to in time of need and to share with others who are hurting, weeping, distraught, bewildered, and weary of the battle. It is found in Mosiah 24 when the children of God cried out because their afflictions were great and Amulon put guards over the people to watch them so that anyone found calling upon God to help them would be put to death. The account tells us that the people didn't raise their voices to the Lord their God. Instead they poured out their hearts to God, and he knew the thoughts of their hearts.

And the voice of the Lord came to them in their terrible times, and they heard his voice, telling them to be of good comfort and to lift up their heads for he was mindful of them.

Then these following words from God are those particularly precious to anyone who feels forgotten in affliction or bereft of ever overcoming such burdens. I strongly suggest that you read these lines carefully for your own benefit, for I am certain that such a promise applies to us as much in our day, in our adversity, as to those of another generation.

"And I will also ease the burdens which arc put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, even while you are in bondage; and this will I do that ye may stand as witnesses for me hereafter, and that ye may know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions. And... the Lord did strengthen them that they could bear up their burdens with ease, and they did submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the Lord." (Mosiah 24:14-15.)

The chambered nautilus suggests that we can leave our outgrown shell by life's unresting sea of experiences; we can move to another life freed by lessons learned, polished by adversity well handled.

Adversity? Who needs it? Everyone, because adversity well handled is really blessings in disguise. Perhaps this book should be retitled In Gratitude to God!

For after much tribulation come the blessings.

-D&C 58:4
