Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Preface

The Doctrine and Covenants instructs us to "teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand." (D&C 88:77-78.) This was the goal of the seventeenth annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, held Saturday, 4 February 1989, on the campus of Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. The symposium, sponsored jointly by Brigham Young University's Religious Education and the Church Educational System, honors Dr. Sidney Sperry for his faithfulness and scholarship. Brother Sperry, a professor of religion at BYU for forty years, was a great student of the scriptures. As a teacher and writer, he set a high standard for scholarship and was a faithful defender of the faith.

The papers delivered at this symposium reflect similar scholarship and faith and were responsive to the Lord's challenge to "teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom." The theme of the symposium was "The Doctrine and Covenants: Doctrines of Exaltation." The Doctrine and Covenants contains the doctrines and covenants that will assist us in our quest for exaltation. Dr. Chauncey C. Riddle, the keynote speaker, discussed the role of the new and everlasting covenant in becoming Christlike. This theme was carried through the symposium, which concluded with a discussion by Dean Robert J. Matthews on the role of the dispensation of the fulness of times in the exaltation of man.

Although all of the contributors sought to be in harmony with the teachings of the Church, the views expressed in the papers are those of the individual writers and do not necessarily represent the position of Brigham Young University, the Church Educational System of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, nor should they be viewed as a replacement for the standard works and the words of the latter-day prophets.

The Seventeenth Sperry Symposium Committee

H. Dean Garrett, Editor

Rex C. Reeve, Jr., Editor

Spencer C. Condie

Eldon L. Haag

Richard D. Draper
