Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter One

The Sacred Role of Women

Susan Easton Black

Associate Professor of Church History and Doctrine Brigham Young University

Attempts to develop a universally accepted definition of a woman's ideal role have left scholars frustrated. Whatever model they propose, increasing numbers of women proclaim themselves to be the exception to the proposed norm. Few women today hold fast to long-held traditional standards, as they witness other women tossing off "apron strings" as vestiges of servitude.

Concurrently, the growing challenge of identifying a doctrinally unassailable definition of the role of women has also confronted gospel scholars. Some gospel scholars have concluded that a redefinition of traditional roles is necessary because of changing times. Others insist that the prophetic roles of antiquity are unalterably appropriate for all dispensations, including our own. Such polarization has prompted me to question why gospel scholars have not searched the modern scriptures found in the Doctrine and Covenants to discover divine direction for defining the role of women in these latter days.

The Doctrine and Covenants is a standard work, which by definition means a collection of prophetic writings against which our thoughts, actions, and even our chosen roles can be measured. It reveals the doctrines of salvation and the basic truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ that are necessary for women to understand and apply. It assures women of the validity, power, and efficacy of the continuing covenants between God and each of his sons and daughters. Careful perusal of this scripture clearly reveals a definition of the currently prescribed role of women in mortality and the promised blessings for faithful obedience to the laws of God.

My purpose is to assure today's women that the Doctrine and Covenants reveals the Lord's continuous approbation of the sacred phases of womanhood: it contains the Lord's continuous respect for the process of womanhood. This modern scripture delineates the prescribed path that illuminates the woman's course toward eternal life. (D&C 132:20; 138:39.) Also, an alternative perilous path is presented, which, if followed, will destroy each woman's potential fulfillment and lead to her destruction. (D&C 132:42.)

The Sacred Phases of Womanhood

The sacred phases of womanhood, reaffirmed and expanded for our day, are those taught to Eve and her daughters through the ages. In broadest terms they are the eternal roles of righteous daughter, wife, and mother. In each of these roles, there is a challenge to serve God and his children in such a way that, line upon line and precept upon precept, women become glorified in "a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." (D&C 132:19.) These roles are as old as Adam and as new as today. The Doctrine and Covenants helps women see clearly each eternal role and how they can make the greatest growth and avoid the failures in each.

The role of daughter. The unfolding of the earthly plan of salvation, as reported in the Doctrine and Covenants, began for women when "the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24.) As daughters of God, women learn the ennobling truth that the Lord "created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them." (D&C 20:18.)

Adam was the first man and Eve the first woman. Since that early creative period, "our glorious Mother Eve, with many of her faithful daughters who had lived through the ages and worshiped the true and living God," have experienced the opportunities for growth in mortal life. (D&C 138:39.)

As these daughters grow to the age of responsibility, they become subject to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. As such, they "must repent and be baptized." (D&C 18:42.) As daughters keep the Lord's commandments, they desire to progress by making further covenants with God. These covenants include commitment to personal worthiness.

The Doctrine and Covenants speaks of an exemplary daughter, Vienna Jaques. [^1] In many ways Vienna becomes a representative model of the many women who respect their womanhood and by their words and actions become Saints.

Vienna was approximately the age of Joseph Smith's parents when she first became acquainted with the Church. She had been a devout Christian who had associated with the Methodists on Bromfield Street in Boston, Massachusetts. While in Boston, she became dissatisfied with her religion and began seeking for a church that evidenced the spiritual gifts described in the New Testament. Hearing of Joseph Smith and his newly published Book of Mormon, she requested a copy. At first reading she was not particularly inspired by the words of the Book of Mormon. One night, however, while she was praying, she saw a vision of the Book of Mormon and resolved to know of its truthfulness.

Her conversion was not instantaneous but came gradually through continual prayer and study of the scriptures. She read the Book of Mormon until she became convinced of its divinity. In 1831 she traveled alone toward Kirtland, Ohio, to meet Joseph Smith. She met the Prophet in Kirtland and accepted baptism. On 8 March 1833 she was instructed by revelation to give the money she had brought from the east to the Church and settle in Missouri: "It is my will that my handmaid Vienna Jaques should receive money to bear her expenses, and go up unto the land of Zion;

"And the residue of the money may be consecrated unto me, and she be rewarded in mine own due time.

"Verily I say unto you, that it is meet in mine eyes that she should go up unto the land of Zion, and receive an inheritance from the hand of the bishop;

"That she may settle down in peace inasmuch as she is faithful, and not be idle in her days from thenceforth." (D&C 90:28-31.)

Forty-six-year-old Vienna Jaques gave all of her money to the Lord's church. In return, she received a portion of her funds from the bishop to maintain herself. This contribution from a single daughter stands as a memorial to her sacrifice and love of God.

Joseph Smith wrote a letter to Vienna on 4 September 1833, in which he wrote: "I have often felt a whispering since I received your letter, like this: 'Joseph, thou are indebted to thy God for the offering of thy Sister Vienna, which proved a savior of life as pertaining to thy pecuniary concerns. Therefore she should not be forgotten of thee, for the Lord hath done this, and thou shouldst remember her in all thy prayers and also by letter. . . . Therefore let your heart be comforted; live in strict obedience to the commandments of God, and walk humbly before Him, and He will exalt thee in His own due time. I will assure you that the Lord has respect unto the offering you made.' " [^2]

In Missouri, Vienna lost her deeded portion because of mobbing against all Latter-day Saints in that region. Nevertheless, she continued to give service. Heber C. Kimball noted her service in his journal entry concerning illness in Zion's Camp. He wrote, "We had to exert ourselves considerable to attend to the sick, for they fell on every hand." Then he added that there was one woman whom, "I received great kindness from . . . sister Vienna Jaques, who administered to my wants and also to my brethren—may the Lord reward . . . [her] kindness." [^3] Vienna Jaques was an exemplar of a righteous daughter in her readiness to accept the laws of God, her devotion to the Lord, and her ability to serve others.

The role of wife. The pivotal covenant that enables a woman to reach her fullest potential is eternal marriage. (D&C 132:18-19.) She desires to be married to a companion who listens to the Lord's command that "thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22.) Such a man desires to begin his marriage union by "enter[ing] into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]." (D&C 131:2.) In this bond of marriage, the couple becomes "one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation." (D&C 49:16.)

In this eternal bond, "women have claim on their husbands for their maintenance." (D&C 83:2.) The word claim means rights, privileges, and entitlements. Maintenance, according to President Spencer W. Kimball, includes the husband's "obligation to maintain loving affection and to provide consideration and thoughtfulness as well as food." [^4]

In turn, the righteous wife is told to comfort her husband. (D&C 25:5.) Joseph Smith clarified this counsel to women as wives:

"Submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord, for the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church; and He is the Savior of the body. Therefore, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands, in everything." [^5]

Emma Smith is remembered as the woman who faithfully stood by her husband during his life. [^6] Emma was a woman of great faith and courage whom the Lord addressed in Doctrine and Covenants, section 25, and again in section 132. Section 25 begins, "Hearken unto the voice of the Lord your God, while I speak unto you, Emma Smith, my daughter." This section is personal for Emma, yet latter-day prophets have used it as counsel for daughters of God and wives in Israel. (D&C 25:16.)

Emma is told by the Lord, "Thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I have called." (D&C 25:3.) The terminology of elect was defined by Joseph Smith on 17 March 1842 in Nauvoo, Illinois, when he told the sisters that "elect meant to be elected to a certain work . . . and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the [Relief] Society." [^7]

Her calling was to be the wife of a prophet. In this role she was told that "the office of thy calling shall be for a comfort unto my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., thy husband." (D&C 25:5.) She was to use "consoling words, in the spirit of meekness" with him. (D&C 25:5.) Emma was to cleave to Joseph and to "go with him at the time of his going, and be unto him for a scribe." (D&C 25:6.) She was promised that for faithfully fulfilling her calling as a wife, her "husband shall support thee in the church." (D&C 25:9.)

In addition to these responsibilities as an elect lady and a called wife, Emma was to develop her talents. Emma's talents included expounding the scriptures, exhorting the Church, writing, learning, and selecting sacred hymns. (D&C 25:7-8, 11.) She was told that while fulfilling these responsibilities, she was not to murmur but was to "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better." (D&C 25:4, 10.) She was also admonished to beware of pride. (D&C 25:14.) If Emma proved faithful, she was to receive "a crown of righteousness." (D&C 25:15.)

Joseph Smith loved Emma, for she did comfort him, she increased her talents, and she heeded the Lord's admonitions. In his love for her, Joseph pleaded with the Lord on her behalf, "Have mercy, O Lord, upon [my] wife . . . , that [she] may be exalted in thy presence, and preserved by thy fostering hand." (D&C 109:69.)

Following Joseph's pleading, Emma again became the subject of the Lord's revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 132. Emma is told "to abide and cleave unto my servant Joseph, and to none else." (D&C 132:54.) She is also told to "forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses; and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses . . . ; and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her, and multiply her, and make her heart to rejoice." (D&C 132:56.)

Emma is warned that despite her position as an "elect lady" and a called wife, she must endure faithfully to the end or risk losing all, for unless she does endure, "where I am you cannot come." (D&C 25:15.) "She shall be destroyed, saith the Lord; for I am the Lord thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law." (D&C 132:54.)

Throughout her life as a wife to the Prophet Joseph Smith, she experienced persecution and Abrahamic tests. Despite the persecution and the severe tests, Emma was admonished to beware of pride and told to let her soul delight in her husband. Emma's responsibilities were many, and by comparison her weaknesses were perhaps few. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "Just as it is possible for the very elect to be deceived, and to fall from grace through disobedience, so an elect lady, by failing to endure to the end, can lose her chosen status." [^8] The lessons from the Lord's revelation to Emma are clear: a wife is to cleave to her husband and comfort him, serve in the Lord's kingdom, and endure faithfully to the end.

The role of mother. As the wife enjoys the marriage relationship, she will anticipate with joy the opportunity of motherhood. As a mother, she will want her children sealed to her and her husband for all eternity by the ordinances and bonds of love. (D&C 138:48.) As parents, the husband and wife will teach the children "to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old." (D&C 68:25.) These children will have "claim upon their parents for their maintenance until they are of age." (D&C 83:4.)

Although Lucy Mack Smith is not mentioned by name in the Doctrine and Covenants, she is mentioned by her designated role of mother in the life of Joseph Smith. [^9] Joseph, in his vision of eternal realms, wrote, "I saw Father Adam and Abraham; and my father and my mother; my brother Alvin, that has long since slept." (D&C 137:5.)

This indisputable role of Lucy Mack Smith, mother of the Prophet, was also noted in the minutes of a Church conference held on 8 October 1845 in Nauvoo, Illinois. On that day, according to the minutes, Lucy Smith made the following remarks: "I raised up 11 children, 7 boys. I raised them in the fear of God. When they were two or three years old I told them I wanted them to love God with all their hearts. I told them to do good. I want all you to do the same. God gives us our children and we are accountable. . . . I presume there never was a family more obedient than mine. I did not have to speak to them only once. . . . I want you to teach your little children about Joseph in Egypt and such things, and when they are four years old they will love to read their Bible. . . . Set your children to work; . . . don't let them play out of doors. . . . I call you brothers and sisters and children. If you consider me a Mother in Israel, I want you to say so." [^10]

According to the minutes, Brigham Young then arose and said, "All who consider Mother Smith as a Mother in Israel, signify it by saying yes." There were loud shouts of yes, according to the clerk. [^11]

Eternal roles. The roles of womanhood found in modern scripture are the same roles found throughout ancient scripture. Furthermore, the roles for righteous women are parallel to those prescribed for righteous men. As the woman became a daughter of God, the man became a son. As the woman became a wife, the man became a husband. As the woman became a mother, the man became a father. These complementary roles and their divine order are basic to the framework of the gospel and the plan of salvation. They have been so since the beginning of time. These are the same roles as those of our ancient forebears, and they are the same as those expected and respected roles in the society of Saints today. Through these roles both men and women can learn the doctrines of salvation and how they are to participate in the laws and covenants of the kingdom of God.

The Lord's Respect for the Process of Womanhood

Complementary expectations and blessings dominate. The role of woman is much more extensively taught through the Doctrine and Covenants when it is realized that masculine references are almost always equally relevant to man and to woman. Thus the description of womanhood can be confusing to the hurried reader because it is interwoven into both masculine and feminine terminology. Throughout the Doctrine and Covenants the terms man, he, him, and his, when not referring to a specific man, also mean woman. For example, Doctrine and Covenants 1:32 states, "Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven." This passage is confidently interpreted to mean, "Nevertheless, he or she that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven." Another example of the generic use of the masculine terms is seen in Doctrine and Covenants 38:24, "And let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practice virtue and holiness before me." This passage is interpreted to mean, "And let every man and woman esteem his or her brother or sister as himself or herself, and practice virtue and holiness before me."

Such implied understanding or liberality with the word of God is accepted by latter-day prophets and Saints and considered appropriate understanding of the word of God. The substance and the essence, with respect both to prescription and to standards, is exactly parallel and complementary for man and woman. Such universality, or generic reference, is not apparent when the Lord uses the feminine terms woman, she, and her. Feminine references are generic for all women but are not applicable to any man. A search of the feminine terms in the Doctrine and Covenants reveals 239 references meant just for women.

Respect for womanhood is emphasized. One consistent theme noted in the 239 references is the divine injunction of continual respect for womanhood. [^12] This respect is shown to woman by various titles that depict her role. These titles include "daughter," six times; "handmaid," five times; "woman," fourteen times; "wife," twenty-six times; "mother," six times; and "widow," three times. These positive titles designate the expected and the respected roles in a woman's mortal life.

The Lord further indicated his respect for the roles of womanhood by teaching parables that feature women. These parables emphasize the importance of continually seeking the Lord (D&C 101:84), of being prepared when he comes again (D&C 63:54), and of his desire to gather the house of Israel (D&C 10:65; 43:24; 29:2). [^13] He expects that his example of respect for womanhood will be followed by both men and women.

The Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants evidenced his high regard and respect for womanhood by noting significant concepts introduced by feminine pronouns. These concepts include Zion (D&C 68:26), mercy (D&C 88:40), stakes (D&C 68:25), earth (D&C 88:45, 89), and moon (D&C 88:45). Numerically the strongest of these feminine referents is Zion. [^14]

The reason why a feminine pronoun was used for these concepts may be found in the virtuous nature of the concepts themselves. For example, mercy is the pure love of God. "Mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own." (D&C 88:40; italics added.) Another example is "Zion," which is a dedicated place or people with one heart and one mind. "For, behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her." (D&C 64:41; italics added.) The sanctity of mercy and Zion, associated with a feminine pronoun, conveys the Lord's vision of the cherished and even sacred position of righteous womanhood. Using these concepts as a prototype shows that in the Lord's plan, women are to be respected and considered sacred and pure.

The Doctrine and Covenants Illuminates the Woman's Course toward Eternal Life

In addition to general and generic reference to women, there are specific scriptures in the Doctrine and Covenants for women that have universal application. These scriptures center on the laws of God. A woman must know that God lives and earn her testimony of the mission of Jesus, the same as does her father, brother, or husband. She must know that Jesus is the Christ, "that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24.)

This principle is highlighted throughout the Doctrine and Covenants in specific commandments, laws, and ordinances for women. The first of these is found in Doctrine and Covenants 20:73. "The person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented himself or herself for baptism."

Notice the parallel of men and women in this scripture centered on the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. Throughout the Doctrine and Covenants this parallelism is seen in all the laws and ordinances. (D&C 42:80-81, 85-92.) For example, "if a man or woman shall rob, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land." (D&C 42:84.)

Also, Elder John A. Widtsoe noted the parallel of the ordinances and laws of the Church with respect to men and to women. He wrote: "This doctrine of equal rights is confirmed in the ordinances of the Church, which are alike for man and woman. Faith, repentance, and baptism are the same for all. The rewards, such as the gift of the Holy Ghost and the temple ordinances, are alike for men and women. The gifts and obligations of the gospel are alike for all. The man who holds the priesthood officiates in it, but the blessings of it descend upon the woman, also." [^15]

President Joseph F. Smith wrote: "There are people fond of saying that women are the weaker vessels. I don't believe it. Physically, they may be; but spiritually, morally, religiously and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really convinced? Daniel had faith to sustain him in the lion's den, but women have seen their sons torn limb from limb, and endured every torture satanic cruelty could invent, because they believed. They are always more willing to make sacrifices, and are the peers of men in stability, godliness, morality and faith." [^16]

When Respect for Womanhood Is Disregarded: The Perilous Path to Destruction

Ancient roles of women are not accepted by all women in our dispensation. The clearly defined roles of women throughout the ages have never been the most popular or the most convenient roles. It takes effort to successfully function in each role because each role forms a relationship. For example, a daughter bonds with a parent, a wife unites with a husband, and a mother rears a child. No sacred role for a woman can be performed in isolation. A current trend of "do my own thing," without regard to an eternal relationship, is inconsistent with the plan of God.

Many women choose to reject a relationship in one or all phases of God's eternal plan and also the ordering of these phases. They advocate alternative life-styles inconsistent with the eternal plan of God for women. Yet, there are numerous faithful women who desire to be wives and mothers but for reasons often unknown, do not have these sacred privileges in mortality. Gratefully, these noble women will not be denied the responsibilities and blessings in the eternities. [^17]

It is often inconceivable to those who desire these opportunities and to those who participate fully in these roles in mortality that increasing numbers of women do not seek to participate in one or more desired phases of womanhood. It is disconcerting also that some women accept the desired role on the surface but grudgingly perform it without "lift[ing] up thy heart and rejoic[ing], and cleav[ing] unto the covenants which [she] hast made." (D&C 25:13.)

Still other women claim that the righteous daughter-wife-mother plan is not easily discernible in the Doctrine and Covenants. Their difficulty in discerning this clearly revealed message is because the message is indeed hidden to the casual reader. Of the 184 individuals mentioned by name in the Doctrine and Covenants, only five are women. [^18] Of the five women, three (Eve, Sariah, and Hagar) are seen first in the Old Testament, and only two (Vienna Jaques and Emma Smith) are contemporary with Joseph Smith. Of all persons named in the Doctrine and Covenants, only 3 percent are women, whereas 97 percent are men. Seventy percent of the men mentioned were living at the time of Joseph Smith, 20 percent were Old Testament men, 5 percent New Testament men, and 2 percent Book of Mormon men.

The critics' impression that the role of women is not clearly taught in modern scripture may also arise from their discovery that the Doctrine and Covenants does not contain any detailed, exemplary stories of women like those in the Bible of Ruth and Esther. They miss the women-oriented teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants, noting instead that women are not mentioned as listening to Joseph's sermons. This omission is contrasted by such critics who recall that women are often cited as listening to Jesus and his apostles in Jerusalem and America.

Yet, when the modern scripture is seen in objective clarity, we see that the quality and quantity of references regarding women is more pervasive throughout the Doctrine and Covenants than in any other scripture. [^19] It is in the Doctrine and Covenants that the Savior calls specifically to women and extends to them the blessings offered in the plan of salvation. (D&C 10:65.) The blessing of being gathered in, plus other blessings, including the wife's ability to sanctify her unbelieving husband and the promises of eternal life, are contained in this holy writ. (D&C 74:1; 132:20.)

Even though the scripturally defined path is ancient and clearly restated in the Doctrine and Covenants, many women still reject one phase or all phases of the plan. Each time a woman rejects a portion of the plan, she not only loses a blessing but experiences a judgment. For example, for marrying outside of the temple, "if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world." (D&C 132:15.)

The woman's willful rejection will obviously affect not only her own life but also perhaps generations to come. The family unit is basic to mortality and will exist among the righteous in eternal realms. When a woman ignores her familial responsibility, frustration will become apparent in her divine nature—for a woman is to be a daughter, a wife, and a mother. A woman cannot reject any of these divine roles without rejecting the essential process of womanhood.

When respect for womanhood is disregarded. Both men and women are warned against even the mildest disrespect toward womanhood. Such disrespect can thwart the Spirit from abiding with the individual. David Whitmer told of an incident in the lives of Joseph and Emma Smith where the devastating effects of mild disrespect were present:

"One morning when he was getting ready to continue the translation, something went wrong about the house and he was put out about it. Something that Emma, his wife, had done. Oliver and I went upstairs and Joseph came up soon after to continue the translation but he could not do anything. He could not translate a single syllable. He went downstairs, out into the orchard, and made supplication to the Lord; was gone about an hour—came back to the house, and asked Emma's forgiveness and then came upstairs where we were and then the translation went on all right." [^20]

In each of the Lord's warnings against disrespect for womanhood, the greatest condemnation is found in the mental or physical violation of the sacred tabernacle of the woman's body. Men are warned, "He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out." (D&C 42:23; 63:16.) Women are similarly warned, "If she be not in the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with another man, she has committed adultery." (D&C 132:42.)

The Lord emphasized his great anger for those who disrespect womanhood by referring to Babylon as a whore. A whore rejects her sacred opportunity to co-create life and even eternal lives through righteous union with another of God's servants. Instead, she uses her most sacred and eternal gifts to get worldly gain, to destroy others, and to create cults for personal, selfish power.

Babylon is the epitome of evil whoring for gain after other gods. The Lord refers to false churches resulting from such whoring as stemming from the "mother of abominations." (D&C 88:94.) To help us understand the concept of Babylon and the mother of abominations, let us look at the example of the woman in the Doctrine and Covenants who illustrates some of these characteristics: Ann Lee. [^21] This example teaches us that whoring of the mind and heart, as in Ann Lee's case, are as abominable as whoring of the physical body with its overt destruction, as was characteristic of ancient Babylon.

Mother Ann claimed, "The duality of Deity, God both Father and Mother; one in essence—one God, not two; but God who possesses two natures, the masculine and the feminine, each distinct in function yet one in being, co-equal in Deity." [^22] This proclamation led to her belief that she was Jesus Christ. This doctrine was believed by her followers in "The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing." [^23]

This abomination of redefining the nature of Deity also included a redefinition of the divine role of motherhood. Ironically, Mother Ann taught, "You must forsake the marriage of the flesh or you cannot be married to the lamb, or have any share in the resurrection of Christ." She abominably concluded, "Those who are counted worthy to have any part in the resurrection of Christ neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like unto the angels." [^24] Ann did not triumph in her false doctrine but became as the mother of abominations, of whom it was written, "She is fallen, is fallen!" (D&C 88:105.)

As is true of all who subvert the sacred role of daughter, wife, and mother, Ann received the harshest condemnation of God. We hear in our day cries by those who insist, like Ann Lee, that women should be freed from the role of righteous comforter and given the role of priest. We hear that women should be released from the earthly role of mother, yet viewed in eternity as a goddess. We see on all sides women who desire worldly power and influence claiming, "Come worship me." Yet, we see the faithful women humbly praying, "I shall worship thee." The whore of Babylon comes in many guises. Each guise would destroy for personal, temporal gain the sacred roles of righteous daughter, wife, and mother.

Conclusion

The world gives women little convincing direction for the process of womanhood. There are conflicting advisers on every side, seeming to agree only that old ways are to be rejected and replaced by roles that emphasize today by discounting eternity. The role of obedient daughter, comforting wife, and inspiring mother are viewed as foolish residue of past ages.

The righteous woman recognizes the increasing peril of the world's destructive advice. She searches diligently in the Doctrine and Covenants to discover the revealed word regarding her appropriate role. She finds modern prophetic advice consistent with ancient scriptural text. As a result, she commits herself to being a faithful daughter, wife, and mother.

The unrighteous woman will not search the Doctrine and Covenants to discover the Lord's plan for women. She does not desire to know or to heed the Lord's warnings. This lack will result in her life on earth and in the eternal realms being tossed to and fro by worldly doctrines, which are in opposition to the Lord's plan.

Obviously, each woman needs to choose whether to accept the Lord's divine plan for womanhood or to embrace its counterfeit. The revealed roles in mortality and in eternity for the woman are the correct roles. If they are obedient and faithful, "a crown of righteousness" awaits all women who reach and then live for this conclusion. (D&C 25:15.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Richard O. Cowan, "The Latter-day Significance of Ancient Temples," in The Old Testament and the Latter-day Saints: Sperry Symposium 1986 (Salt Lake City: Randall Book Co., 1986), pp. 111-24. For a more complete discussion, see Richard O. Cowan, Temples to Dot the Earth (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989).
[^2] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962), p. 17.
[^3] Sidney B. Sperry, "Some Thoughts Concerning Ancient Temples and Their Functions," Improvement Era, Nov. 1955, p. 814.
[^4] Talmage, House of the Lord, p. 110.
[^5] Orlen C. Peterson, "A History of the Schools and Educational Programs of the Church . . . in Ohio and Missouri, 1831-1839" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972), pp. 23-24.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:358-59.
[^7] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 129.
[^8] Brigham Young, 1 Jan. 1877, in Journal of Discourses (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 18:303.
[^9] History of the Church, 2:379-80.
[^10] Milton V. Backman, Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983), p. 285.
[^11] History of the Church, 2:415.
[^12] Harold B. Lee, "Correlation and Priesthood Genealogy," address at Priesthood Genealogical Research Seminar, 1968 (Provo: BYU Press, 1969), p. 60.
[^13] History of the Church, 4:179; see also D&C 124:132.
[^14] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 49.
[^15] History of the Church, 4:231; Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 179.
[^16] History of the Church, 4:426.
[^17] Ibid., 4:186.
[^18] Brigham Young, 6 Apr. 1853, in Journal of Discourses, 2:31.
[^19] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 831.
[^20] Talmage, House of the Lord, pp. 99-100.
[^21] Lyle G. Brown, "The Sacred Departments for Temple Work in Nauvoo: The Assembly Room and the Council Chamber," BYU Studies 19 (Spring 1979): 363.
[^22] Lucius N. Scovil letter in Deseret News Semi Weekly, 15 Feb. 1884, p. 2; quoted in BYU Studies 19 (Winter 1979): 159 n.
[^23] History of the Church, 5:1-2.
[^24] Heber C. Kimball to Parley P. Pratt, 17 June 1842, Parley P. Pratt papers, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; quoted in Stanley B. Kimball, Heber C. Kimball: Mormon Patriarch and Pioneer (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1981), p. 85.
