Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Two

The Doctrine and Covenants on Temples and Their Functions

Richard O. Cowan

Professor of Church History and Doctrine Brigham Young University

An understanding of temples in former dispensations enhances our appreciation of these sacred structures in our own day. [^1] In Old Testament times, for example, temples served two distinct functions: God promised to manifest himself to his people in the Tabernacle made by Moses in the wilderness (Exodus 25:8, 22), and God revealed sacred ordinances, both in the Tabernacle and in Solomon's Temple (D&C 124:38). Summarizing these two functions, Elder James E. Talmage declared that a temple is "characterized not alone as [1] the place where God reveals Himself to man, but also as [2] the House wherein prescribed ordinances of the Priesthood are solemnized." [^2] A perceptive article written by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry considered the extent to which these ordinances may have been performed in ancient temples. [^3] Both temples and temple functions would need to be part of the latter-day restoration of all things.

God's people at different times have had a varying comprehension of temple functions. As Elder Talmage explained, there is "no close similarity" in temple designs from one era to another, because "there is a definite sequence of development in the dealings of God with man throughout the centuries." [^4] Even in the present dispensation this understanding has been unfolded piecemeal, by means of revelations now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The School of the Prophets

A forerunner to temple procedures and worship can be seen in the School of the Prophets that opened three years before the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. An 1832 revelation instructed Church leaders to convene this school, which was described as a "solemn assembly" to prepare and sanctify those who would go forth to preach. (D&C 88:70, 74.) Only the worthy were to attend: "He that is found unworthy . . . shall not have place among you; for ye shall not suffer that mine house shall be polluted by him." Subsequent revelations use almost identical language concerning those who should or should not be permitted to enter the temples. (D&C 88:134; compare with D&C 97:15-17, for example.) Participants in the school were to have their hands and feet washed as a symbol of this spiritual preparation and of their being "clean from the blood of this wicked generation." (D&C 88:75.)

Meetings of the School of the Prophets frequently included advanced discussion of gospel doctrines. Those participating accepted a commitment "not to willfully divulge that which is discussed in the school." [^5] The school met initially in a room, measuring about twenty feet square, above Newel K. Whitney's store. During the school's first season, however, the Saints were already looking forward to building the temple in order to provide a permanent home for the school.

Design and Construction of the Kirtland Temple

The building of the Kirtland Temple had its genesis in the December 1832 revelation that had directed the brethren to form the School of the Prophets. The Lord commanded them to "establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.)

In May of the following year, the Lord directed that the temple and two other sacred buildings should be planned for the heart of Kirtland. (D&C 94:1-12, especially 8-9.) Just a few weeks later the Prophet drew up a plat for the city of Zion. The plan he envisioned expanded the number of holy buildings at the center of the city from three to twenty-four. These "temples" were to be assigned to the various priesthood quorums and were to serve a variety of functions—"houses of worship, schools, etc." [^6] Because all inhabitants of the city would be expected to be living on a celestial level (D&C 105:5), all these buildings could be regarded as "temples"—places of communication between heaven and earth—even though their functions were not restricted to ordinance work.

On 1 June 1833, the Lord admonished the Saints to move forward with the building of the Kirtland Temple in which "I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high." (D&C 95:8.) He specified that the temple was not to be built "after the manner of the world," but according to a plan that he promised to reveal. (D&C 95:13-14.) The chapel on the main floor was to be used "for your sacrament offering, and for your preaching, and your fasting, and your praying." A similar hall on the second floor was to house "the school of mine apostles." (D&C 95:16-17.) Five small rooms in the attic were used as offices or classrooms.

Thus, "the design and construction of the Kirtland Temple," Elder Boyd K. Packer explained, "was different from that of all other latter-day temples because its purpose was different. While already in 1836 certain ordinances had been introduced in a limited way which later would form part of the regular temple ordinances, the sacred ordinances and ceremonies performed in today's temples were not done in this first temple." [^7] Specifically, President Brigham Young pointed out, the Kirtland Temple "had no basement in it, nor a font, nor preparations to give endowments for the living or the dead." [^8] The temple was more of a multipurpose building intended for general functions rather than only for sacred ordinances.

A Rich Outpouring of Spiritual Blessings

Great spiritual blessings and remarkable manifestations followed the period of sacrifice during the temple's construction. These "pentecostal" experiences began just three days after the School of the Elders had moved into the attic of the nearly completed temple. On Thursday evening, 21 January 1836, "at early candle-light" [^9] the First Presidency met with the Patriarch, Joseph Smith, Sr., in the west room of the temple attic, where they anointed one another with consecrated oil and pronounced blessings and prophecies. Then, "the heavens were opened," the Prophet recorded, and he "beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof." When he saw his brother Alvin in that kingdom, he "marveled" because Alvin had died before the gospel was restored, so had not been baptized. But the Lord declared: "All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God." (D&C 137:1, 6-7.) This assurance became the foundation of the Church's doctrine of salvation for the dead and of its great vicarious service in the temples.

During early 1836, the Saints reported seeing heavenly messengers in at least ten different meetings. At five of these meetings individuals testified that they had beheld the Savior himself. Many received visions, prophesied, or spoke in tongues. [^10]

Some of the most memorable spiritual experiences occurred on Sunday, 27 March, the day the temple was dedicated. Hundreds of Latter-day Saints crowded into the temple, anticipating the great blessings the Lord promised to bestow upon them, including a special gift or endowment of power from on high. The seven-hour dedicatory service began at 9:00 A.M. Joseph Smith's first counselor, Sidney Rigdon, spoke eloquently for two and a half hours, declaring that among all the buildings erected for the worship of God, the temple was unique, having been "built by divine revelation." [^11]

The climax of the day was the dedicatory prayer, which had been given to the Prophet by revelation. This revelation was a fulfillment of the Lord's promises (D&C 46:30; 50:30) to guide us in knowing what to pray for, and it also showed the Prophet what was appropriate to include in a temple dedicatory prayer. After expressing gratitude for God's blessing, the Prophet, with hands raised to heaven and tears flowing freely, prayed that the Lord would accept the temple, which had been built "through great tribulation . . . , that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people." (D&C 109:5.) Thus the Kirtland Temple, like holy sanctuaries in former dispensations, was to be a place of revelation between God and man. Joseph petitioned that the blessings promised in the Lord's 1832 revelation (D&C 88:117-20) might now be realized. The prayer also asked that Church leaders and members and the leaders of nations might be blessed and that the promised gathering of "the scattered remnants of Israel" might be accomplished. (D&C 109:67.) This prayer would become a pattern for other temple dedicatory prayers. Joseph Smith and others testified that they had beheld divine messengers and heard heavenly choirs during the services.

A transcendently important spiritual manifestation occurred on Easter Sunday, 3 April, just one week following the temple's dedication. After the close of the afternoon worship service, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery retired to the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpits in the west end of the lower room of the temple. The "veil," a canvas partition, was lowered so that they might pray in private. Joseph Smith testified that "the veil was taken from our minds" (D&C 110:1) and that he and Oliver beheld a series of remarkable visions. The Lord Jesus Christ appeared, accepted the temple, and promised to manifest himself therein "if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house." (D&C 110:8.) Moses then appeared and bestowed "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north." (D&C 110:11.) Elias next conferred "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham." (D&C 110:12.) Finally, in fulfillment of Malachi's prophecy (Malachi 4:5-6) and Moroni's promise (D&C 2), Elijah committed "the keys of this dispensation" in preparation for the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" (D&C 110:16). Through the sealing keys restored by Elijah, priesthood ordinances performed on earth can be "bound," or "sealed," in heaven. Latter-day Saints can also perform saving priesthood ordinances in behalf of loved ones who died without the opportunity of accepting the gospel in person. In this way the hearts of the children are turning to their fathers.

"The prime purpose in having such a temple," Elder Harold B. Lee believed, "seems to have been that there could be restored the keys, the effective keys necessary for the carrying on of the Lord's work." He therefore concluded that the events of 3 April 1836 (as recorded in D&C 110), were "sufficient justification for the building of [this] temple." [^12]

Not long after these glorious occurrences had lifted the Saints, the forces of persecution increased. In less than two years the faithful were compelled to flee from their homes in Kirtland, and shortly afterwards, the Saints in Missouri were ordered to leave that state or be exterminated. By 1839, they found a new haven in Illinois, where they built the city of Nauvoo. Here the Lord unfolded to their understanding the doctrine of salvation for the dead and restored vital temple ordinances—the second of the two main functions of temples.

Baptism for the Dead

The New Testament indicates that the early Christians performed vicarious baptisms for the dead. (See 1 Corinthians 15:29.) This practice was taught for the first time in the present dispensation on 15 August 1840 at the funeral of Seymour Brunson, a faithful member of the Nauvoo high council. [^13] The Prophet indicated that the Saints could "now act for their friends who had departed this life, and that the plan of salvation was calculated to save all who were willing to obey the requirements of the law of God." [^14] Almost immediately Church members began receiving the ordinance of baptism in the Mississippi River in behalf of deceased loved ones.

In October, the Prophet explained this ordinance to the Twelve who were then in England: "The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison." [^15]

The Prophet, on another occasion, referred to "the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead." Then, in the spirit of warning, he concluded: "Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation." [^16]

With such encouragement, the Saints eagerly took advantage of the opportunity to make gospel ordinances and blessings available to their departed loved ones. By 1844, the year of the Prophet's martyrdom, some 15,722 baptisms had been performed in behalf of the dead.

Nauvoo Temple Construction Commanded by Revelation

As early as August 1840 the First Presidency declared that the time had come "to erect a house of prayer, a house of order, a house for the worship of our God, where the ordinances can be attended to agreeably to His divine will." [^17]

A revelation received 19 January 1841 specifically pointed out the need for the temple. Echoing instructions given to Moses concerning the ancient Tabernacle, the Lord now commanded his latter-day Saints to gather precious materials from afar and build a house "for the Most High to dwell therein. For there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood." (D&C 124:27-28; compare Exodus 25:8, 22.) Specifically, the Lord declared that the ordinance of baptism for the dead "belongeth to my house," and that he had temporarily allowed the Saints to perform this ordinance outside of the temple only "in the days of your poverty." He therefore commanded them to provide an appropriate font in the temple. (D&C 124:30-33.) Hence the Nauvoo Temple, like holy sanctuaries in former dispensations, was to serve the dual purpose of being a place of contact between God and man where sacred priesthood ordinances are also performed. The Lord promised to show the Prophet "all things pertaining to this house," including "the place whereon it shall be built." (D&C 124:42.)

The Endowment and Other Blessings

Speaking in 1853 at the cornerstone-laying ceremonies for the Salt Lake Temple, President Brigham Young declared that in Kirtland the "first Elders" received only a "portion of their first endowments, or we might say more clearly, some of the first, or introductory, or initiatory ordinances, preparatory to an endowment." [^18] "It should be remembered," Elder Bruce R. McConkie concurred, "that the endowment given in the Kirtland Temple was only a partial endowment, and that the full endowment was not performed until the saints had established themselves in Nauvoo." [^19]

Elder James E. Talmage described the temple endowment as a "course of instruction," reviewing key events in the history of mankind—the Creation, the fall of Adam, the Great Apostasy, the Restoration, and our eventual reunion with God—giving emphasis to the plan of redemption and to our living according to the high standards of the gospel. [^20] These instructions would need to be given in a place of privacy because they were sacred and would make known "things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world." (D&C 124:41.) Such a facility became available when Joseph Smith opened his store early in 1842. The second storey of this twenty-five-foot by forty-four-foot red brick structure included the Prophet's small personal office and a large area that came to be known as the assembly room. Here the Relief Society was organized on 17 March 1842, and the first endowments were given seven weeks later. [^21]

With the assistance of five or six workmen, the Prophet divided the main room to represent the various stages in man's eternal progress. "We therefore went to work making the necessary preparations," one of the workmen later recalled, "and everything was arranged representing the interior of a temple as much as the circumstances would permit, [the Prophet] being with us dictating everything." These preparations were completed before noon on 4 May 1842, and later that same day the first endowments were given. [^22] As the instructions of the endowment were unfolded, the group moved from one area to another in the main assembly room. Concerning this significant event, Joseph Smith recorded:

"I spent the day in the upper part of the store . . . in council with [seven brethren], instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchisedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. . . . the communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple." [^23]

The Lord had anticipated these blessings and instructions when he spoke of the Saints' "washings" and "anointings" together with other revelations designed for the "glory, honor, and endowment" of Zion. (D&C 124:39.)

About a month after Elder Heber C. Kimball had received his endowment, he wrote of this experience to a colleague in the Twelve, Elder Parley P. Pratt, who was away doing missionary work: "We have received some pressious things through the Prophet on the priesthood that would cause your Soul to rejoice. I can not give them to you on paper fore they are not to be riten." [^24] By the time of the Prophet's martyrdom, more than fifty individuals would have received the blessings of the endowment, these instructions being given in the assembly room above Joseph's store or in private homes.

By means of two letters written during the first week of September 1842, the Prophet gave yet further instructions concerning work for the dead. He emphasized the importance of having a recorder present, not only to keep an accurate record but also to assure that each ordinance is done properly. (D&C 127:6; 128:3.) The Prophet linked this keeping of proper records with the power to bind or loose on earth and have this action recognized in heaven. He indicated that in all ages any ordinance that is performed "truly and faithfully" by proper authority and is properly recorded, would be recognized in heaven. (D&C 128:8-9; compare Matthew 16:18-19.) This power to "bind on earth" and in heaven was associated with the keys that Elijah had restored in 1836 just after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. Because temple baptismal fonts symbolize the grave, the Prophet explained, they should be located "underneath where the living are wont to assemble." (D&C 128:12-13.) Finally, expanding on the writings of Paul (Hebrews 11:40), Joseph Smith declared that "they [the fathers] without us cannot be made perfect—neither can we without our dead be made perfect" and that "their salvation is necessary and essential to our salvation." This is so because in the celestial kingdom we will be organized as God's family according to the patriarchal order. Hence he taught that there must be "a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children." (D&C 128:15, 18.) Vicarious ordinances for the dead, he concluded, were the means of establishing this link.

Among the other blessings unfolded during these years was eternal marriage. During his earthly ministry, the Master had stressed the sanctity of the family. "What therefore God hath joined together," he declared, "let not man put asunder." (Mark 10:9.) The Apostle Paul similarly insisted: "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 11:11.) During the present dispensation a revelation had affirmed that "marriage is ordained of God" as the means of providing earthly tabernacles for the spirits which had lived before the world was made. (D&C 49:15-17.)

Even though the first couple was married for eternity as early as 1841, there were relatively few of these "sealings" at first. In May 1843 the Prophet instructed the Saints that in order to attain the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, one must enter "the new and everlasting covenant of marriage." (D&C 131:1-4.) Two months later he recorded a revelation that among other things declared: "If a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world." (D&C 132:15.) Following these instructions, the number of marriages for eternity increased.

In his 1841 revelation, the Lord had urged the construction of the temple so that he might restore "the fulness of the priesthood." (D&C 124:28.) During the closing year of his life, the Prophet Joseph Smith made sure that the Twelve and others received the highest blessings available through temple ordinances so that the authority necessary to roll forth the Lord's work would remain on the earth. Elder Orson Hyde later recalled that Joseph Smith "conducted us through every ordinance of the holy priesthood, and when he had gone through with all the ordinances he rejoiced very much, and says, now if they kill me you have got all the keys, and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom." [^25]

Effect of the Martyrdom

The martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith on 27 June 1844 caused only a temporary lull in temple construction. Even though the Saints knew they would soon be forced to leave Nauvoo and lose access to the temple, yet they were willing to sacrifice to fulfill their Prophet's dream of erecting the million-dollar House of the Lord. Individual parts of the temple were completed and dedicated piecemeal so that ordinance work could begin as soon as possible.

Endowments were given beginning 10 December. By the end of the month more than a thousand Saints had received these endowment blessings, including 107 who spent Christmas Day in the temple receiving their endowment.

As the year 1846 dawned, pressure on the Saints to leave Illinois mounted. There were rumors that federal troops might be used against them. Hence Church leaders decided to commence the exodus early in February rather than wait until spring. This decision increased the Saints' eagerness to receive temple blessings before leaving Nauvoo, so activity at the temple during January was even greater than during the previous month.

On 12 January Brigham Young recorded: "Such has been the anxiety manifested by the saints to receive the ordinances [of the Temple], and such the anxiety on our part to administer to them, that I have given myself up entirely to the work of the Lord in the Temple night and day, not taking more than four hours sleep, upon an average, per day, and going home but once a week." [^26]

During the eight weeks prior to the exodus, approximately 5500 were endowed, fulfilling the Prophet Joseph Smith's compelling desire to make these blessings available to the Saints in Nauvoo.

Reflections

As I studied the latter-day restoration of temple service, I was struck by the fact that the word temple was not always used in reference to these sacred structures. Today we think of these buildings as "temples," but the early Saints more often called them "houses."

The accompanying table summarizes the uses of these terms. From the initial word counts generated by the computer, we had to subtract entries from headings which were added in later years and hence did not reflect the usages at the time under study. We also had to delete the text of Doctrine and Covenants revelations from the History of the Church.

Doctrine and Covenants History of the Church

Temple House Temple House

Kirtland 0 0% 40 100% 30 25% 89 75%

Independence 3 50% 3 50% 3 100% 0 0%

Far West 0 0% 7 100% 2 11% 16 89%

Nauvoo 1 12% 7 88% 322 93% 24 7%

Others 9 56% 7 44% 28 46% 33 54%

Totals 13 17% 64 83% 385 70% 162 30%

The Doctrine and Covenants employs the term temple about half of the time in referring to the sanctuaries in Jerusalem, in the New Jerusalem, and to temples in general, shown as "Other" on the table. In contrast, almost all references in the revelations to contemporary latter-day temples use the word house. The three instances where temple is used in connection with Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:3; 58:57; 84:3), all refer to the site where the holy structure was to be built. Hence they may have referred to the great temple of the last days in the New Jerusalem rather than just to the house the Saints were about to build there. On the other hand, the three uses of house, all in section 97, deal specifically with the structure the Saints were commanded to erect at that time. The temple in Nauvoo was almost always called a "house" in the revelations, despite the fact that there was a separate building, a hotel or boarding house, specifically named "the Nauvoo House." (D&C 124:60.) Joseph Smith's History of the Church for the Ohio and Missouri period follows the same pattern, but it does employ temple part of the time. A dramatic shift is observed, however, when temple is used almost consistently in History of the Church to refer to the Lord's house in Nauvoo. Perhaps the restoration of sacred ordinances led the Saints increasingly to link the functions of this holy structure with the ancient temples. Interestingly, the only Doctrine and Covenants usage of temple in reference to a contemporary building actually is found in an epistle written by the Prophet concerning baptisms for the dead. (D&C 127:4.) Further research into diaries or other documents written at the time may shed greater light on the connection between the Saints' unfolding understand of the functions of temples and their use of that term in reference to these special buildings.

The process of unfolding the Saints' understanding of temples and temple service has continued. Vicarious endowments for the dead were inaugurated with the completion of the St. George Temple in 1877. For the first time the Saints had the privilege of returning to the temple and, while officiating in behalf of others, renewing their own understanding and appreciation of the great teachings contained in the endowment. In 1894 a revelation through President Wilford Woodruff directed the Saints to trace their genealogies and be sealed to their own progenitors as far back as possible. Then, in 1918, President Joseph F. Smith received a remarkable vision, expanding our understanding of how the gospel is being preached in the spirit world. (D&C 138.) Paraphrasing the ninth article of faith, we accept all that God has revealed concerning temples and their ordinances, and we eagerly look forward to whatever more he may yet reveal on this important subject.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:335.
[^2] Ibid., p. 334.
[^3] Ibid., p. 336.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 342-43.
[^5] Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam Co., 1973), s.v. "glory."
[^6] C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1949), pp. 8-9.
[^7] Webster's, s.v. "glory."
[^8] Noah Webster, American Dictionary of the English Language, 3d ed. of the reprint of the 1829 ed. (San Francisco: Foundation of American Christian Education, 1983), s.v., "glory."
[^9] History of the Church, 4:536.
[^10] American Dictionary, in standard use during Joseph Smith's lifetime, defines truth as "conformity to fact or reality; exact accordance with that which is, or has been, or shall be." (S.v. "truth.")
[^11] John Jaques, "Oh Say, What Is Truth?" Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 272.
[^12] The Prophet Joseph Smith elaborated on this thought, stating, "Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939], p. 354.) B. H. Roberts believed this referred to the primal substance from which man's spirit was organized. (See Smith, Teachings, p. 354 n. 9; see also p. 158 n. 5.)
[^13] This is the definition in "Oh Say, What Is Truth?" (Hymns, 1985, no. 272.) This hymn, as a piece of poetry, was once a part of the Pearl of Great Price. It was set to music and placed in the LDS hymnal.
[^14] American Dictionary, s.v. "grace."
[^15] Smith, Teachings, pp. 187-88.
[^16] The Savior was already the spirit Son of God. He was also the physical Son. But it was the reception of the divine attributes of light and truth by which he was glorified and gained eternal life. Accordingly, he became the spiritual or eternal Son of God when he received of the fulness of the Father.
[^17] Smith, Teachings, pp. 346-47.
[^18] Brigham Young, 6 Apr. 1853, in Journal of Discourses, 2:31.
[^19] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 831.
[^20] Talmage, House of the Lord, pp. 99-100.
[^21] Lyle G. Brown, "The Sacred Departments for Temple Work in Nauvoo: The Assembly Room and the Council Chamber," BYU Studies 19 (Spring 1979): 363.
[^22] Lucius N. Scovil letter in Deseret News Semi Weekly, 15 Feb. 1884, p. 2; quoted in BYU Studies 19 (Winter 1979): 159 n.
[^23] History of the Church, 5:1-2.
[^24] Heber C. Kimball to Parley P. Pratt, 17 June 1842, Parley P. Pratt papers, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; quoted in Stanley B. Kimball, Heber C. Kimball: Mormon Patriarch and Pioneer (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1981), p. 85.
[^25] 25. Times and Seasons 5 (15 September 1844): 651.
[^26] 26. History of the Church, 7:567.
