Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Seven

Salvation Cannot Come without Revelation

Richard Neitzel Holzapfel

Instructor, Irvine Institute of Religion Irvine, California

"Salvation cannot come," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "without revelation." [^1] This is one of the grand keys revealed to a modern world through the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Without modern revelation, the Saints' situation would be very similar to that of the Jews of Jesus' day. They believed in the dead prophets of Israel and their writings but did not accept revelation in their own time. Thus they denied Christ's proclamation of the Good News to themselves and their children. In a modern setting, without their belief in modern revelation the Latter-day Saints would be like all other churches, denominations, and sects. Their beliefs are based on the writings of Old and New Testament prophets, written thousands of years ago. Joseph Smith said that the sectarian churches were "buil[t] [with] hay, wood and stubble on the old revelations without the spirit of revelation." [^2]

Sectarian Christianity has splintered because of many interpretations of the scriptures. Where can one find the truth in the midst of such diversity of interpretation and opinion? Joseph Smith said "that it was impossible for a person young as [he] was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong." (Joseph Smith-History 1:8.)

Why was the Bible not enough revelation for Joseph? "For the teachers of religion of the different sects," he recorded, "understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible." He wrote, "Unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know." (Joseph Smith-History 1:12.)

Joseph began to receive the spirit of revelation from the Lord while reading the New Testament book of James. It was not a vision, nor an angel, but the voice of the Spirit that spoke to him that day:

"I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

"Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart." (Joseph Smith-History 1:11-12.)

Obedient to the first dictates of the Spirit, Joseph determined to ask God for more wisdom on the subject. As a result, he went into the woods near his home to pray for further guidance. He received one of the greatest revelations in world history. The Father, the Son, and many angels appeared to young Joseph, and he received the assurance that his sins were forgiven. [^3] This revelation signaled the beginning of Joseph's own personal salvation and the salvation of a dark world, a world that had forgotten that salvation comes only upon the principle of continued revelation. Later the Prophet taught John Taylor the importance of cultivating the Spirit. He said, "Now listen to the dictates of that spirit and cultivate it, and it will become a spirit of revelation." [^4]

The Prophet often expressed difficulty revealing God's will because of false traditions (false interpretations of scripture). He claimed that the inhabitants of a modern world were "differently situated from any other people that ever existed upon this Earth. Consequently those former revelations cannot be suited to our condition, because they were given to other people who were before us." He concluded that if the revelations and the Book of Mormon were taken away, "Where is our religion? We have none." [^5]

The Lord announced to the inhabitants of the earth, "This generation [dispensation] shall have my word through you [Joseph Smith]." (D&C 5:10.) Joseph is not only the spokesman of God but is an example of a disciple of the Lord in this time. An analogy could be made between one who seeks salvation and Joseph Smith, although some may think it inappropriate to use Joseph as a model to receive revelation. They reason that Joseph was in some way special and therefore different from others seeking answers. Remember Joseph was a seeker of truth before he was a prophet. His story teaches universal principles that apply to every honest and sincere individual. Joseph taught that he had no "corner on the market" for revelation. To the brethren of the Church the Prophet said, "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what he will make known unto the Twelve and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^6]

Revelation Promised in the Latter Days

Revelation is promised in the latter days by ancient scripture. The fulfillment of the prophecy of Joel is occurring today. Joseph learned this from Moroni on September 23, 1827: "He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be." (Joseph Smith-History 1:41.)

The Lord's preface to the Doctrine and Covenants states, "The voice of the Lord is unto all men," for "all that will hear may hear." (D&C 1:2, 11.) The Lord makes several special promises of continued revelation in this new dispensation of the gospel. One such promise is found in Doctrine and Covenants 5:16: "Whosoever believeth on my words [in reference to the Book of Mormon], them will I visit with the manifestation of my Spirit." Another promise is found in Doctrine and Covenants 84:64: "I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words [referring to Joseph Smith in particular], and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost." We must accept revelation through the Lord's anointed to receive the promise of more individual revelation. The Lord made this promise in Doctrine and Covenants 42:61: "If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal."

Since Joseph's life is a model of the life of a true disciple, then the Doctrine and Covenants is our handbook on revelation. There the day-to-day revelatory experience of the Prophet unfolds. In the Doctrine and Covenants one can witness the spiritual growth and maturity of Joseph Smith as he receives inspiration and revelation from the Lord.

Revelation Comes in Diverse Ways

A careful study of the Doctrine and Covenants shows that revelation comes in diverse manners. During the Church's organizational meeting of April 6, 1830, Joseph said that the "revelations of God . . . shall come hereafter by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, the voice of God, or the ministering of angels." (D&C 20:35.) While recording a later revelation, the Prophet wrote, "Thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest." (D&C 85:6.) This statement implies that there were times when Joseph's bones did not quake.

As a young man I served my mission in Italy. Naively I believed and taught that the Prophet had a personal priesthood interview with the Lord each day. I thought it was a common experience for the Lord's anointed to speak face to face with Him. Showing a picture of the modern Church Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, I said, "This man is our prophet. He is just like Moses and speaks with the Lord face to face." When President S. Dilworth Young of the First Quorum of Seventy visited our mission and met with us in a zone conference, he specifically asked us to stop saying that the prophet regularly talked with the Lord face to face. He then explained that those occurrences over the last four or five thousand years are actually quite rare. He also said: "All revelation comes by the Holy Ghost. . . . Only a few times does God the Father or Jesus Christ appear. They go through the Holy Ghost, and they are one. Just as the First Presidency signs three names at the bottom of their message it is still only one message. When Pres. Romney refers to a letter he says, 'President Kimball said . . . ' not himself, and so it is with our Father in Heaven. He operates like that by way of the Holy Ghost." [^7]

Examining the Doctrine and Covenants, I learned that President Young was right. Like Isaiah of old, I discovered that the Lord speaks to his modern servants by the same "still small voice." It was the same small still voice that spoke to me. (See 1 Kings 19:12.)

The Doctrine and Covenants As a Guide to Revelation

There are a few examples in the Doctrine and Covenants when revelation came to Joseph Smith through a messenger. These include sections 2, 13, 27, and 110. Section 128, an epistle, mentions the appearance of several other angelic ministers who came to Joseph.

Revelation also comes by vision. There are only two examples of revelations received in this way in the Doctrine and Covenants during the lifetime of the Prophet. They are sections 76 and 137.

Several revelations came through the use of divine instruments. Usually it was the seer stone, or Urim and Thummim. Sections 3, 6-7, 10-11, and 14-17 came in that way.

Doctrine and Covenants 130:14-15 is an account of Joseph's hearing a voice speak to him. This seems to be the only revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that was received in this way.

Of all the 135 sections of the Doctrine and Covenants recorded during Joseph's lifetime, only 16 came in these special ways. They were truly unusual events in Joseph's revelatory experience. An examination of all ancient scripture seems to show this to be true. Modern and ancient scriptures testify that the "holy prophets . . . spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 20:26.) This was the usual way of communicating the mind and will of the Lord. Latter-day Saints as individuals should expect that the general law of revelation is the still small voice instead of bright lights and loud voices.

Revelation through the Spirit

Most of the Doctrine and Covenants consists of revelations given by the Holy Ghost. These revelations were given by the Spirit clothed in language by the Prophet. The Lord says that the voice Joseph heard "[was] as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound." (D&C 88:66.) Revelations given by the voice of the Spirit may include: Doctrine and Covenants 1, 4-5, 8-9, 12, 18-26, 28-64, 66-73, 75, 78-101, 103-8, 111-12, 114-20, 122, 124-26, 129, and 132-33.

Doctrine and Covenants 65, 109, and 121 are prayers, but the Prophet says in his record that they are revealed prayers. [^8] Several other sections are Spirit-inspired letters (D&C 123; 127-28), minutes of a Church meeting (D&C 102), instructions (D&C 130-31), and questions and answers (D&C 77; 113). The total of Spirit-directed scriptures is thus 124 of the 135 sections of the Doctrine and Covenants recorded during the Prophet's lifetime. By far the most scripture came by the Spirit of the Lord, nearly 88 percent of the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord announced who he was and how he spoke to his servants when he said, "Behold, I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, and your Redeemer, by the power of my Spirit have spoken it." (D&C 18:47.)

There are several differences between Joseph's reception of revelation and the individual Saint's reception of revelation. First, Joseph clothed his impressions in words and wrote them down. Orson Pratt said, "Joseph the Prophet, in writing the Doctrine and Covenants, received the ideas from God, but clothed those ideas with such words as came to his mind." Elder Pratt continued: "Had [modern scripture] been through Orson Pratt or John Taylor, probably different words would have been used by each one to convey the same meaning." [^9] A possible sign of this procedure is found in Doctrine and Covenants 104:81, where the Lord commanded Joseph to write a letter to New York. "Therefore write speedily," said the Lord, "and write according to that which shall be dictated by my Spirit."

This principle is involved today in the Church through patriarchal blessings. The patriarch receives the promptings of the Spirit. A patriarch could receive revelation in another way, maybe hearing a voice or seeing a vision, but this would probably be the exception. He then clothes these impressions in his own words to convey the meaning of the ideas. Different patriarchs use different words to convey the same meaning, depending upon the patriarch's education and culture. The patriarch's words are recorded and a written copy is given to the individual receiving the blessing. The individual can take that revelation and include it in his own "doctrine and covenants" for his own use and edification.

Brigham Young made the following observation concerning language and revelation:

"When God speaks to the people, he does it in a manner to suit their circumstances and capacities. He spoke to the children of Jacob through Moses, as a blind, stiff-necked people, and when Jesus and his Apostles came they talked with the Jews as a benighted, wicked, selfish people. They would not receive the Gospel, though presented to them by the Son of God in all its righteousness, beauty and glory. Should the Lord Almighty send an angel to re-write the Bible, it would in many places be very different from what it now is. And I will even venture to say that if the Book of Mormon were now to be re-written, in many instances it would materially differ from the present translation." [^10]

The Lord uses the language of the individual to reveal his mind and will. (D&C 1:24.) In early Church history there were men who had more formal education than the Prophet. Some of them were concerned with the language Joseph used in the revelations. The Lord said, "Your eyes have been upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and his language you have known, and his imperfections you have known; and you have sought in your hearts knowledge that you might express beyond his language." (D&C 67:5.) They were concerned with the Church leader's language and grammar, not necessarily with gospel messages revealed. The Lord's Spirit gave knowledge to Joseph, and he put that knowledge into his own language so others could read it.

Another difference between Joseph Smith and the individual Latter-day Saint is that Joseph's revelations not only were personal revelations or stewardship revelations but also were institutional revelations for the entire Church. (D&C 21:1-4; 28.)

How to Get Revelation

"By learning the Spirit of God and understanding it," the modern seer taught, "you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." [^11] Learning the Spirit of God may mean that one must "notic[e] the first intimation of the Spirit of Revelation." This first intimation occurs when you "feel pure Intelligence flowing unto you it may give you sudden strokes of ideas." [^12] By noticing these strokes of ideas an individual will find the spirit of revelation. To Oliver Cowdery the Lord said, "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost. . . . Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation." (D&C 8:2-3.) He told Oliver that the answer would come not by a voice or in a vision, but as a feeling.

Christ has promised revelation to all who "serve [him] in righteousness and in truth unto the end." (D&C 76:5-7.) Joseph Smith emphasized: "No man can be called to fill any office in the ministry without it [the gift of the Holy Ghost]; we also believe in prophecy, in tongues, in visions, and in revelations, in gifts, and in healings; and that these things cannot be enjoyed without the gift of the Holy Ghost. We believe that the holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and that holy men in these days speak by the same principle; we believe in its being a comforter and a witness bearer, that it brings things past to our remembrance, leads us into all truth, and shows us of things to come; we believe that 'no man can know that Jesus is the Christ, but by the Holy Ghost.' " [^13]

After his death, Joseph appeared to Brigham Young in a dream. Brigham had several questions to ask him on important Church doctrines and practices. Instead of answering Brigham Young directly, Joseph Smith responded with this advice: "Be sure and tell the people one thing. Do you be sure and tell the brethren that it is all important for them to keep the spirit of the Lord, to keep the quiet spirit of Jesus . . . which always brings peace and makes one happy and takes away every other spirit. When the still small voice speaks, always receive it." [^14] The Spirit is the general way for the Saints to receive guidance.

Beginning to Receive Revelation

The scriptures are the best place to begin to feel and hear the still small voice of the Spirit. This was Joseph's pattern, starting with his reading of James 1:5. The next step in this process is found in Doctrine and Covenants 18. Every person who hears or reads the revelations and receives the Spirit's witness to them can "testify that [they] have heard [the Lord's] voice, and know [the Lord's] words." (D&C 18:34-36.) Jesus said to the young prophet, "What I say unto one I say unto all." (D&C 93:49.) Individuals can get the spirit of revelation by reading and studying the scriptures. The scriptures become personal revelation. Once these revelations are accepted as God's word, God may be asked for the continuous revelation he has promised. The Holy Spirit can give individuals the personal revelation so necessary for meeting the problems and situations of a modern day. If God does not reveal himself, he cannot be known. Without such divine communication, therefore, an individual remains forever ignorant of the process of salvation. Continued personal revelation becomes scripture. "And whatsoever they shall speak," said the Lord, "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

Summary

These are the days spoken of by Joel the prophet. Through him the Lord said: "I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

"And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit." (Joel 2:28-29.)

As with Joseph's first revelation after reading James 1:5, a new convert reads the Book of Mormon and then asks God for wisdom, after which the Holy Ghost manifests the truth to him. Revelation comes by the Spirit, which if followed, brings salvation to the sincere believer in Christ.

The Lord has given a pattern that will help an individual to know whether the revelation is from Him or some other spirit:

"And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

"And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive." (D&C 11:12-14.)

The Lord made known his intentions concerning all his faithful Saints, "As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints." (D&C 121:33.)

With the Doctrine and Covenants as a guide, each of us can begin to understand and learn how to gain revelation. Revelation comes by the Holy Ghost. The Lord said to Oliver Cowdery, "Blessed art thou . . . ; thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. . . .

"Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth. . . .

"Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:14-15, 23.) This witness of the Spirit is the guide to salvation. The Lord said, "For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day." (D&C 45:57.)

Revelation is an important part of salvation for the whole earth and all its inhabitants. The Prophet Joseph Smith said at the conference where the Doctrine and Covenants was approved for publication that modern revelation was the "foundation of the Church and the salvation of the world." [^15]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:146 n.
[^2] Ibid., 1:148-54.
[^3] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 23.
[^4] Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), p. 277.
[^5] History of the Church, 1:386.
[^6] Ibid., 1:386; 2:55.
[^7] Ibid., 4:473.
[^8] Ibid., 4:93; see also D&C 104:11-14.
[^9] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 231.
[^10] History of the Church, 1:364; or Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 22-23.
[^11] History of the Church, 1:365-66. While these forms are included in the History of the Church, there is no evidence that they were used, for they are not dated or notarized. In addition, they ignore some of the principles given in the revelations. For example, Billings agreed to relinquish all his property if he transgressed the laws of the Church. While it is true the transgressor did not have claim upon previously donated property, he did have claim on his inheritance because the deed should have guaranteed him that right. Another instruction ignored in the documents pertained to the right of a wife to sign with her husband. (History of the Church, 1:364.)
[^12] Ibid., 1:298.
[^13] Smith, Personal Writings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 258.
[^14] History of the Church, 1:365-66.
[^15] Ibid., 2:49.
