Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Ten

Revelation on the Priesthood: The Dawning of a New Day in Africa

E. Dale LeBaron

Assistant Professor of Church History and Doctrine Brigham Young University

When the revelation giving the priesthood to all worthy males was announced, I was presiding over the only mission in Africa. Because we had no black, male, Church members, the revelation did not have a noticeable immediate effect upon the Church there. It was obvious, however, that in the days ahead this revelation would have a much greater effect upon the continent of Africa than upon any other part of the world. The announcement of the revelation also brought understanding to many unusual happenings I had observed during the previous months. There had been numerous inquiries by black people of southern Africa who wanted information about the Church. These inquiries, although rarely occurring before this time, greatly increased following the revelation, and few of these inquirers knew anything about the revelation or the priesthood. There was abundant evidence that the Lord had poured out his Spirit upon the prophet in giving this revelation and also upon the blacks of Africa, who had long been deprived of the fulness of the gospel blessings and ordinances.

As an observer of many unusual evidences of the Lord's power upon the blacks of Africa, I felt a great concern that this marvelous chapter of Church history was not being adequately recorded because the blacks are an oral history people, unaccustomed to keeping a written history. I also felt a concern that any delay in record-keeping could rob us of valuable histories due to the death or illness of important participants. The opportunity of addressing these concerns came a decade later when the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies approved my proposal to travel to Africa to collect oral histories from black converts to the Church. This project also received support from the General Authorities, who provided invaluable assistance in opening the way for support from mission presidents throughout Africa. In addition to this help, there were also frequent experiences that gave evidence that the Lord wanted this project accomplished. Divine intervention—from contacting interviewees to providing a replacement for a broken microphone—allowed the project to succeed as it did. One of my concerns about the urgency of this project was verified when Violet Dube, a pioneer among the black Saints of Soweto, South Africa, passed away two weeks after I interviewed her in the Johannesburg temple. This interview is the only recorded history of her life.

During the summer of 1988 I traveled in ten different African countries obtaining more than four hundred oral histories. The countries I visited were Ghana, Nigeria, Zaire, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Ciskei, Transkei, Swaziland, and the islands of Maritius and Reunion, located off the east coast of Africa.

The Restoration for Black Africa

Prior to the revelation on the priesthood in 1978, no mission was organized among the blacks of Africa. In many respects, this divine directive brought the restoration of the gospel and all its blessings to these people. There are many parallels between the restoration of the gospel and the establishment of the Church in black Africa. This paper will compare some of these parallels, using examples from oral histories that reflect the divine origin of the revelation and the power of the Lord guiding and blessing people of Africa.

Spiritual Darkness Penetrated

One hundred and fifty-five years ago, the Lord promised, "Then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations, . . . of the gospel of their salvation." (D&C 90:10.) The restoration was accompanied by an immense thrust of spiritual power that penetrated the spiritual darkness and moved the kingdom forward. Like a rocket launching into space, this thrust of power overcame opposition and moved the Church upward on its divinely decreed course. After liftoff, continued energy was provided, but not as much as at first. Similarly, the revelation granting the priesthood and all its blessings to all worthy males was of such tremendous import and eternal significance that the Lord "poured out the Holy Ghost upon the First Presidency and the Twelve in a miraculous and marvelous manner, beyond anything that any then present had ever experienced." [^1] Just as the Spirit was poured out upon many people about the time of the First Vision, preparing many for the message of the gospel, the Lord extended his Spirit with power upon people and parts of Africa near the time of the priesthood revelation.

Although the Church was established in South Africa in 1853, more than a century passed before work officially began among the blacks in Africa. In 1960 Glen G. Fisher returned to Canada from South Africa after serving as mission president there. The First Presidency asked President Fisher to stop in Nigeria and investigate groups who had organized themselves into church units, and had taken the name of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. During the next six years, efforts were made to send missionaries to Nigeria. LaMar Williams was called and set apart by President McKay for this work. Others were also called, but the effort was abandoned in 1966 because visas could not be procured.

African Eliases

At the time of the restoration of the gospel, there were people who exerted leadership by breaking away from dominant churches and preparing themselves and others for the message of the restoration. Some of these were Sidney Rigdon and his Disciples group; John Taylor and his study group in Toronto, Canada, converted by Parley P. Pratt; and John Benbow and the United Brethren, taught by Wilford Woodruff in England. These courageous and inspired souls did much to prepare many to receive the gospel even before they had received it themselves.

For many years before 1978, unbaptized converts in Africa had received Church literature and divine direction. Their faith penetrated the spiritual darkness, and they sought more of the teachings of the Church. Often these devoted people made great efforts to communicate with Church headquarters and missions to obtain more information and to receive direction. They also pleaded for visits from Church representatives. Invariably, they shared their newfound knowledge and conviction generously. Though the Church and all of its blessings were not available to them, they found spiritual nourishment from "the crumbs which fall from their masters' table," and have testified of a spiritual confirmation that assured them, "Great is thy faith." (Matthew 15:27-28.)

One such pioneer in Ghana is Joseph W. B. Johnson. In 1964 he prayerfully read the Book of Mormon. He relates: "One early morning about 5:30 A.M., while about to prepare for my daily work, I saw the heavens open and angels with trumpets singing songs of praise unto God. . . . In the course of this I heard my name mentioned thrice, 'Johnson, Johnson, Johnson. If you will take up my work as I will command you, I will bless you and bless your land.' Trembling and in tears I replied, 'Lord, with thy help I will do whatever you will command me.' From that day onward, I was constrained by that spirit to go from street to street . . . to deliver the message which we had read from the Book of Mormon. . . . I did exactly as the Lord commanded me . . . and immediately . . . our persecution started." [^2] Fourteen years later, when the missionaries arrived, there were already many congregations named The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They had been organized by Brother Johnson. Hundreds were baptized into the Church.

In Nigeria, Anthony Obinna was a faithful and persistent pioneer. As a lifelong seeker after truth, he relates the following, which occurred in the late 1960s: "One night I was sleeping and a tall man came to me . . . and took me to one of the most beautiful buildings and showed me all the rooms. At the end he showed himself in the crucified form. Then in 1970 I found this book to read. It was the September, 1958, Readers Digest. There was an article entitled, 'The March of the Mormons' with a picture of the Salt Lake Temple. It was exactly the same building I had seen in my dream." [^3]

Brother Obinna persistently wrote to Church headquarters and to missions, seeking Church literature and hoping for personal visits from Church representatives. After years of waiting, he wrote the following to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on 28 September 1978: "Your long silence about the establishment of the Church in Nigeria is very embarrassing. . . . What could hinder this church from having a foothold here? Did Christ not say, 'Go ye and teach all nations?' " [^4] When the Obinna family learned of the revelation on the priesthood, they wrote to the First Presidency: "We are happy for the many hours in the upper room of the temple you spent supplicating the Lord to bring us into the fold. We thank our Heavenly Father for hearing your prayers and ours and [that he] by revelation has confirmed the long promised day. . . . We thank you for extending the priesthood which has been withheld [from] us and to prepare us to receive every blessing of the gospel." [^5]

When the missionaries arrived in Nigeria, they found many prepared for the gospel through the teaching and leadership of Brother Obinna. He became the first person to be baptized by the missionaries sent to West Africa, and Sister Obinna became the first Relief Society president in black Africa. The first Latter-day Saint chapel built in Nigeria is in Aboh Mbaise, of the Imo State, near the home of the Obinna family.

I first met Moses Mahlangu in 1976 when I presided over the South Africa Mission. Living in the township of Soweto, Brother Mahlangu prayerfully read the Book of Mormon and patiently waited sixteen years for baptism. His dedication and persistence in living gospel principles deeply impressed me. Fluent in nine languages, he shared his testimony with many people during that time. While reflecting upon his long wait to join the Church, Brother Mahlangu compared himself to Cornelius, "who was very good in waiting to receive the word of God or to be a member of the church . . . till the angels came and told him what to do." [^6] Today, at age sixty-three, Brother Mahlangu is a groundskeeper at the Johannesburg temple, which he regularly attends. He is the elders quorum president in the Soweto branch.

Prepared for the Message

The Lord assured us that at the time of the Restoration he would pour out his spirit upon all flesh and many would dream dreams and see visions. (Joel 2:28.) This is evidenced by the experiences of many early converts to the Church, including Solomon Chamberlain, who received a message about the Restoration from a vision before the organization of the Church, and Wilford Woodruff, who was promised in a vision to Robert Mason that he would participate in the Lord's restored church. [^7]

In a similar way, many Africans have been guided to the Church and prepared for the gospel. Typical of them is Adjei Kwame, who grew up in a religious atmosphere in Ghana. Being an excellent student, he was given a seven-year scholarship to study engineering in the Soviet Union. He completed a master's degree in mechanical engineering but felt that his spiritual life suffered because he was not allowed to attend church meetings. Upon graduating, Brother Kwame took a teaching position in Gweru, Zimbabwe. There he began to experience spiritual yearnings, which he described: "I have always been searching for the truth and for the true church. . . . Then, February of this year (1988), I kept having dreams about a church building. When I went through Que Que, I saw this church building and wanted to go in to find out what kept coming into my dreams all the time. . . . The building looked like a big temple. It had big spires like the temple that we see. The people were dressed in long white robes which ended at their feet, not in suits. . . . It was not in my thoughts that I should become a member of the church, but I wanted to find out why that church kept coming into my dreams. I felt like I was being pushed to that area. So I went into that church one Sunday. When I got there I felt that I had been released from some burden and I felt that this was the true church which I should join. . . . When I got to that church I felt that I was actually with some people that I knew a long time ago. I don't know how to express that feeling, but the only thing I can say is that I felt that I knew them a long time ago and that they have been good friends. And so I just felt that I was at home." [^8]

Reflecting upon his first Latter-day Saint meeting, Brother Kwame related: "The first time I went to church in Que Que, I didn't know what was going on. It was a fast Sunday. . . . Now, people got up to give testimonies. The meeting was started when I got there. I sat at the back. The sacrament was served, and I participated without knowing what I was doing. After that, people were giving testimonies and I didn't know what they were doing. I got up and went straight to the pulpit and started talking. . . . I said that it is not easy for somebody to . . . talk to people that you don't know, but they should forgive me if I have made a mistake but I believe in the Supreme Being, whom I call God, and I want to be a member of that church. . . . After that I met Sister Hamstead and what actually descended upon the two of us I can not explain. Before I became aware I was weeping. . . . I can't explain the feeling. I was released of all burdens. . . . I felt that I had gone to a place where I visited often. And now I was at home." [^9]

A Foundation of Faithful and Able Leaders Brings Growth

The quality of leadership brought into the Church between 1830 and 1840 made possible its survival and growth. The four presidents of the Church who succeeded the Prophet Joseph, as well as many other great leaders, all joined the Church in that decade. The strength of that leadership is reflected by the Church's unusual growth in spite of the persecutions and hardships that the members endured.

In the first decade after the revelation on the priesthood, the Church in Africa was blessed with an unusual quality of converts. A surprisingly large number of African converts are educated. Take, for example, the educational achievements of the Church leadership in Ghana and Nigeria. Because of widespread poverty and unemployment, it is unusual for a person to complete high school in these countries. In 1987, the literacy level was reported at 30 percent for Ghana and 25 percent for Nigeria. [^10] Yet, of the Church leaders I interviewed in Ghana and Nigeria, 82 percent of the district and stake presidents are college or university graduates. In Ghana 76 percent of the Relief Society presidents interviewed are college or university graduates; in Nigeria, 58 percent. Of 104 persons interviewed in Ghana and 100 interviewed in Nigeria, 74 percent in Ghana and 55 percent in Nigeria have received some college or university training. This foundation of leadership, in only ten years, is impressive. The Philippines, which is considered one of the most rapidly growing areas of the Church, organized its first stake twelve years after the missionaries arrived; a new stake was organized in Nigeria in less than ten years' time after the missionaries arrived. Church leaders are confident that there will be accelerated growth throughout Africa because of the quality of the converts who are responding to the gospel. [^11]

The Church in Africa has grown rapidly as converts have shared the gospel with their families and friends. In 1840, ten years after the Church was organized, there were 16,865 members. (Church Almanac, 1985, p. 248.) Today, ten years after the revelation on the priesthood, there are approximately 17,000 black Saints in Africa. (As reported by mission presidents.)

One example of why Church growth is spectacular in Africa is the experience of Rueben Okuchukwu Onuoha, the newly ordained patriarch of the Aba Nigeria Stake, which was organized three weeks before our interview. When he received his call from Elder Neal A. Maxwell, Brother Onuoha had been a member less than three years and had never met a patriarch. Reflecting upon that interview, he said: "I don't know anything about it. The only thing I've got to do is to be prayerful about it. . . . I know that by the grace of God I will succeed when the time comes for me to be at peace in the job." All his life Brother Onuoha has felt spiritual yearnings and restlessness. Disillusioned and disappointed about religion, he stopped attending Christian meetings. "But then, as soon as this church came to me," he reflected, "I picked up interest, and I have not missed attending sacrament meeting even one day since the 25th of August, 1985, . . . regardless of whether I am sick or not." The same week he was baptized, Brother Onuoha introduced the gospel to eighteen people, who later joined the Church. Because he lived about twenty miles from the nearest chapel, meetings were held in the parlor of Brother Onuoha's home. Four months after his baptism, there was no longer space in his parlor for the eighty people whom he had introduced to the gospel. [^12]

Besides the two hundred members in his branch, Brother Onuoha has shared the gospel with many others, including Dr. Clement Nwafor. Dr. Nwafor is the chief medical officer for about two million Nigerians, a prominent and popular citizen in the Aba area. Brother Onuoha visited Dr. Nwafor when Brother Onuoha's wife was ill. To the chain-smoking doctor, Brother Onuoha said, "Look, doctor, you have achieved almost everything. I know you to be a very hard-working man. You are very popular in your area. You have been given the chieftainship title and several other positions from the government and from the community which you come from. But you still lack one thing, and that is serving the Lord who has brought you into this universe." From this bold declaration followed pamphlets, the Book of Mormon, and the missionaries. Dr. Nwafor accepted the gospel: "My whole system was like it was a break from prison right from that time. . . . I felt like a new person. I felt like somebody that was born again. I felt anew." Less than six months after Dr. Nwafor's baptism, he was set apart as a high councilor in the new stake in Nigeria. [^13]

The Lord Uses "the Weak" to Do His Work

One of the great testimonies of the restoration of the gospel is the work that was accomplished by the Prophet Joseph and those who were faithful to him and the gospel teachings. From the beginning of this dispensation the Lord promised that he would use the weak things of the world to accomplish his great purposes. (D&C 1:19, 23-24.) There are many examples of the application of this principle in the Church in Africa, from preaching to prophesying, from teaching to translating.

Missionaries in Africa are awed by the childlike faith of those they teach. One pair of missionaries in South Africa, after telling and testifying of the First Vision, asked the family if they understood what they had heard and whether they had any questions. The father replied, pointing to the flip-chart drawing of the First Vision, "Yes, I have a question. Who took that photograph?" [^14]

Unusual blessings have come to the Saints in Africa because of the faith and sacrifice of some of the members there. The accomplishments of Sister Priscilla Sampson-Davis, who joined the Church in 1979, provide one example. Through her faith and encouragement, her oldest son gave up a lifelong dream and forfeited a four-year scholarship to an Anglican seminary theological school, to be baptized. Twenty months later, he was one of the first full-time missionaries from West Africa. One day after sacrament meeting, Sister Sampson-Davis had an experience that changed her life and ultimately affected many others.

"I had a vision. I wasn't asleep. I saw things as if I was at the sacrament meeting and someone in white apparel came and stood in front of the stand, and beckoned me and called me. I came and stood by him, and then he asked me to turn around and look at the congregation—to look at the faces of the people to see if they were all enjoying the service. I looked around. I couldn't see any differences, so I told him that I couldn't see any differences in their faces. Then he asked me . . . to look again carefully, and I saw that some of them had bent down their heads.

"He asked me why some of those people were not joining in the singing. Then I said, 'Because they didn't go to school and they couldn't read English. They couldn't sing, and that is the reason why they bent down their heads.' Then he said, 'Wouldn't you like to help your sisters and brothers who couldn't read and who couldn't join you in singing praises to our Heavenly Father?' Though I wasn't very good in the language, I could speak. It is my mother tongue, but I couldn't write well. I didn't say, 'No.' I said, 'I will try. I will do my best.' And then the vision passed away. So I immediately got up. I took paper and pencil and started translating 'Redeemer of Israel' right away into Fante."

As Fante is the language of 85 percent of the Ghanaian people, the hymns were eagerly received by the Ghanaian Saints. After translating the hymnbook, Sister Sampson-Davis translated missionary pamphlets and film strips, Gospel Principles, Stories of the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Mormon. She is now translating the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. She bears powerful testimony that the Holy Ghost has been her teacher and guide in this great and important project. [^15]

Another example of perseverance and faith is the life of Celestine Onuka. While conducting interviews in Aba, Nigeria, I observed Brother Onuka as he studied the scriptures each day in the chapel. I was told that he was one of the first Nigerians to serve a mission, and now unemployed, he studies the scriptures daily to stay mentally and spiritually alert. Brother Onuka told me of his father, who died when he was seven. His father had taught him that he should get an education and become an engineer. Education became an obsession for him, though there was little to hope for because of his family's poverty. "I had faith. I had hope that I would finish secondary school, too. But how I was going to do that I did not know."

By working and saving in every way, Brother Onuka completed elementary school. But secondary school was a greater challenge—to attend he had to pay tuition approximately equivalent to a laborer's monthly salary. He would also have to walk six miles to school every day. As impossible as this seemed to him at age fifteen, Brother Onuka was determined to do it. He worked many jobs to buy a few books and a pen. Most books he borrowed from friends. Many days he didn't attend school so he could work. A family friend counseled him to get a steady job, but he said he must go to school. So his friend agreed to help him with his expenses. Brother Onuka was active in school: speech, debate, and choir. He rose to the top of his class. Then, his generous friend died and again Brother Onuka was discouraged and in despair. When he couldn't pay tuition, he was asked to leave the school. Some teachers pitied him and allowed him to stay in class, but others asked him to leave. When required to leave a class, Brother Onuka sat under the classroom window and listened, taking notes on the lectures. "I would not give up!" he declared. Through help from sympathetic administrators, teachers, and friends, he finished his final year of high school. His goal for his last year was to receive top grades on his final exams and thereby get a scholarship to a university—his only hope of attending. After writing the national exams, he felt he had done well, but the examining committee determined that a student from his school had cheated, and they disqualified all exams from his school. His hopes were dashed again.

Brother Onuka's interests changed from education to religion. Usually unemployed, he studied religions and the scriptures. He was disturbed by many teachings of churches that he felt did not agree with the Bible. Upon receiving a Book of Mormon, he read, felt its truthfulness, and asked to be baptized. At about this time, he found a copy of the Book of Mormon that had been read and marked by his father many years before. Along with it was correspondence from Church headquarters that revealed that his father had planned to join the Church and go to school in Utah.

Immediately after Brother Onuka's baptism he obtained a job, and about one year later, he was the second Nigerian to serve a full-time mission. As a missionary, he participated in more than seven hundred baptisms and helped to create entire branches. He spoke of his mission with deep emotion and love for the people and the work.

Although he had several jobs after his mission, he chose to quit those that took him away from Church activity. Now the ward clerk and music director of the Aba Ward, this valiant young man spends most days studying the scriptures alone in the chapel.

I asked Brother Onuka of his goal to become an engineer and of the future. He solemnly replied: "I do not know. No, I do not know. I really do not know. Education is one thing that I had hoped to have in my life, but I have tried. With all the money I have received, I have tried to get a good education. But I do not know. I want to have a good job and to get married but when I think about all I have tried, I become depressed. I don't want people seeing me depressed and thinking I am in the wrong church and that God is punishing me. I want them to see me as an example of God's church." Then, with tearful eyes he observed, "I want to be able to serve the Lord and do something for the dead—baptisms for the dead. I know my father loves me." After weeping for some time, he continued, "He loves me! I would like to be with him always." He sobbed uncontrollably, and concluded, "I would like to be with him anytime." I embraced Brother Onuka as we both wept. I felt to bless and assure him as well as encourage him. [^16]

Upon my return home from Africa, a letter from Brother Onuka was waiting for me. He happily shared the news that, the week following our interview, he was offered employment by a new convert to the Church who also agreed to train him as a surveyor, free of charge. Brother Onuka wrote, "I have started training and will graduate in about two and a half year's time."

Conclusion

A year before the establishment of the Lord's church in this dispensation, he assured the Saints, "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." (D&C 6:20.) Through his Book of Mormon prophet, the Lord also declared that "he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God." (2 Nephi 26:33.)

Indeed, there is abundant evidence of the Lord's love for the people of Africa and of his desire to bless these patient people. It is thrilling to see that they are beginning to have a vision of the important role that they must take in the Lord's kingdom, so recently established among them. This was illustrated through a dream related by Jude Inmpey of the Aba area of Nigeria. He dreamed that he observed a person playing an organ, which emitted a terrible sound. Upon investigating, he found the person was playing only the white keys. Some time later, in a Church gathering, he saw the interpretation of this dream as he related, "The Church has for many years played only the white keys on the keyboard, and now they're playing both the white and the black, and the music is much sweeter." [^17]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "All Are Alike unto God," A Symposium on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), p. 4.
[^2] Document on file with author.
[^3] Document on file with author.
[^4] Copy of letter on file with author.
[^5] Copy of letter on file with author.
[^6] Oral history on file with author.
[^7] See David F. Boone, "Prepared for the Restoration," Ensign, Dec. 1984, pp. 17-21.
[^8] Oral history on file with author.
[^9] Oral history on file with author.
[^10] World Fact Book 1987 (Washington, D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency, 1987).
[^11] Oral history on file with author.
[^12] Oral history on file with author.
[^13] Oral history on file with author.
[^14] Oral history on file with author.
[^15] Oral history on file with author.
[^16] Oral history on file with author.
[^17] Oral history on file with author.
