Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Eleven

The Doctrine and Covenants Leads Us to Christ

Robert England Lee

Curriculum Writer, Church Educational System Salt Lake City, Utah

Sometime during the summer of 1828, the Lord taught the Prophet Joseph a doctrine, which He called "my doctrine." Even though this doctrine was taught before the Church was formally organized, it states, "Whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me, the same is my church." (D&C 10:67.)

The Savior clarified this doctrine somewhat in 1831 when he told us how we can know if a person has repented. "By this ye may know," said he, "if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43.) Yet, in all the Doctrine and Covenants, there is no succinct definition of the expression "come unto Christ." The Lord has not said, "By this you may know if a man cometh to Christ. . . . " It is my feeling that he has offered a definition of "come unto Christ" within the holy scriptures. I believe that there are elements of the definition of "come unto Christ" lying before us as we read the scriptures, but we must seek for them before we find them.

The Lord declared, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that, "this rest is of such perfection and glory, that man has need of a preparation before he can . . . enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938], p. 54.)

The rest offered by the Lord comes to us when we obey his counsel and keep his commandments, or, in other words, when we come unto him. We can therefore assume that the counsel and commandments of the Lord, as found in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants, constitute a definition of the expression "come unto Christ." We may read the Doctrine and Covenants and translate the counsel and commandments of the Lord into a "come unto Christ statement"; then, we may evaluate our lives in the light of our findings. Our evaluation of our lives will be based upon what the Lord expects and not upon what the world expects. Once we have evaluated our lives, we will be inclined to repent and come unto Christ and be his church. We will therefore examine the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants with the specific purpose in mind of learning principles relative to our coming to Christ.

Before we begin our search, however, we will briefly explore the Doctrine and Covenants to learn who Christ is. On several occasions the Lord has used titles to describe himself and his relationship to God, to us, and to the world. Insofar as his relationship with God is concerned, he is "the Son of the living God" (D&C 14:9), "the Firstborn" (D&C 93:21), "the Son of Man" (D&C 61:38), and "Son Ahman" (D&C 78:20).

To us as individuals, he is "the Lord thy God" (D&C 10:15), "your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer" (D&C 27:1), "thy Savior" (D&C 19:41), "your Maker" (D&C 30:2), and "your advocate" (D&C 62:1).

Relative to the world, he is "the Redeemer of the world" (D&C 19:1) and "the Savior of the world" (D&C 43:34). He is "Alpha and Omega, . . . the beginning and the end" (D&C 19:1), "the Lord of Sabaoth, . . . the creator of the first day" (D&C 95:7), "the Lord" (D&C 44:1), "the Lord Almighty" (D&C 84:118), "the Most High God" (D&C 39:19), "the Holy One of Zion" (D&C 78:15), "the Mighty One of Israel" (D&C 36:1), "the Lord God of hosts" (D&C 56:10), "the Spirit of truth" (D&C 93:26). He is "the Bridegroom" (D&C 33:17; 65:3; 88:92), "the good shepherd" (D&C 50:44), "the stone of Israel" (D&C 50:44), "the Great I Am" (D&C 39:1), "Endless" (D&C 19:10), "he who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman" (D&C 78:15), "he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt" (D&C 136:22), "the light which shineth in darkness" (D&C 10:58), and "the life and the light of the world" (D&C 11:28).

With this clearer picture of the Savior in mind, we turn to the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants to learn what it means to come to Christ. We will not examine all the counsel and commandments given by the Lord in this book of scripture. Rather, we will examine the directives given to a portion of a group of people known as the members of the Church.

Just as the Lord refers to himself by different titles, even so, in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord calls his people, the members of the Church, by different titles. We shall look at some of these titles and examine what the Lord says to and about these people. We will assume that what he asks them to do is calculated to bring them to Christ. We will therefore examine what the Lord asks these people to do and translate those instructions into actions performed by one who is striving to come to Christ. Then, we will search the scriptures to verify that living these instructions will bring us to Christ.

The titles of the Lord's people that we will examine are "the church," "the elect," "the people of the Lord," "the sons of God," and "saints."

The Church

"The church," as we shall use the term, is a title sometimes used by the Lord when referring to the members of the Church as a whole. Each use of the term "the church" as it appears in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants will be examined to determine what "the church" does to demonstrate that it is coming to Christ. Those of "the church" who are striving to come to Christ "take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation." (D&C 20:33.) They meet together often to partake of the sacrament in remembrance of the Lord Jesus. (D&C 20:75.) They give heed to all the words of the prophet and walk in holiness before God. (D&C 21:4.) They sustain those among them who have been appointed to care for the poor and the needy. (D&C 38:34-35.) They repent of their sins. (D&C 63:63.) They assist and support the families of those who have been called to preach the gospel to the world. (D&C 75:24.) They have respect or reverence for the name of the Supreme Being. (D&C 107:4.) They uphold the First Presidency with their confidence, faith, and prayers. (D&C 107:22.)

In connection with the title "the church," there is an emphasis on prayer and brotherhood that is not associated with other titles. Do the scriptures validate the assumption that prayer and brotherhood will lead us to Christ?

In 4 Nephi we learn that after the appearance of Christ among the Nephites, "the disciples of Jesus had formed a church of Christ in all the lands round about." (4 Nephi 1:1.) Those who belonged to the church of Christ came to these disciples, repented, were baptized, and received the Holy Ghost. (4 Nephi 1:1.) They had no contentions or other forms of wickedness among them. (4 Nephi 1:15-17.) Mighty miracles were performed among them. (4 Nephi 1:5.) Mormon indicates why this condition existed when he says, "They did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord." (4 Nephi 1:12.)

Of them Mormon said, "Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. . . . they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God." (4 Nephi 1:16-17.) They demonstrated for us how "the church" comes to Christ. By contrast, when they became lifted up in pride and divided into social classes, they denied the true church of Christ and "the more parts of his gospel," and Satan "did get hold upon their hearts." (4 Nephi 1:27-28.)

The Lord declared to "the church" in this dispensation, "Whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church to the end, him will I establish upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them." (D&C 10:69.)

The Elect

Our examination reveals that the "elect," and therefore those who are striving to come to Christ, hear the voice of the Lord and do not harden their hearts. (D&C 29:7.) They believe in Christ and hearken to his voice. (D&C 33:6.) They magnify their callings. (D&C 84:33.) They are on guard concerning their own lives and give diligent heed to the words of eternal life. (D&C 84:43.) They live by every word that comes forth from the mouth of God. (D&C 84:44.) The "elect" of God are sensitive to the word of the Lord which comes from his voice. They hear, and hearken, and heed, and live by the words which come from his mouth.

Again we look to the scriptures to seek confirmation that such behavior will lead us to Christ. We look at Nephi, in the Book of Mormon. When he returned to the land of Jerusalem to obtain the brass plates, he was "led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which [he] must do." (1 Nephi 4:6.) He was "constrained by the Spirit" (1 Nephi 4:10), and he "did obey the voice of the Spirit" (1 Nephi 4:18). This is the pattern he followed in his relationship with the Lord throughout his life. In his parting testimony he revealed the motto by which he lived: "Thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey." (2 Nephi 33:15.) Nephi saw the Lord, and received great revelations concerning the future, and he obtained the land of promise the Lord had reserved for him. Furthermore, he promised us that we will see him as we stand before the judgment bar of God. (2 Nephi 33:11.) He followed the pattern of those called the "elect" and came unto Christ.

Of the "elect" in the last days the Lord declared, "They will hear my voice, and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am pure." (D&C 35:21.)

The People of the Lord

The title "people of the Lord" appears only once, as such, in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is used in the first verse of the revelation recorded in section 63. In this revelation the Lord addresses those who call themselves the people of the Lord. From this revelation we learn that there is a difference between people calling themselves the people of the Lord and actually being his people. The Lord indicates that among those who call themselves "the people of the Lord" there are those who have turned away from the commandments and have not kept them. Of those people, the Lord says, "Let such beware and repent speedily, lest judgment shall come upon them as a snare, and their folly shall be made manifest, and their works shall follow them in the eyes of the people." (D&C 63:15.)

The revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants declare that to be the people of the Lord, we must be striving to come to Christ and refrain from seeking after signs and wonders to sustain our faith. Rather, we must seek for the glory of God to be made manifest to mankind through signs and wonders. (D&C 63:12.) We will keep the commandments. (D&C 63:13.) We will not commit adultery, even in our hearts; therefore, we will not lose the Spirit, but we will keep the faith, and will not fear. (D&C 63:14, 16.) We will believe. We will be honest. We will not love and make a lie. We will not be whoremongers or sorcerers. (D&C 63:17.) We will endure in faith and do the will of the Lord. (D&C 63:20.) As the people of the Lord we will be virtuous and honest in our dealings with each other and with God. To be worthy of this title today we must be out of step with the commonly accepted practices of the world. Will such behavior lead us to Christ?

In the Book of Mormon we read of Ammon, a missionary to the Lamanites. I believe he was one who possessed great virtue and honesty. His motivation to preach the gospel sprang from a sincere desire to serve the Lord. He faithfully defended the king's flocks, when lesser men would have made excuses and run away. He took no glory to himself when great miracles were performed in his behalf. King Lamoni was astonished by the great physical and spiritual power Ammon possessed, but "he was more astonished, because of the faithfulness of Ammon," because "he doth remember all my commandments to execute them." (Alma 18:10.) Ammon revealed the mystery of the Great Spirit to King Lamoni. Furthermore, "he began at the creation of the world, and also the creation of Adam, and told him all things concerning the fall of man, and rehearsed and laid before him the records and the holy scriptures of the people." (Alma 18:36.) Ammon's efforts resulted in many souls' being brought to Christ, and the Church was established among Lamoni's people.

Of Ammon and his brothers Mormon declares: "They had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God. . . . They had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God." (Alma 17:2-3.) Such were the power and the example of Ammon that those who were converted by his preaching "never did fall away." (Alma 23:6.) Mormon declares Ammon to be a man of God. (Alma 48:18.) Ammon followed the pattern of all those who are called the "people of the Lord" and came unto Christ.

To the people of the Lord, the promise is given that they "shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of transfiguration shall come." (D&C 63:20.) Unto them shall the mysteries of the kingdom of God be revealed, which mysteries shall become for them "a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life." (D&C 63:23.)

The Sons of God

The title "sons of God" is frequently associated with the future. It is generally a title yet to be bestowed. In the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord gives men power to become the sons of God when certain conditions are met. The only time that the term is used in the present tense is in the vision of the three degrees of glory, found in section 76: "Wherefore, . . . they are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:58; italics added.) Those who are familiar with the context of this statement recognize that we are reading of those "who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just" (D&C 76:50; italics added.) Therefore, it too has a strong orientation toward the future.

Those who are striving to come to Christ, and therefore those who will receive the power to become the sons of God, must receive a testimony of Christ and believe on his name. (D&C 11:30; 34:3; 35:2; 45:8; 76:51.) In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord never mentions this title without also listing these qualifications. In section 76 the Lord indicates how one manifests that he has received the testimony of Christ and that he believes on Christ's name. He is baptized after the manner of the burial of Christ. He is "buried" in the water in the name of Christ. (D&C 76:51.) He keeps the commandments and receives the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands by one who has authority. (D&C 76:52.) And he overcomes the world by faith. (D&C 76:53.)

The title "sons of God" is more closely linked to receiving a testimony of Jesus and manifesting it through faithfulness and the reception of ordinances than any other title used by the Lord when referring to his people. We will look to the scriptures once again to verify our assumption that this behavior will lead us to Christ.

The people of Alma, who gathered at the waters of Mormon, possessed the qualities we have described. They received a testimony of Jesus and the saving ordinances. They kept the commandment given to them by Alma that they should "look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another. . . . And thus," Mormon declares, "they became the children of God." (Mosiah 18:21-22.)

The Lord revealed to Moses that Adam was baptized and that the Spirit of God descended upon him and he was born of the Spirit. Afterward, "he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever;

"And thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity.

"Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. Amen.

" . . . Behold, our father Adam taught these things, and many have believed and become the sons of God, and many have believed not, and have perished in their sins, and are looking forth with fear, in torment, for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God to be poured out upon them." (Moses 6:66-68; 7:1.)

Speaking of the sons of God, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever." (D&C 76:62.)

Relative to those who could have become the sons of God but do not, the Prophet Joseph revealed that they are people "who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it. These are they who are the honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men. . . . These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (D&C 76:74-75, 79.)

Saint

Jacob, the brother of Nephi, provides us with a poignant definition of a saint. He declares saints to be "they who have believed in the Holy One of Israel, they who have endured the crosses of the world, and despised the shame of it." (2 Nephi 9:18.)

How do saints demonstrate that they are striving to come to Christ?

During an earlier time in the Church, they assembled themselves to the land of Zion (D&C 63:24, 36); now, they assemble themselves to those places appointed by the Lord through his prophet (D&C 125:2). They keep the commandments and hearken to observe all the words which the Lord speaks to them. (D&C 103:7-8.) They are a light to the world and the saviors of men. (D&C 103:9.) They impart of their substance to the poor and the needy among them. (D&C 105:3.) They build temples and are baptized for the dead and participate in all the ordinances associated with the temple. (D&C 124:29-40.)

The title "saint" is used by the Lord when he addresses the members of the Church in the revelation called the Word of Wisdom. (D&C 89.) This revelation shows the "order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days." (D&C 89:2; italics added.) The Lord also indicates that it is within the capacity of all those who can be called saints to obey this law. (D&C 89:3.) Therefore, those who are called saints, and those who are striving to come to Christ, will not drink wine or strong drinks. (D&C 89:5.) They will use tobacco only for the healing of cattle, and they will not take hot drinks into their bodies. (D&C 89:8-9.) They will use wholesome herbs with prudence and thanksgiving. (D&C 89:11.) They will eat the flesh of beasts and fowl sparingly, and with thanksgiving, in times of winter, cold, famine, or excess of hunger. (D&C 89:12-15.) They will eat grain, fruits, and vegetables. (D&C 89:14-16.) They will remember to keep and do these sayings, and they will walk in obedience to the commandments. (D&C 89:18.)

Those whom the Lord calls "saints" manifest that they are striving to come to Christ by the spiritual nature of the actions which flow from them and by the physical nourishment which they take in. We will search the scriptures to see if such behavior will lead us to Christ.

Daniel, the Old Testament prophet, and his friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah elected not to defile themselves with the meat and wine of the king. Therefore their "countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat." (Daniel 1:15.) The Lord gave them "knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom." (Daniel 1:17.) King Nebuchadnezzar found them to be "in all matters of wisdom and understanding . . . ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm." (Daniel 1:20.)

Later, Daniel's friends were asked to defile themselves spiritually by bowing down to a false god. This they also refused to do. As a result they were cast into a fiery furnace. Yet, when the king who had condemned them looked into the furnace, he exclaimed, "Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God." (Daniel 3:25.) They lived as saints, striving to come to Christ; he came to them and delivered them from destruction.

Those who are worthy of the title "saint" in this dispensation "shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones; and shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures; and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint." Furthermore, the Lord promises the saints "that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them." (D&C 89:18-21.)

Traditionally, we have associated this deliverance from destruction as a promise of good health. While that is a significant part of the promise associated with the Word of Wisdom, there may be a larger meaning to the promise as it applies to saints. That larger meaning is understood when we examine the prophecy in section 45.

Concerning the destruction of the wicked prior to his second coming, the Lord declared, "But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud.

"Wherefore, if ye have slept in peace blessed are you; for as you now behold me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me and your souls shall live, and your redemption shall be perfected; and the saints shall come forth from the four quarters of the earth.

"Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations." (D&C 45:45-47.)

Relative to the blessings that await the saints, Jacob, the brother of Nephi, declared, "They shall inherit the kingdom of God, which was prepared for them from the foundation of the world, and their joy shall be full forever." (2 Nephi 9:18.)

Summary

We have read the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants to learn what it means to come to Christ, and we have verified from the scriptures that we can come to Christ by following the counsel and commandments found in these revelations. Our answer is not complete because we did not examine every commandment given to every person or group mentioned in the document. But we have explored a way to study the Doctrine and Covenants, which will bless our lives as we apply that which we learn.

It is my belief that the Lord has given us these sacred writings for the purpose of teaching us how we come to him. Consider the statement made by the Savior to the Jews, relative to the scriptures available to them in their day: "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life." (John 5:39-40; italics added.)

The Lord taught the Jews of his day that, despite what they thought, they were not saved by the scriptures. They were saved as they used what they learned from the scriptures to come to Christ. It cannot be any different today. We are not saved according to our knowledge of the scriptures. Only insofar as we use that knowledge to come unto Christ will we have eternal life.

There are no references in the Old or the New Testament that contain the admonition from the Lord, or anyone else, to "repent and come unto Christ." That coming to Christ is inextricably tied to true repentance is clearly taught only in the Book of Mormon, in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants, and in the words of the living prophets. I believe that it is one of the "plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back." (1 Nephi 13:32.)

As we review the words of the Lord on this matter, notice the tandem nature of these principles. The resurrected Savior taught the Nephites:

"Whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved." (3 Nephi 9:22; italics added.)

"I have given you the law and the commandments of my Father, . . . that ye shall repent of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (3 Nephi 12:19; italics added.)

"Ye shall not cast [a man who is unworthy] out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them." (3 Nephi 18:32; italics added.)

To those of our generation who are the church, the elect, the people of the Lord, the sons of God, and saints, the Savior says:

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

"For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him.

"And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance.

"And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!

"Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people.

"And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D&C 18:10-15; italics added.)

Therefore, search the scriptures, for they truly testify of Christ. And they will tell us how to come to him and show us how to bring others to him. And if we apply what the scriptures teach, we shall have eternal life.
