Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Twelve

What Is the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times?

Robert J. Matthews

Dean of Religious Education Brigham Young University

I am happy to be associated with this great effort that takes place each year to honor Dr. Sidney B. Sperry and to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ. I want to present a doctrinal dimension to the story of the restoration of the gospel, which began with the personal appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith in the sacred grove near Palmyra, New York, in 1820. We will discuss the ministry of angels in the literal establishment of the kingdom of God on the earth. That is what the Prophet Joseph Smith has called "the established order of the kingdom of God."

For this presentation I alone am responsible. I do not speak for the Church or for the university. I will quote numerous authorities and passages of scripture and endeavor to quote them correctly and in the proper context. I fully believe the doctrine to be true and correct, yet the arrangement and presentation are my own.

"As a Babe upon Its Mother's Lap"

We will begin with the words of President Wilford Woodruff, speaking in the sixty-eighth general conference of the Church, 8 April 1898. He was telling of a meeting that had been held in Kirtland, Ohio, sixty-four years earlier, on Sunday, 27 April 1834:

"I arrived in Kirtland on Saturday and there met with Joseph and Hyrum Smith in the street. I was introduced to Joseph Smith. It was the first time that I had ever seen him in my life. He invited me home to spend the Sabbath with him, and I did so. They had meeting on Sunday.

"On Sunday night the Prophet called on all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland, and who had gathered together to go off in Zion's camp. That was the first time I ever saw Oliver Cowdery, or heard him speak; the first time I ever saw Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, and the two Pratts, and Orson Hyde and many others. There were no Apostles in the Church then except Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. When we got together the Prophet called upon the Elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. Those that I have named spoke, and a good many that I have not named, bore their testimonies. When they got through the Prophet said, 'Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it.' I was rather surprised. He said, 'it is only a little handfull of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world.' " [^1]

We are witnessing today the worldwide expansion of the Church. It has covered a great area in North and South America and is reaching throughout the world. Wherever a temple is built, that is a reliable indicator that the gospel has taken root and that the Church is stable in that particular area. Today, besides the many temples in North and South America, there are Latter-day Saint temples in England, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, South Africa, the Philippines, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, New Zealand, Australia, Tahiti, Tonga, Samoa, and Hawaii. And we are just getting started with a worldwide dispensation of the gospel. It is 169 years since Joseph Smith received his first vision, yet in many parts of the world, expansion of the Church has come in just the last few decades. This is the dispensation of the fulness of times—the last of many dispensations that first began with father Adam. This time the gospel and the kingdom are going to stay upon the earth, and this time the eternal purposes of the Lord pertaining to the salvation of the human family on this earth are going to be fulfilled.

While there are many things we do not know, we do not need to remain in the same condition as those of whom the Prophet Joseph spoke, as knowing little more than "babes upon their mother's lap." That was in 1834. The Lord has revealed much since then, and we have seen a number of things unfold pertaining to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

The Established Order of the Kingdom of God

One of the fundamental concepts of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that there is an established, revealed order, or system, for doing gospel things. We have it as a basic principle that all blessings are governed by law. Both the earth and the heavens are governed by law—divine law, instituted by the Lord himself.

I will read an excerpt from a sermon delivered by the Prophet Joseph Smith at the funeral of James Adams, 9 October 1843:

"The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. . . .

"I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer. The Hebrew Church 'came unto the spirits of just men made perfect and unto an innumerable company of angels, unto God the Father of all, and to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new covenant.' . . . What object was gained by this communication with the spirits of the just? It was the established order of the kingdom of God: The keys of power and knowledge were with them to communicate to the Saints." [^2]

The Prophet spoke several times about "fixed principles." You noted that term in the quotation just given. In the same address he uses the term at least two more times, and he also uses it in other discourses. [^3]

These words from the Prophet Joseph extend our understanding of some earlier statements found in the Doctrine and Covenants.

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

And also:

"For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. . . .

"Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

"Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

"Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

"And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

"I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. . . .

"I am the Lord thy God, and will give unto thee the law of my Holy Priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was." (D&C 132:5, 8-12, 28.)

Even a casual look at these passages is sufficient to inform us that the Lord works by the law that he and his Father ordained and established before the creation of this earth. The angels obey and are governed by such laws, and man also is obligated to obey these divine laws that are older than the world is old, if he wants the blessing. That is the plain meaning of these declarations. The Lord is not adding to or changing the plan of salvation. There are no bargain days, no special sales, no days for double coupons. The plan of redemption through the gospel and its ordinances has always been the same.

The Lord has a plan, an order, a system for the salvation of the human family. It is an old plan, an ancient plan, an eternal plan. It was explained to us and implemented in the premortal life, and it has been introduced several times to mankind on the earth through chosen prophets beginning with father Adam. When the Lord Jesus Christ reveals his plan anew and confers his holy priesthood upon his prophets, that is called a dispensation of the gospel. Since the plan is older than the earth, there is no difficulty or problem in the Lord revealing the entire plan to the ancient prophets, beginning with Adam. The Lord has established and re-established gospel dispensations several times among people on the earth. Each dispensation endured for a while, and then each ceased to function on earth because of wickedness and unbelief. The last and final gospel dispensation has now been established, and it is destined to fill the whole earth. It is appropriately called the dispensation of the fulness of times, because it is a dispensation consisting of all previous dispensations plus some unique and particular things never accomplished before on the earth.

My presentation deals with these two questions: What is the dispensation of the fulness of times? and a related question, How was it established? The first question has been at least partially answered, and so I will turn to the second: How was the dispensation of the fulness of times established? We can almost answer that in one sentence: It was done by the prophets of former dispensations extending the gospel and priesthood they have to the prophets of the last dispensation. But we need to examine and discuss the details.

Forming a Colony

I have ofttimes thought of the establishment of a dispensation of the gospel on the earth as something like establishing a colony in a new land. When the European settlers came to America in the sixteenth century, they found a people already here (the American Indians, or Lamanites), but the settlers brought a different culture, a different mode of life, and new laws and authority. These settlers named their colonies after the places from whence they came, hence we had New England, New Holland, New France, and New Spain, etc. We still have New York, New Amsterdam, and New Orleans. A new culture became established among the previous occupants. It was really an old culture transplanted from Europe, but it was new to America in that generation.

In something of the same way, a new dispensation is brought about by angels from an older world coming to visit this world and calling upon new prophets, introducing what to the new prophets is a new culture, a new authority or priesthood, and new laws. These heavenly visitors have brought to earth a celestial priesthood, a celestial order of marriage and family, a celestial economic system, and a celestial social system. The parallel to a colony can be carried too far, but there are some similarities.

The dispensation of the fulness of times was established on this earth by heavenly messengers coming from another world, conferring their laws and doctrines and authority upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, thus initiating a new colony on the earth that represented and bore traces of the world from whence these angels came.

The ancient prophets who had been the leaders of their dispensations during earlier ages of the earth are angels now, and they minister to the current prophets on the earth. Although all are engaged in the same holy work of the Lord, these heavenly angels are not all alike and do not all come for the same precise and detailed purpose—some bring information, others bring keys and priesthood. But they are all engaged in the gospel of Jesus Christ. It makes a difference who is sent to do what. Our clue to understanding that is in becoming acquainted with the established order of the kingdom of God.

Who were the divine messengers who came to the Prophet Joseph Smith? We know of at least the following:

The Father and the Son. They initiated this dispensation and brought a correct knowledge of the Godhead. They removed all doubt that there is a God, that he hears and answers prayers, and that the Father and Son are two different, distinct persons.

The Angel Moroni. He brought forth the Book of Mormon—the stick of Ephraim.

John the Baptist. He restored the Aaronic Priesthood.

Peter, James, and John. They restored the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Moses. He brought the keys of the gathering of Israel.

Elias. He brought the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, thus establishing the patriarchal order of marriage and family.

Elijah. He brought the keys of sealing and turning the hearts of the children to the fathers and to the promises that had been made to the fathers.

No doubt Adam also came, and Enoch, Noah (Gabriel), and many others. We do not have the exact record, date, place, or occasion for some of these coming to Joseph Smith to extend to him their particular keys, but because we know the rules that govern the system, we know it has to be so.

What qualified each of these prophets to come to Joseph Smith and be the one to restore those particular keys and priesthood for this dispensation? First, they were chosen and ordained in the premortal life. Second, they were righteous and diligent in mortal life and held the keys in their day on earth. Third, they went into eternity still holding those keys and thus were appointed as angels, on an errand, to return and bestow their authority.

There seems to be another essential consideration also. When keys and priesthood are bestowed, two persons are always the recipients. In every documented case Oliver Cowdery was present with the Prophet Joseph Smith when priesthood and keys were restored. This is no doubt a demonstration of the law of witnesses. When the revelation is personal, or consists of information only, no such witness seems to be necessarily present.

In addition to the visits of those angels whom we have already mentioned, we are given a wider view by President John Taylor:

"If you were to ask Joseph what sort of a looking man Adam was, he would tell you at once; he would tell you his size and appearance and all about him. He would do the same about Peter, James, and John, because he had seen them." [^4]

"I know of what I speak for I was very well acquainted with him [Joseph Smith]. The principles which he had, placed him in communication with the Lord, and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent. He seemed to be as familiar with these people as we are with one another." [^5]

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

The dispensation of the fulness of times is a period of restoration and of gathering. It is the plan of Jesus Christ for completing the redemption of mankind and the earth. There are some very interesting statements in the scriptures on this subject:

First, from Peter, as recorded in Acts 3:20-21:

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

"Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began."

And from Paul to the Ephesians, 1:9-10:

"Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:

"That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him."

At the conclusion of the visits of Jesus Christ, Moses, Elias, and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple, Elijah said to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery: "Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands." (D&C 110:16.) And a few months later the Lord said to Thomas B. Marsh, president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles:

"For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

"Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation;

"For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you." (D&C 112:30-32.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D&C 128:18.)

Elder David W. Patten, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, wrote in July 1838:

"Now the thing to be known is, what the fullness of times means, or the extent or authority thereof. It means this, that the dispensation of the fullness of times is made up of all the dispensations that ever have been given since the world began, until this time. Unto Adam first was given a dispensation. . . . And unto Noah also was a dispensation given. . . . And from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Elias, and from Elias to John the Baptist, and from then to Jesus Christ, and from Jesus Christ to Peter, James, and John, the Apostles—all received in their time a dispensation by revelation from God, to accomplish the great scheme of restitution, spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began; the end of which is the dispensation of the fullness of times, in the which all things shall be fulfilled that have been spoken of since the earth was made.

" . . . this deliverer [Joseph Smith] must be clothed with the power of all the other dispensations, or his dispensation could not be called the dispensation of the fullness of times." [^6]

This dispensation therefore represents all other dispensations, and Elder Patten continues by saying if we treat lightly the calling of Joseph Smith we likewise "sin not against him only, but against Moroni, who holds the keys of the stick of Ephraim [Book of Mormon], and also Elias, who holds the keys of bringing to pass the restitution of all things, and also John . . . ; and also Elijah . . . ; and also Joseph and Jacob and Isaac and Abraham, your fathers, by whom the promises remain; and also Michael, or Adam, the Father of all, the Prince of all, the Ancient of Days; and also Peter and James and John. . . .

"Therefore, brethren, beware concerning yourselves, that you sin not against the authority of this dispensation, nor think lightly of those whom God has counted worthy for so great a calling." [^7]

Elder Patten's words bring us an awareness of the high calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and also of each of his successors, right down to President Ezra Taft Benson. It is not a matter of personality, or of popularity; it is not a charismatic thing, it is a matter of a man holding the keys of the priesthood and of being the Lord's anointed.

The saving principles and ordinances of the gospel are the same in every dispensation. We do not have any doctrines or ordinances in the Church today that have not been had at some time or other in the world in earlier dispensations. There are, however, some things to be accomplished in this dispensation that have not been done before, such as the building of the New Jerusalem, the second coming of the Savior, the Millennium, and the earth receiving its paradisiacal glory.

How many dispensations have there been? We often hear that there have been seven—Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Joseph Smith. This list is far too shallow. The seven are only a few of the dispensations mentioned in the Bible (what about Melchizedek, Elijah, John the Baptist?), and this list completely ignores what we know about the gospel being among the Nephites, the Jaredites, and the ten lost tribes. There have been many, many dispensations, and the dispensation of the fulness of times is a combination of them all.

The Heavenly Order of Priesthood

Since the ancient prophets are angels now, let us read some things about the order and the organization that exists among these celestial beings as they relate to the Church upon the earth.

First, from Elder Orson Pratt about the priesthood: "There are authorities in heaven as well as upon the earth, and the authorities in heaven are far greater in number than the few who are upon the earth. This [church] is only a little branch of the great tree of the priesthood—merely a branch receiving authority from heaven, so that the inhabitants of the earth may be benefited as well as the inhabitants of the eternal world; but the great trunk of the tree of the Priesthood is in heaven." [^8]

Now from the Prophet Joseph Smith: "[The Melchizedek priesthood] is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven.

"Its institution was prior to 'the foundation of this earth.' . . . It is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which He has continued to reveal Himself to the children of men to the present time, and through which He will make known His purposes to the end of time." [^9]

As to the special functions and powers of the priesthood, we read the following: "For him to whom these keys [of the Holy Priesthood] are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living." (D&C 128:11.)

The Special Status of Adam

The Prophet Joseph taught that Adam was not only the first man on the earth but also the first in a lot of other things. He was the first prophet for Jesus Christ. These are the words of Joseph Smith: "Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth." [^10]

Adam presides over all of the dispensations: "Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. . . .

"Now the purpose in [God] in the winding up scene of the last dispensation is that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations.

"And again, God purposed in Himself that there should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus; therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. . . .

"These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord." [^11]

"Moses sought to bring the children of Israel into the presence of God, through the power of the Priesthood, but he could not. In the first ages of the world they tried to establish the same thing; and there were Eliases raised up who tried to restore these very glories, but did not obtain them; but they prophesied of a day when this glory would be revealed. Paul spoke of the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God would gather together all things in one, etc.; and those men to whom these keys have been given, will have to be there; and they without us cannot be made perfect.

"These men are in heaven, but their children are on the earth. Their bowels yearn over us. God sends down men for this reason. . . . All these authoritative characters will come down and join hand in hand in bringing about this work." [^12]

"There has been a chain of authority and power from Adam down to the present time." [^13]

In view of what we have just read, we ask ourselves these questions: Who sent John the Baptist to Joseph Smith? Answer: Adam. Who sent Peter, James, John, Moroni, Elijah, Moses, and all the others to Joseph Smith? The answer is the same: Adam. Who sent angels to minister in any age of the world? Who sent Moses and Elijah to the Mount of Transfiguration? It has to have been Adam, or someone acting under his direction. Adam holds all of the keys, and keys are the directing power. In every dispensation Adam reveals the gospel of Jesus Christ, or he sends someone to do it. He is the father of the human family and wants as many of his children saved as possible. Since there is no salvation outside of Jesus Christ, every dispensation is a gospel dispensation. All of the prophets and all of the angels are servants of Jesus Christ.

When we see the relationship between the dispensations as explained by the Prophet Joseph and that all are conducted on the same plan, we come to the conclusion that all of the former dispensations were open-ended. That is, they had a starting point but have not had a closing date as such. They ceased to function on earth because of apostasy, but the work of the earlier dispensations is not yet ended. The leaders of each dispensation, still holding the keys, have come back again to continue their work, until "the Great Jehovah says the work is done." In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "As rivers flow into an ocean, all the dispensations of the past flow into this final great dispensation." [^14] In the meantime, those who held the keys and were once mortal prophets are continuing their work on the other side of the veil, in the spirit world, or elsewhere as translated beings or as resurrected beings.

Continuing with the words of the Prophet Joseph, we learn that Adam holds the keys of the First Presidency: "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. . . .

"The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority.

" . . . He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council.

" . . . He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship, and they to him." [^15]

That Adam held the keys of the First Presidency was the subject of remarks by Elder Mark E. Petersen at the Mexico City Conference, 26 August 1972:

"Now tonight we had the prophet of the Church visit us. Do you know how much authority the President of the Church holds? Let us think for a moment about the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet Joseph Smith was ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood by whom?

"Answer: John the Baptist.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith an apostle was ordained by whom?

"Answer: Peter, James, and John.

"Joseph Smith then was ordained an apostle by Peter, James, and John. This was part of his ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood, but other men also came and ordained Joseph to other powers. Can you tell us, any one, what other angels came and ordained Joseph Smith to certain powers?

"Answer: Moses and Elijah, the prophet.

"Who else? What angels came? We have Moses and Elijah, and Elias, and who else?

"Answer: Adam.

"What power did Adam bring back to Joseph Smith.

"(No answer) Then I will tell you. Adam brought the keys of the First Presidency. Joseph Smith received the keys of the First Presidency from Adam, who came back and visited him. Joseph Smith received the power of the gathering of Israel through Moses, who came back to see him. Elijah brought back the powers that we use in connection with our temple work." [^16]

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote:

"The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. . . .

"How have we come at the Priesthood in the last days? It came down, down, in regular succession. Peter, James, and John had it given to them and they gave it to others. Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [^17]

"This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency of them all, even Adam; and Adam receiving his Presidency and authority from the Lord." [^18]

These clear and direct statements about Adam's special status are in complete harmony with yet another declaration found in D&C 78:16 that Adam holds the keys of salvation:

"[The Lord] hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life."

The Special Status of Noah (Gabriel)

The Prophet Joseph had some special things to say about the great prophet Noah: "Noah, who is Gabriel . . . stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the dominion." [^19] Noah was like a second Adam, the father of all living in his day after the Flood. Doctrine and Covenants 27:6-7 states that a prophet named Elias holds the keys of "bringing to pass the restoration of all things" in the last days. This Elias is further identified as the angel who visited Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, and gave him promise of a son (as recorded in Luke 1). Since Luke identifies this angel as Gabriel, and Gabriel is Noah, we conclude that the Elias of Doctrine and Covenants 27 is Noah. It therefore appears that Noah has a major role, under Adam, in bringing about the restoration of the gospel in the fulness of times. That is, Noah, as well as Adam, is closely linked with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Again from the Prophet Joseph: "[Jehovah talked with Noah] in a familiar and friendly manner, that He continued to him the keys, the covenants, the power and the glory, with which He blessed Adam at the beginning; . . . for all the ordinances and duties that ever have been required by the Priesthood, under the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensation, therefore all things had under the authority of the Priesthood at any former period, shall be had again, bringing to pass the restoration spoken of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets." [^20]

These teachings from the Prophet show us an order, a priesthood organization in the heavens, and they explain to us the doctrinal background of the Church and the dispensation in which we live. These things give us a perspective on the work of the Lord in our own day.

Differences between Angels and Spirits

We have said quite a lot about angels and the priesthood order that exists among them, but we have not dealt with the different levels among the angels. The word angel means a messenger and is often used to refer to any heavenly messenger, but in the strict sense, an angel is a resurrected or translated being with a body.

There are also ministering spirits, who are not tabernacled with a body of flesh and bones—for example, those who have passed through mortality and are awaiting the resurrection. It appears from what has been revealed that if priesthood or keys are to be conferred, a resurrected or translated being is employed because of the laying on of hands, whereas spirits can convey knowledge but cannot lay on hands. Such is the fundamental principle of Doctrine and Covenants 129, which first defines an angel as having a tangible body as contrasted to a spirit, and then indicates that mortals could not feel the physical touch of a spirit, therefore righteous spirits will not attempt to touch a mortal. Hence a mortal could not be ordained by a spirit, but either an angel or a spirit could deliver a message. Because of the necessity for the laying on of hands, we can thus discern that John the Baptist, Peter, James, John, Moses, Elias, Elijah, and any others who conferred priesthood and keys on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were tabernacled beings and not merely spirits.

We return again to the Prophet Joseph, who spoke of the distinction of missions, or assignments, between angels and spirits:

"Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire and glory. Angels have advanced further, their light and glory being tabernacled; and hence they appear in bodily shape. . . .

" . . . Angels have advanced higher in knowledge and power than spirits." [^21]

Joseph Smith "explained the difference between an angel and a ministering spirit; the one a resurrected or translated body, with its spirit ministering to embodied spirits—the other a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits. Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while His body was lying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part of His mission, without which He could not have perfected His work, or entered into His rest. After His resurrection He appeared as an angel to His disciples.

" . . . Jesus Christ went in body after His resurrection, to minister to resurrected bodies." [^22]

The Prophet Joseph thus taught that there is an order that must be observed in the teaching of the gospel. That is, the general pattern is for mortals to teach mortals, spirits to teach spirits, and resurrected beings to minister among other resurrected beings. Only when there is no available mortal with the priesthood does an angel come from heaven to confer it or to teach the gospel. There is a law that governs who is assigned to preach to whom.

This law does not imply that angels or spirits do not minister to mortals, but only that such ministering would be the exception, when there is no mortal who can do what is needed. These basic principles seem to pertain to the preaching of the first principles to mankind, and not to pertaining to the prophets of God receiving guidance and direction from the Lord, from angels, and so on.

The Prophet Joseph Smith indicated still further that the order of heaven is that mortals will receive the gospel from mortals: "No wonder the angel told good old Cornelius that he must send for Peter to learn how to be saved: Peter could baptise, and angels could not, so long as there were legal officers in the flesh holding the keys of the kingdom, or the authority of the priesthood. There is one evidence still further on this point, and that is that Jesus himself when he appeared to Paul on his way to Damascus, did not inform him how he could be saved. He had set in the church first Apostles, and secondly prophets, for the . . . grand rule of heaven was that nothing should ever be done on earth without revealing the secret to his servants the prophets, agreeably to Amos 3:7, so Paul could not learn so much from the Lord relative to his duty in the common salvation of man, as he could from one of Christ's ambassadors called with the same heavenly calling of the Lord, and endowed with the same power from on high." [^23]

This concept is in harmony with the parable in Luke 16 in which the rich man died and went to hell and asked for someone to come back from the dead and warn his five brothers before they died, lest they too come to that place. Father Abraham said they would be taught on earth by "Moses and the prophets." But Lazarus insisted it would be better if someone rose from the dead to teach them. Whereupon, in the parable, Abraham said: "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." (Luke 16:26-30.)

Some Missionaries in the Spirit World

We generally have supposed that soon after Jesus' resurrection, all of the righteous spirits in the spirit world were also resurrected; however, we may need to look at this supposition a little closer. Since there is a principle that spirits preach to spirits, I take it that not every one of the righteous spirits was resurrected immediately after Jesus was resurrected. Most of them, yes, but apparently not all. We have learned from Doctrine and Covenants 138 that between the time of his death and the time of his resurrection, Jesus went in spirit to the world of spirits. He did not go personally among the wicked in the spirit world but instead spent the time ministering among the righteous spirits, organizing a mission in the spirit world for them to preach to those in the spirit prison. Jesus' spirit thereafter returned to his dead body, and he became the first resurrected being on this earth. If all of the righteous were resurrected immediately after Jesus, the spirit world mission would essentially have been disorganized. It is my opinion that a few stalwart, righteous men and women spirits were asked to postpone their resurrection for a short time in order to conduct their missions in the spirit world among those in prison. It would not be very long before recruits would come from the earth, from among the Jewish, Nephite, and Ten Tribe churches which Jesus had established on earth. Stephen, James, and many others would soon be available to take up their labors in the spirit world. I don't know of any revelation that says that this is not so, and I believe this conclusion is entirely consistent with the known laws that govern the preaching of the gospel.

The Angels at the Tomb

One more application of these principles. Who were the two angels who came to the tomb at Jesus' resurrection? Although they are nowhere named in scripture, we are not without information on the matter. Things are done according to law and order in the priesthood. The resurrection of Jesus from the dead is the greatest event that occurred on this earth since the creation and fall of man. In the King James Version of the Bible, Matthew and Mark say there was one angel at the tomb. Luke and John say "two angels." The Joseph Smith Translation uniformly reads two angels in all four of the Gospels. (See JST Matthew 28:2-5; Mark 16:3-6.) This is a strong suggestion that these two angels came as witnesses of Christ's resurrection. Who among all the hosts of heaven deserved such a privilege? Surely not just anyone would be so selected and chosen. There is an ancient tradition in early Christianity that the two angels were Michael and Gabriel. That to us means Adam and Noah. When we consider that Adam is the chief angel, the Archangel, and that Noah stands next to Adam, it is easy for me to be comfortable with this identification of the two angels.

Of what form would they be? Jesus was already resurrected at the time. The stone needed to be rolled away, not to let Jesus out, but to let mortals in to observe that Jesus was not there. Who would deserve to be among the first to rise from the dead, after Jesus? No doubt Adam and Noah. They could be freshly resurrected, just after the Savior, and could come to the tomb to roll the stone away and announce to the women, to Peter, John, and others that Jesus was risen from the dead.

Conclusion: Light and Darkness

All that we have read today teaches us that there is "an established order in the kingdom of God," whether that kingdom is on earth or in heaven. I will cite again for emphasis a statement from the Prophet quoted earlier:

"The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth." [^24]

When we contemplate the heavenly order of things with its intelligence, purpose, and light, as it has been given to us in the dispensation of the fulness of times, and contrast that with the confusion, disorder, contention, and lack of vision found among man-made organizations on the earth, we can appreciate the need for the gospel of Jesus Christ to be taught carefully to all men and women everywhere.

The world is in spiritual darkness. We can plainly see that as yet the dispensation of the fulness of times, with its celestial laws and promises and celestial authority, is still but a system of colonies in a strange earth among people with different laws and customs who have not yet learned of the established order of heaven. Who cannot see that those mortals who are limited to the secular and religious beliefs of the world, great as they may be, are "as babes upon their mothers' laps" with respect to the scope, the plan, the order, and the purposes of Jesus Christ manifested in the dispensation of the fulness of times. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the kingdom of God on the earth in the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] At the age of sixty-five Enoch was called of God to cry repentance to a wicked people. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 160.
[^2] Though shy, hesitant, and slow of speech, Enoch was given divine assurance and promised great power: "Behold my spirit is upon you, wherefore all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me." (JST Genesis 6:36.) Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957), 1:131-33.
[^3] Enoch became a seer and was given a knowledge of "things which were not visible to the natural eye." (JST Genesis 6:38.) Steven L. Olsen, "Zion: The Structure of a Theological Revolution," Sunstone, vol. 6, no. 6 (November-December 1981), pp. 24-25.
[^4] Enoch's preaching led many people to repent. The city became so righteous that "the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness." Further, "the fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people." (JST Genesis 7:20-21.) Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), p. 415; spelling and punctuation standardized.
[^5] Enoch established an economic order for the poor and needy. "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." The city of Enoch came to be known as "the City of Holiness, even Zion." (JST Genesis 7:23, 25.) Ibid., p. 363; spelling and punctuation standardized. See also Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 362.
[^6] Enoch saw in vision a future day when the "elect" would be gathered to a "Holy City," a latter-day community that "shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem." (JST Genesis 7:70.) Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, F. D. Richards & Sons, 1855-86), 13:138; see also 2:57, 60; 11:324; 17:291-306. Note the following from Brigham Young: "Where is the centre stake of Zion? In Jackson County, Missouri. Were I to try to prevent you from going there, I could not do it. Can the wicked? No. Can the devils in hell? No, they cannot." (Ibid., 8:198.)
[^7] Enoch and his people were eventually translated, taken into heaven without experiencing death. "And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion is fled." (JST Genesis 7:77-78.) Later in Genesis, by the way, we learn (through the Prophet's inspired translation) of the people of Melchizedek, a people who "wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world." (JST Genesis 14:34.) Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:253.
[^8] Ibid., 8:198; italics added.
[^9] Ibid., 8:205.
[^10] For a detailed treatment of the various phases and periods of consecration in the Church during the administration of Joseph Smith, see Lyndon W. Cook, Joseph Smith and the Law of Consecration (Provo, Utah: Grandin Books, 1985).
[^11] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 83.
[^12] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 9:137-38.
[^13] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 71; see also p. 101.
[^14] Ibid., pp. 307-8; see also Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 12:161.
[^15] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 93.
[^16] Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star, 8:90 (15 October 1846).
[^17] Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Experience (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979), p. 129.
[^18] Ibid., p. 136.
[^19] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:253; italics added.
[^20] Messages of the First Presidency, comp. James R. Clark, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75), 4:222.
[^21] Mexico and Central America Area Conference Report, Aug. 1972, pp. 43, 45.
[^22] Smith, History of the Church, 6:365.
[^23] Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), pp. 28, 29.
[^24] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 10:224.
