Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Fifteen

Doctrine and Covenants 76 and the Visions of Resurrected Life in the Teachings of Elder John A. Widtsoe

Alan K. Parrish

Associate Professor of Ancient Scripture Brigham Young University

Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught that many truths known by the ancient Saints but lost through the dark millennium have been restored to us in this age of restoration, things largely "Christ-centered, gospel-centered, priesthood-centered, church-centered." He declared that the doctrinal restoration, begun in 1820 with the Prophet Joseph Smith, is in our day still in its beginning stages and will continue through the Millennium. [^1] As fundamental doctrine shaping the views of Church members on matters of life here and hereafter, few, if any, scriptural passages have had more influence than Doctrine and Covenants 76. From it we derive much information about our relationship to God and eternity and about the purpose of religion, the Church, and our individual lives. Viewing the great doctrines of eternal life through the eyes of our best teachers is profitable for our learning and edification. So, in addition to studying the doctrine in section 76 itself, many Church members have studied related teachings of early Church leaders, including the Prophet Joseph Smith, President Brigham Young, Elder Orson Pratt, and others. They have also studied the related teachings of recent Church leaders, including President Joseph Fielding Smith, President Spencer W. Kimball, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, and President Ezra Taft Benson. But many Church members are far less aware of the teachings on this subject by prominent Church leaders in the middle decades of the Church. Elder John A. Widtsoe was one of these leaders. This paper will look at some important teachings of section 76 through the eyes of this special witness, who had a particular devotion to the Doctrine and Covenants. Elder Widtsoe was one of the great teachers of this dispensation. His influential Church service covered the first half of the twentieth century. He was a stalwart witness of Christ and the Restoration and a gifted Church leader noted for his keen and inspired mind. A review of his background, especially as it relates to the Doctrine and Covenants and his Church service, is a necessary foundation for this analysis.

John Andreas Widtsoe, or Dr. Widtsoe, as he was popularly called throughout the Church, was born in Norway, 31 January 1872. In the fall of 1883, with his convert mother and six-year-old brother, Osborne, he emigrated to Utah to live among the Saints. His is a classic story of penniless beginnings, a single-parent family, and an arduous struggle to establish life in a new community with another language and unique religious customs. From that beginning John A. Widtsoe rose to extraordinary prominence. Between 1889 and 1891 he became a distinguished student at Brigham Young College in Logan, for which he, along with seven others, was invited to attend Harvard College by Dr. Joseph M. Tanner, president of Brigham Young College.

In 1894, after only three years, he graduated from Harvard, summa cum laude (with highest honors). Between 1894 and 1898 he was professor of chemistry at the Agricultural College of Utah in Logan, now Utah State University. For two years beginning in 1898, he studied chemistry and agriculture in Europe and received his doctorate from the distinguished Georg-August-UniversitÃ¤t in GÃ¶ttingen, Germany. In 1900 he returned to the Agricultural College of Utah as the director of the Agricultural Experiment Station, which was established as a result of land-grant college legislation. For the next five years he achieved academic distinction while juggling the demands of teaching, research, and administration. At the Agricultural Experiment Station, his duties encompassed the practical application of academic research to increased efficiency of farming and agriculture throughout the state of Utah.

Between 1905 and 1907 he established the agriculture program at Brigham Young University. Then for the nine years between 1907 and 1916, he was president of Utah State Agricultural College in Logan, Utah. His term there ended when he was appointed president of the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. Because of his devotion to the Church and his personal association with many of the early leaders of Brigham Young University he was prominent in the development of that university, and efforts were made by some to have him appointed its president. He never was appointed president of BYU, but in later years, as the LDS Church's commissioner of education, he had responsibilities for overseeing its administration. Following a remarkable career in Utah higher education, John A. Widtsoe was called to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in which he served for more than thirty years, from 1921 to 1952.

Elder Widtsoe's devotion to the scriptures and the teachings of the Church permeated his home life, his academic training, his professional life, and his Church service. In his autobiography, written in the final years of his life, he looked back on his early education at Brigham Young College:

"Theology became our best loved subject. It formed our outlook upon life; and made us more sensitive to right and wrong. It shaped our characters and conduct in life. From my own experience and from the observation of the lives of those who have had parallel training in secular and sacred subjects, I have been throughout life an unchanging, firm believer in religious education for youth." [^2]

Through the difficult and lonely years at Harvard his faith was tested, and, like so many others, he had to search for the truth. Of that search he wrote: "At that time I was having my religious battles. Was Mormonism what it pretended to be? Did Joseph Smith tell the truth? I read, listened, compared, thought, prayed. It was a real search for truth. Out of it in time came the certain knowledge that the restored gospel is true and that Joseph Smith was indeed a Prophet, and restorer of the simple true gospel of Jesus Christ. There has never been any doubt about it since that time of deep study and prayer." [^3]

Upon graduation in 1894 he returned to Logan and began his teaching career at the Agricultural College. His passion for learning, especially religious learning, continued. Though he had studied widely the philosophies and religions of man at Harvard, he wrote, "the gospel impressed me as the foremost, all-encompassing system of truth. I liked to discuss its many implications." [^4] Accordingly, he organized a small group of friends into weekly study sessions. Shortly thereafter, Orson Smith, president of the Cache Stake, learned of John's enthusiasm for the gospel, which, combined with the unusual advantage of his Harvard education, presented a rare opportunity for the stake. Anxious to fulfill the president's wishes, John agreed to bring his friends and meet President Smith in the regular meeting of the first quorum of elders of Cache Stake in the First Ward on the following Monday evening. In that meeting, President Smith reorganized the elders' quorum, and John was sustained as the first counselor and quorum instructor. That Church calling became an important landmark in Elder Widtsoe's life and was quite significant to the study of the Doctrine and Covenants throughout the Church. He wrote:

"We undertook to read and study the Doctrine and Covenants. However, we found it difficult to remember the places in the Book where certain thoughts were expressed. We needed to have an index to which we could refer. So I made a concordance of the ideas in the Book, which was used effectively in card index form. Some years later this concordance was presented to the Church and published. In all my priesthood work, none has been more enjoyable than in this elders quorum. The happy associations came to an end after four years, when I went abroad for more learning. But the love of the Doctrine and Covenants has been kept alive. It remains one of my favorite scriptures; and I have written and published much about it." [^5]

Upon his return from Germany, Dr. Widtsoe resumed work on the concordance. He completed the project on his thirty-third birthday, 31 January 1905. The work was published in 1906 as a volume of 205 pages under the copyright of Joseph F. Smith, trustee-in-trust for the Church. [^6] In 1908, an edition of the Doctrine and Covenants was published with this index and concordance in its entirety, including the title page. In its preface Dr. Widtsoe shared some personal impressions about the Doctrine and Covenants:

"Concordance making is not a work for vacation times. Yet the wearisome routine, which can not be avoided in such labors, has been more than compensated for, by the glorious visions of revealed truth that have sprung from every page of the Book. Thus, whatever reward is due for the work represented by this concordance I have already received. . . . The Book of Doctrine and Covenants is a mighty evidence of the divine inspiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The study of this holy Book has greatly strengthened my love for the Gospel." [^7]

Among Church auxiliaries, interest in a regular course of study from the Doctrine and Covenants burgeoned with this new aid. Between 1902 and 1904 Dr. Widtsoe wrote a series of twenty-eight lessons for the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association under the title The Book of Doctrine and Covenants. In 1903 he wrote a series of lessons for the fourth-year theological department of the Deseret Sunday School Union entitled An Outline for the Study of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. In 1904 he wrote a series called The Study of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. He prepared still another series, The History and Message of the Doctrine and Covenants, for the Young Mens Mutual Improvement Association in 1906.

In an article published in the Improvement Era in October 1951 detailing the history of the development of the Doctrine and Covenants, A. C. Lambert reported the major changes in the 1921 edition. He noted that it still contained 136 sections but that the Lectures on Faith had been removed. He further noted that it was published "with revised prefaces to the individual sections in double-column pages, and with an index and concordance by John A. Widtsoe." [^8] Elder G. Homer Durham reported that "the 'Index and Concordance' of all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants since 1921 is based on this work." [^9]

Dr. Widtsoe's work on indexing the Doctrine and Covenants did not end with the publication of this concordance. He continued his card file of cross-references and compiled three large binders totaling 939 pages containing multiple clippings taken from copies of the 1921 edition. Every verse in the Doctrine and Covenants was arranged topically with many verses appearing several times. His devotion to the Doctrine and Covenants is also evidenced in his gospel sermons. A review of scriptural references in all of his conference addresses revealed that he referred to the Doctrine and Covenants almost five times more frequently than he referred to any other book of scripture.

Another indication of his devotion to the Doctrine and Covenants is found in a special calling extended to him during the school year 1935-36. The University of Southern California had invited the Church to send a representative to teach Mormonism for university credit. Elder Widtsoe was sent as a visiting professor for the entire school year. His lectures in the first two quarters were the basis of his book The Program of the Church. In the spring quarter he delivered a series of lectures on the teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants. From the actual transcripts of the lectures, and also from Dr. Widtsoe's outline and lecture notes, those lectures were later compiled by Elder G. Homer Durham and published as The Message of the Doctrine and Covenants.

While on this assignment Elder Widtsoe taught religion courses to Church members at USC and three other local campuses. In a very real way this assignment of Elder Widtsoe was a forerunner to the institute of religion program in Southern California. [^10]

Elder Widtsoe applied himself to understanding the doctrinal teachings of latter-day prophets. He published two books on the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Smith As Scientist: A Contribution to Mormon Philosophy, and Joseph Smith: Seeker After Truth, Prophet of God. He also compiled the Discourses of Brigham Young, and Gospel Doctrine, the teachings of Joseph F. Smith.

Elder Widtsoe's Teachings about Doctrine and Covenants 76

On 16 February 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were given a remarkable vision of the resurrected worlds. The Prophet recorded descriptions of the sons of perdition, the three degrees of glory, and the characteristics of those who would obtain each of those degrees. Elder Widtsoe's feelings about section 76 were beautifully expressed in his last lecture at USC in the spring of 1936:

"In the sacred literature of the world, there is probably no more beautiful, no more eloquent message than Section 76. It is a jewel, a gem, a scintillating diamond. It is the most beautiful in all our literature, both because of its phrasing, its vision of the future, and the glorious promises to humanity. It is a great chapter in the sacred writ which may be set side by side with the finest in the Bible or Book of Mormon, or the more or less inspired writings of the sages of all times. It bears reading and rereading." [^11]

Elder Widtsoe was a scientist. His instinct and training was to be logical and analytical, to probe more deeply than most, and to suggest conclusions from a set of relevant data. He investigated our understanding of God, man, and eternal life much as he did our understanding of the chemistry of life in plants and people. In reviewing his teachings, we should be aware that on some very important points differing views have been taught by equally prominent Church leaders. Some of the views of these other authorities, as well as some explanations, are also included in this discussion. Explanations are, by nature, interpretations. The interpretations I have given are intended to clarify, not replace, the teachings of Elder Widtsoe. Where all things have not been restored, it is wisdom to understand the teachings of several of the best of the Lord's anointed.

Satan and the Sons of Perdition

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were commanded to write that they beheld that Satan "rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ—wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about." (D&C 76:28-29.) The Prophet further recorded that they "saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he [Satan] made war and overcame." (D&C 76:30.) In this part of the vision the voice of the Lord described those of the resurrection of damnation. Of them he used the label "the sons of perdition," for they had been overcome by him, they had become "born" unto him (perdition), and thus had become his sons. (D&C 76:31-49.)

From this revelation it can be concluded that the resurrection of damnation refers only to the sons of perdition. All others will be saved in the variety of degrees of glory described in other parts of the vision. The revelation states that neither their end, nor their torment, nor the place thereof has been or will be revealed, except to those "ordained unto this condemnation." (D&C 76:48.) In his lectures at USC, Elder Widtsoe taught that the Lord shut off the vision when he got to the sons of perdition. Of their fate he explained:

"No one understands and I certainly do not understand. Brigham Young offered the opinion in one of his discourses that probably the punishment to be inflicted upon the sons of perdition would be that they would have to start over the long painful journey from the beginning. They would be reduced to the elements from which they started." [^12]

As Lucifer was called perdition for rebelling against the knowledge he had acquired, so the sons of perdition qualify themselves through rebelling against their acquired knowledge. They must "know [his] power, and . . . [be] partakers thereof" (D&C 76:31), and they must have received the Holy Spirit and have denied the Only Begotten Son after having that spiritual witness, thereby, "having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame." (D&C 76:35.)

Elder Widtsoe wrote: "It is probable that only personages who have acquired similar full knowledge, who willfully and deliberately deny the truth, when they know it to be the truth, can commit the unpardonable sin and become sons of perdition. . . . They must have had a fullness of knowledge; a testimony which cannot be destroyed. One must be on a high eminence to fall so low; and few in world's history have attained such a height." [^13]

He also wrote: "These are the sons of perdition—they who come to a knowledge of the truth, who knew the Father, and understood His will, and then willfully denied the truth. I have come to think that this was the sin of the devil himself. I know of no more damnable sin than to know the truth and then deny it." [^14]

And further: "It must be a terrible punishment beyond human comprehension, the greatest conceivable, yet a justified punishment. Since the greatest sin is the unpardonable sin, it would appear that they will forfeit all the gains of the ages of pre-existence and the years on earth. It is no wonder that the heavens wept over Lucifer's rebellion. (D&C 76:26)." [^15]

Elder Widtsoe taught that the sons of perdition stand as a warning against all "who deal lightly with truth in their lives," and that "though they may not become sons of perdition, [they] must expect a heavy punishment, which often begins in mortality." [^16] He further taught that the old notion of hell, a place of unending torture and a flaming cauldron, was erroneous. "The word hell, when used in these revelations [D&C 19 and 76], refers to the abode of the devil and his ugly brood. As used in the Bible, it has the same connotation." [^17]

Universal Salvation

The final chapter in The Message of the Doctrine and Covenants contains the last lecture Dr. Widtsoe gave at USC. It is entitled "Salvation and Eternal Life." He taught that Doctrine and Covenants 76 is the culmination of the message of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^18] "Whatever system of truth, whatever gospel is presented, which does not admit all to the plan of salvation if they so desire, can not be of God. The book is emphatic there. The work must be done in temples." [^19] On this premise he taught the importance of temple work for the dead, which, he emphasized, had been given to the Latter-day Saints as a special commission. He reasoned that the privileges of salvation are linked to man's obedience to the laws of salvation, which extend through eternity and bridge the bands of death. Salvation is a concern as vital for the dead as for the living and is the chief pursuit of all men through eternity.

In 1906 he wrote a lengthy article on Doctrine and Covenants 2, the priesthood mission of Elijah, fulfilled through the Prophet Joseph Smith. In it he wrote that the plan of salvation was designed to save all of God's children. It was not to be blocked by mortal death but was to reach into the life beyond. Otherwise, the mission of mortality and the efforts of God would have been largely wasted. He held that the opportunity for salvation is always open and that the ordinances required and performed in the mortal world have eternal validity. Said he:

"The promise of salvation is to all individuals who will repent and conform to the ordinances of the gospel, whether they are alive or dead, or whether the acceptance is made today or an eternity from now. The laws of life in the here and the hereafter are not, according to 'Mormonism,' essentially different. . . .

"The plan of salvation was not formulated in order to provide eternal life for a few handfuls of spirits. On the contrary, it was intended for the salvation of a family of spirits numbering many millions of members. The earth-experience was necessary for the development of the spirits towards a God-like state of superiority. The laws of the gospel are eternal and irrevocable. Every spirit to be saved, must believe, repent and be baptized, before he enters properly upon the road to eternal life; yet there can be no justice in withholding salvation from those who died on earth without hearing the gospel, or from those who, at any future time, in the hereafter, may acquire faith, repent, and desire baptism. . . .

"If, now, this work for the dead has not been done at the last day, what shall become of the waiting spirits, who perhaps, on the other side, have declared their willingness to accept the gospel? They are not legal members of the Church; and can not become such unless an earthly ordinance is performed. The purpose of the plan of salvation is blocked; the mission of the earth and her children has not been completed; the efforts of God and righteous men have largely been wasted. Even more terrible is the fact that in such an event the glory of God is obscured, for the Father of All, glories not in saving a few of his children; his joy is full only when the hosts of earth-spirits shout hosannas to the King of kings in gratitude for their citizenship in the Kingdom of Heaven." [^20]

In 1931 Elder Widtsoe taught that the restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith opened man's eyes to the opportunity of salvation in one of the degrees of glory through repentance either here or in the hereafter: "The doctrine of universal salvation grips the hearts of mankind. Seventy-five years ago the greatest theological battle of the centuries was waged with that doctrine as the storm center. Were all men to be saved, or only a few? The vicious doctrine had been preached for generations that only a few men and women were destined to be saved in the presence of God. In that battle, questions were asked. Is there power of repentance beyond the grave? At death does nothing remain of the old life? Is memory blotted out? Is the power of free will then a thing of the past? Around such questions, asked by intelligent men, a great battle was waged. That was after the Lord had turned the key, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and laid bare the doctrine of universal salvation, which declares that all who repent, either here or in the hereafter, may achieve salvation in one or the other of the great glories that the Lord has prepared for his children." [^21]

Gradations and Degrees of Salvation

Resurrection is a free gift to all the children of God. Individual attainment in the resurrection is determined by the combination of knowledge and works. In Elder Widtsoe's words: "The test is this: the use one makes of his knowledge will determine his place in the hereafter." [^22] It is a common practice in the Church to focus only on the celestial degree of glory. As a consequence, many remain confused about the glorious nature of life in the other degrees and how they fit into the resurrection. Many Church members, if asked to describe the telestial kingdom, may likely make it resemble our view of hell more than our view of heaven. To the question, "what do you teach your students about the telestial kingdom?" a colleague answered, "I try to scare them away from it. I try to make it sound so terrible that they will be afraid of anything but the celestial kingdom." Salvation in the other degrees and their place in the overall plan of the Lord is well addressed in Elder Widtsoe's teachings:

"The doctrine is taught by the church that we shall be placed, in the hereafter, 'according to our works.' Here shall be one, there another. Apparently for convenience, to make clear the thing to the human mind, the book tells (D&C 76) of three great divisions—the celestial; the terrestrial; and the telestial. It is made clear that in each one of these degrees or glories there are many divisions. As one reads the book he learns of an infinite gradation, accorded to each as they have done certain kinds of works." [^23]

Elder Widtsoe also explained: "As everything in Mormonism tends to be of a rational character, so with the resurrection. First those arise who have earned that right. Then those arise who have earned a later call. Those yonder arise. There is a series of resurrections. There are several calls, for those who have done best, first, and those who have done worst, last. That seems to be a fair procedure from beginning to end. This book [the Doctrine and Covenants] deals in an understandable way with all such problems." [^24]

In two addresses given in 1921 Elder Widtsoe taught about gradations of salvation, the means of achieving progression, and their desirability:

"Through obedience to the first principles of the Gospel, and a subsequent blameless life, a person may win salvation for himself. But in God's kingdom are many gradations, which lead to exaltation upon exaltation. Those who hunger and thirst for righteousness and labor for the fulfillment of the promise involved in the gift of the Holy Ghost will advance farther that those who placidly sit by with no driving desire within them." [^25]

"There is a graded salvation, within the ultimate reach of every human being, if he cares to accept of it, there can be no deep-seated fear of the hereafter, especially when we have been told that the lowest glory of this graded salvation is entirely beyond the understanding and wildest fancy of man." [^26]

Addressing the Liberty Stake Genealogical Convention on the fundamentals of temple doctrine in May 1922, Elder Widtsoe again spoke about graduated degrees of progression. Though there is progression in each kingdom, there is a type of hell that stays through endless ages: to know what might have been, but be restricted in progression to a lower kingdom:

"We are told in section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants that there are different degrees of glory in the great hereafter. This is indeed simply an emphatic statement of the fact that the judgment passed upon man will be graduated according to the works of man. We do not know much about conditions in the hereafter; but the spirit of revelation known as Section 76, is very clear to all who care to understand. A man shall be judged according to his life; and his place in the hereafter will depend on what he has earned for himself. . . . After reading Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants, it seems that hell is to find ourselves in an inferior position and conditions, and to know that we might have been, by our efforts, in a higher and more glorious place, had we exercised our free agency more vigorously for better things. Moreover our punishment stands, at least measurably, throughout the endless ages, because as we go onward, those above us go onward also, and the relative positions remain the same. This is the just but fearful punishment of evil doing. Temple work in its various departments assumes this principle of eternal justice. The Gospel, however, fills human hearts with joy, for it teaches that even in the lowest glory described in Section 76 [v. 89], the place reserved for those who have made the greatest mistakes, who have failed to get beyond the first step, is so glorious as to be beyond the conception of mortal man." [^27]

In 1944 a series of radio addresses by Dr. Widtsoe were published as a book under the title An Understandable Religion. In an address entitled "Facing the Judgment," he taught that the degrees of salvation are the equitable reward of justice tempered by mercy and the logical consequence of man's earnestness to be faithful to God:

"We do not all strive with equal earnestness to pay the price. What then is the logical consequence? We shall not all attain to the same degree of salvation. Under the law, composed of divine justice tempered with mercy, each one of us will be given a fully equitable reward. All that we have earned will be given us, and the measure will be full to overflowing. But there will be no dead equality of salvation, such as has been painted by churches for generations of men. . . . This really means that salvation is graded . . . And in our day, through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, the more complete understanding of the gradations of salvation has been secured. The document in which this doctrine is stated is one of the most precious in sacred literature [D&C 76]." [^28]

In the passages cited above he consistently taught that those who qualify for a greater degree receive a greater reward and advance further than those who do not so qualify. He taught that there is no equality in salvation of those who hunger and thirst after righteousness and those who are less attentive to righteousness and that our punishment stands throughout endless ages. Concerning the differences in the three degrees of glory as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants 76, he taught:

"The revelation details somewhat fully, and with much beauty of language, the conditions that place people in each of these kingdoms. Those of the celestial, the place where God and Christ dwell, have accepted Jesus and the ordinances of his Church. Those of the terrestrial died without the law, or were not valiant in the testimony of Jesus. Those of the telestial kingdom did not receive Jesus but were content to follow falsehood.

"These kingdoms, though very different, are filled with the children of God the Father. Though those of the lower kingdom have not shown themselves worthy of the fulness of salvation, yet the love of the Father envelops them. Even the glory of the lowest, the telestial, 'surpasses all understanding' [D&C 76:89].

"Nevertheless, there remained the punishment that one in the lower kingdoms might by another mode of life have received and enjoyed a higher glory. The eternal memory, though terrible, is a more reasonable punishment than the fiery furnace taught through generations of time by false teachers." [^29]

The eternal memory of those in a lower glory indicates that the differences and limitations of a lower degree of salvation remain through eternity. Elder Widtsoe characterized the differences in the progression of those in lower degrees as limitations placed on their capacities such that they could never endure the glory of a higher kingdom.

"Moreover, those who are assigned to the lower kingdoms, have so lived, so misused their opportunities, that they could not adapt themselves to the prevailing conditions in the higher kingdoms. Their capacities, by their own acts, have been changed to fit a lower glory. They would not be happy in a higher kingdom. They are unprepared for association with those whose lives have been in accord with God's truth. As we have made ourselves, so shall our judgment be." [^30]

Some of his children have already been denied the capacity for mortal life. Likewise, all who do not achieve exaltation in the celestial glory will be denied the capacity to live as do those who will obtain it. In an essay teaching that it is not possible to progress from one glory to another, Elder Widtsoe wrote:

"They who inherit the celestial glory will dwell in the presence of the Father and the Son. They are kings and priests. From that glory issues the power of God, known to us as the Priesthood of the Lord. In that glory certain conditions of joy belong which are absent in the other glories. They who have inherited the lesser glories will receive a salvation so glorious as to be beyond the understanding of man—that has been revealed to us—but, 'where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end' (D&C 76:112)." [^31]

Elder Widtsoe's teachings about salvation and progression in the lower degrees of glory are unusually optimistic and cause some to question whether he pictured progression to be on a single continuum, so that in time all the blessings of the highest kingdom may be obtained by those in the lower kingdoms. These teachings raise the question of overlap, or the possibility of progression between the three degrees of glory. The following statement was given in his lectures at USC, to indicate his belief that though there is progression in all the degrees of glory, it is "utterly impossible" to progress from one degree to another.

"The question is frequently asked concerning three men placed in the three glories, can the one in the lower glory, by acceptable living in that glory, be transferred into the next glory, and the one in the middle glory move into the higher glory? If you will stop to think, you will see how utterly impossible that is. Growth, the basis of judgment, means greater power, greater strength. Those who are placed in the highest glory have greater power for, or a greater rate of, increase. They move at the rate of, say, fifty miles an hour, while those in the next glory move at twenty-five miles an hour; and those in the lower have power to move at only ten miles an hour. In the course of time, the one in the lower glory may reach the point that was occupied by the one in the higher, but then the one in the higher glory will be miles and miles ahead. Start three automobiles at the same time moving ten, twenty, and thirty miles an hour, and you will see that every second they are farther and farther apart, yet all are progressing." [^32]

This explanation was given to non-Latter-day Saint students. He might not have chosen to characterize it quite so simply to an audience familiar with Latter-day Saint beliefs. The statement and the impression given in the illustration, that in time those in the lower kingdoms "may reach the point that was occupied by one in the higher," is misleading. The logical extension is that in time the slower cars could reach the starting point of the fastest, or that telestial and terrestrial beings may, in time, become celestial. As already indicated, Elder Widtsoe did not believe there could be progression between kingdoms. His explanation was that the capacities of those in lower kingdoms were incompatible with life in the higher degrees and that their progression was confined to their inferior capacity. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that progression in the different degrees was to be in different directions.

"The celestial and terrestrial and telestial glories, I have heard compared to the wheels on a train. The second and third may, and will, reach the place where the first was, but the first will have moved on and will still be just the same distance in advance of them. This illustration is not true! The wheels do not run on the same track, and do not go in the same direction. The terrestrial and the telestial are limited in their powers of advancement, worlds without end." [^33]

Eternal Life

Elder Widtsoe taught that the best picture we have of eternal life is that given in Doctrine and Covenants 76. The essence of that picture is that eternal life is the highest possible attainment for man:

"Life eternal is a life of action, of development, of growth, of eternal progression. Life hereafter is active, not static. Eternal life is eternal growth according to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. For that reason, as the book says, the greatest gift of God is eternal life (14:7). There is no greater gift, according to the book, than the gift of being able to increase continually whether upon this earth or in the life to come. There must be growth where there is life. There you have a cardinal doctrine which may be applied to everyday life. . . . The difference between immortality and eternal life is that immortality is eternal existence. But eternal life involves growth." [^34]

In 1934 Elder Widtsoe taught about the rich potential and the ultimate value of a soul who may rise to perfected achievement. He explained that eternal progression is the means of obtaining the joy Father Lehi described as the essence of man's existence:

"We are eternal souls, with the inherent power to progress, placed on earth for the purpose of learning better how to go forward under the law of progression, stepping on from one estate to another estate, preparing ourselves for still another estate, all in the line of advancement. The result of such progression, the final purpose of life, has been clearly and definitely stated by the Prophet Lehi: 'Men are, that they might have joy.' . . . And joy can be won in only one way—the joy of which the prophet Lehi speaks, through the definite principle of eternal progress. There can be no joy for a person who stands still; to him, that which seems joy is merely a make-believe, the shell, not the kernel. It is but the savory smell, not the feast itself." [^35]

Elder Widtsoe described death as entry into the third estate of man's advancement. He described that estate as an eternal life of progress, of never-ending education and advancement:

"Death must be viewed as a portal to a new and a greater life, in which man, possessed of new experiences and a material as well as a spirit body, may continue eternally the exploration of the inexhaustible universe and gain never-ending education and never-ending advancement. Under the law of progression, the imperishable man may move onward more rapidly and fully than ever before. Every natural power of man on earth will be retained, improved and perfected, with others added. The power to accept or to reject, to gain knowledge and to use it wisely, will be keener than before. This is the Third Estate and the last estate of man. It is an eternal life of action, increase and progress." [^36]

In 1922 Elder Widtsoe described eternal progression as the reason for existence, for it encompasses an existence of everlasting achievement and everlasting growth toward our ideal, God. "It is the glory of this Church that it possesses, and the glory of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that he left behind him, for us and for all generations to come, the explanation of explanations, the reason for life and the reason for human existence. Under the inspiration of God, he told us whence we came, what we are doing here and where we are to go. . . . We shall live hereafter—not a quiet, silent, purposeless life, but a life of development and progress, everlastingly achieving, everlastingly growing, everlastingly becoming more and more like the greatest and highest of our ideals." [^37]

Several prominent members of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles spoke on the topic of eternal progression at the annual leadership week at Brigham Young University in January 1937. Newspaper accounts record the essence of Elder Widtsoe's remarks. "The speaker [Elder Widtsoe] said also that man was living in a progressive universe, a purposeful universe, and was engaged in an eternal journey of which there were many stages. Progression of man never stops, Elder Widtsoe explained, carrying this thought into an explanation of the three degrees of glory to which man will eventually attain in a state of salvation. Salvation of man is progression, he said, explaining these various degrees of future progress as revealed in modern scriptures." [^38]

In 1934 Elder Widtsoe again urged that the purpose of earth life is eternal progress, just "as had been the purpose of all life before and will be the purpose of all life in the hereafter. In the universe of living, intelligent beings, there are many gradations. Some are perfected—we call them gods. God, the Father of all, is beyond our full comprehension in his attributes. No man can comprehend infinity. There are other living beings, here and elsewhere, of lesser and varying intelligence and achievements, all moving forward, upward, to the high destiny of all sentient beings. It is self-evident that those who are lower down in the scale of progression do not know as much as those who are superior in experience and therefore need help from those further advanced. We need ask and receive help from our Heavenly Father. Every man has need of the guidance that comes from a greater intelligence. Therefore we have a plan of salvation." [^39]

To better understand Elder Widtsoe's teachings about man's growth toward the ideal of perfection personified in God, it is necessary to know his teachings about God's perfection. He held the view that eternal life is a condition of continual growth that brings the eternal joy Lehi described as man's object. Eternal growth is a characteristic of the eternal life that God enjoys. To acquire eternal life in the highest degree is to acquire the degree of exalted increase that God has acquired. Elder Widtsoe recognized that to man, much about God's nature is incomprehensible, therefore, attempts to describe the finer points of His nature are severely limited. Implicit in his view of God's progressive nature is the recognition that God's nature is consistent with universal laws.

"To determine this relationship between God and man, it is necessary to know, as far as the limited human mind may know, why the Lord is the supreme intelligent Being in the universe, with the greatest knowledge and the most perfected will, and who, therefore, possesses infinite power over the forces of the universe. It must be admitted at once that the mind of man can know God only in part. One thing seems clear, however, that the Lord who is a part of the universe, in common with all other parts of the universe is subject to eternal universal laws. In some manner, mysterious to us, he has recognized and utilized the laws of the universe of which he is the chief intelligence. Therefore, if the law of progression be accepted, God must have been engaged from the beginning, and must now be engaged in progressive development, and infinite as God is, he must have been less powerful in the past than he is today. Nothing in the universe is static or quiescent. While it is folly for man to attempt to unravel in detail the mystery of the past, yet it is only logical to believe that a progressive God has not always possessed his present absolute position. That view does not change his relative position to man. The term infinite is always of relative meaning.

"The supreme Being of the universe transcends the human understanding. His intelligence is as the sum of all other intelligences. There can be no rational discussion of the details of God's life or nature. To him we give the most complete devotion, for to us he is in all respects infinite and perfect. His Godhood, however, is the product of simple obedience to the laws of the universe.

"God, exalted by his glorious intelligence, is moving on into new fields of power with a rapidity of which we can have no conception, whereas man, in a lower stage of development, moves relatively at a snail-like, though increasing pace." [^40]

Elder Widtsoe also wrote: "There are those who will protest that there is no growth in heaven. In firm answer, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints asserts that the power of increase or growth is a necessary quality of intelligence. If intelligence remains with us in the hereafter, the power of growth will continue also.

"We can now understand more clearly the real, the ultimate object of life. Growth or progress may be unending. Every onward step, ever so small, is another approach to the ideal of perfection. God is perfect. Therefore, eternally progressing man is ever approaching the likeness of God; ever on the way to perfection. That is the objective of life, here and hereafter,—to approach, eternally, the likeness of our Father in Heaven, on earth, and in the hereafter." [^41]

If God himself is forever progressing in a degree of glory beyond man's comprehension, it is a reasonable deduction that man is incapable of being equal to him at any given point in time. To be ever approaching that high ideal in the same degree is therefore a description of exalted attainment. Teachings about the progressive nature of God were more widely taught in Elder Widtsoe's day than in our own. Because they dealt with God's incomprehensible nature, attempts to convey one's impressions were limited by language and interpretation. When studying the teachings of those who addressed this subject, it is often difficult to know whether that person is describing individual advancement or eternal family increase, the latter being more widely accepted today. All who made such attempts seemed to agree that understanding about God's advancing glory is important but can only be approximated. The statements that follow indicate the difficulty of ascertaining what God's progression consists of. The strongest advocate of eternal increase was President Joseph Fielding Smith, who taught:

"Do you not see that it is in this manner that our Eternal Father is progressing? Not by seeking knowledge which he does not have, for such a thought cannot be maintained in the light of scripture. It is not through ignorance and learning hidden truths that he progresses, for if there are truths which he does not know, then these things are greater than he, and this cannot be. Why can't we learn wisdom and believe what the Lord has revealed? . . .

"It is not because the Lord is ignorant of law and truth that he is able to progress, but because of his knowledge and wisdom. The Lord is constantly using his knowledge in his work, and his great work is in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. By the creation of worlds and peopling them, by building and extending, he progresses, but not because the fulness of truth is not understood by him." [^42]

Several favored advancement beyond the increase President Smith described. Elder James E. Talmage gave numerous descriptions of the progressive nature of God, of which the following are typical:

"The fact of man's eternal progression in nowise indicates a state of eventual equality on however exalted a plane; nor does it imply that the progressive soul must in the eternal eons overtake those once far ahead of him in achievement. Advancement is not a characteristic of inferior status alone; indeed, the increment of progress may be vastly greater in the higher spheres of activity. This conception leads to the inevitable deduction that God Himself, Elohim, the Very Eternal Father, is a progressive Being, eternally advancing from one perfection to another, possessed as He is of that distinguishing attribute, which shall be the endowment of all who attain celestial exaltation—the power of eternal increase." [^43]

"It is reasonable to believe, in the absence of direct revelation, by which alone absolute knowledge of the matter could be acquired, that, in accordance with God's plan of eternal progression, advancement within each of the three specified kingdoms will be provided for; though as to possible progress from one kingdom to another the scriptures make no positive affirmation. Eternal advancement along different lines is conceivable. We may conclude that degrees and grades will ever characterize the kingdoms of our God. Eternity is progressive; perfection is relative; the essential feature of God's living purpose is its associated power of eternal increase." [^44]

Elder B. H. Roberts taught that God's immutability, or unchangeableness, does not preclude enlargement in his kingdom, nor, perhaps, new thoughts, new vistas, and new experiences:

"His [God's] immutability should be regarded as stability, adherence to principle. . . . But God's immutability should not be so understood as to exclude the idea of advancement or progress of God. Thus, for example: God's kingdom and glory may be enlarged, as more and more redeemed souls are added to his kingdom: as worlds and world-systems are multiplied and redeemed and enrolled with celestial spheres, so God's kingdom is enlarged and his glory increased. . . . An absolute immutability would require eternal immobility—which would reduce God to a condition eternally static, which, from the nature of things, would bar him from participating in that enlargement of kingdom and increasing glory that comes from redemption and progress of men. And is it too bold a thought, that with this progress, even for the Mightiest, new thoughts, and new vistas may appear, inviting to new adventures and enterprises that will yield new experiences, advancement, and enlargement even for the Most High?" [^45]

Elder Melvin J. Ballard spoke of the eternal laws, which God obeyed in order to become God, and which govern man's advancement and eternal progression. These laws are as basic as those associated with the fall of Adam, which God could not violate or change:

"We have learned that upon those planets our Father's children dwell in all stages of perfection and advancement. There are those who are infinitely beyond us in eternal progress, who have reached their present degree of perfection by obedience to everlasting and irrevocable law. God Himself can not change that law, no more than He could obliterate the consequence of Adam's fall. He could not be God and violate a law which is eternal, and by obedience to which He became God." [^46]

Elder Anthony W. Ivins summarized his views of the law of eternal progression as follows: "All I have to say to you is that we believe in progression, we are a progressive people, and we believe that there will never be an end to it, that we shall continue and must continue, in this life and in the life to come, to go forward, for water that stands still of necessity becomes stagnant." [^47]

Elder Charles W. Penrose said, "Progress is the law of the universe, and all beings, all intelligences will have an opportunity of progressing along certain lines." [^48]

President Joseph F. Smith described man's eternal life as continual advancement throughout the eternities: "We believe that every man will have his work to do in the other world, just as surely as he had it to do here, and a greater work than he can do here. We believe that we are on the road of advancement, of development in knowledge, in understanding, and in every good thing, and that we will continue to grow, advance and develop throughout the eternities that are before us. That is what we believe." [^49]

Conclusion

The teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants regarding salvation and eternal life focus on the celestial glory and those things associated with qualifying therefore. By the declaration of section 76, all three degrees of glory surpass our understanding in dominion, might, and glory. Yet, because the Lord has given us this revelation, he intends that we learn much of eternal value from the descriptions therein. Perhaps more revelation restoring doctrinal understanding of the degrees of glory and life associated therewith only awaits our mastery and appreciation of what he has already given us. It is edifying to study the teachings of our great leaders, of whom Elder John A. Widtsoe is but one. They have set an example before us; and as they have sought to understand these great visions, so ought we. In their teachings is the sense that they speak "as one having authority": that in their hearts they comprehend more than their pen is able to write or their mouth to speak. Within us there ought to swell the urging to study these things out in our mind that we might be ready to understand them by the Spirit. The Lord ended section 76 by stating that these things are "only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him; to whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves." (D&C 76:116-17.)

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Father would give his children instruction and commandments. The recipient must be willing to take upon himself the name of Jesus Christ. Taking the name of the Savior begins in the waters of baptism whereby we accept Jesus Christ as our new spiritual father and are willing to be known as his children before all people at all times and in all places. But it is also an expression of the willingness to take upon us all of the names of Jesus Christ, even until we receive a fulness of what he is and has. This willingness then is the willingness to go on to receive the second part of the new and everlasting covenant, which is to receive the oath and covenant of the holy priesthood. [^48] D&C 20:28.
[^2] Any child who would believe Father and obey his every commandment, without exception, would in that obedience grow to attain and maintain all the good that Father is and does, which is exaltation. The covenanter additionally promises always to remember his new father, Jesus Christ. This promise seems to mean to think upon him, yearn for him, pray continually in his name, be anxious for the success of his great work of salvation among the children of men. [^49] John 17:21.
[^3] Any child who disobeyed any single commandment of Father, would, without exception, immediately die spiritually, which spiritual death is to be cut off from Father's presence, no longer to be able to grow in his order of good. [^24] The recipient of the covenant of baptism must also affirm his willingness to abide and obey every instruction that his new father will give to him. Only in so doing can the covenanter come to avoid choosing and doing evil, for righteousness in this world is only of Christ, he being the sole fountain of this rare reality. [^50] D&C 20:59.
[^4] For every transgression of a commandment of Father, the offender must suffer for that sin and make full restitution for that sin, this suffering and restitution being at least equal to the suffering and loss caused to the person(s) against whom the transgression was committed. [^25] 1 Corinthians 8:5-6.
[^5] D&C 124:123; 76:50-60; Alma 13:1-16.
[^6] D&C 14:7.
[^7] D&C 88:21-35.
[^8] Mosiah 3:19.
[^9] Moses 5:13.
[^10] D&C 8:1-3.
[^11] Alma 10:6; 12:10, 35.
[^12] Moses 6:57; D&C 1:31.
[^13] Genesis 6:5; Ether 3:2; Moroni 7:8.
[^14] Moroni 6:4; D&C 3:20.
[^15] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), p. 305.
[^16] Acts 4:12.
[^17] 3 Nephi 12:48; 27:27.
[^18] "Where there is no kingdom of God there is no salvation. What constitutes the kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives his oracles" to eventuate in the administration of the new and everlasting covenant. (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 272.)
[^19] "A man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge." (Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 217.)
[^20] D&C 45:6.
[^21] 2 Nephi 25:23.
[^22] 2 Corinthians 5:17; Galatians 6:15.
[^23] D&C 132:19-20.
[^24] Alma 42:14.
[^25] Alma 42:22-28.
[^26] 3 Nephi 13:10.
[^27] Moses 4:1-2; Revelation 12:7-11.
[^28] 1 Corinthians 15:22.
[^29] Alma 42:14.
[^30] 2 Nephi 9:7-9.
[^31] Psalm 37:4; Mosiah 11:2; Joseph Smith-History 1:15.
[^32] Psalm 24:3-5.
[^33] 1 Nephi 10:18.
[^34] Moses 6:56.
[^35] Genesis 17:7-8.
[^36] D&C 132:19.
[^37] Ephesians 4:11-13.
[^38] D&C 121:41-46.
[^39] Moroni 7:9.
[^40] John 1:9.
[^41] 2 Nephi 2:26; Alma 5:41.
[^42] D&C 121:34-40.
[^43] Romans 3:12; 2 Nephi 28:11.
[^44] Alma 32:28-32.
[^45] Alma 32:34.
[^46] Mosiah 18:8-10.
[^47] Moroni 4:3.
[^48] Dallin H. Oaks, "Taking Upon Us the Name of Jesus Christ," Ensign, May 1985, pp. 80-83.
[^49] Alma 34:17-27.
