Susan Easton Black, Doctrines for Exaltation: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1989)

Chapter Seventeen

Eyes That See Afar

S. Michael Wilcox

Assistant Professor of Ancient Scripture Brigham Young University

On the day the Church was organized, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the instructions recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 21. It has one theme: follow the prophet. I do not think it is coincidental that this exhortation was given on 6 April 1830. The Church was given the following commandment, stated in words traditionally associated with a commandment—"thou shalt":

"Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me;

"For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith.

"For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." (D&C 21:4-6; italics added.)

Notice that the Lord instructed the Church to give heed to all his words, not just to his commandments. The Lord promised that the powers of darkness and the gates of hell would disperse and not prevail. Verse 7 indicates that God "inspired" Joseph Smith "to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good." In the early days of the Church, the Saints were eagerly anticipating the building up of a Zion people in the land of Missouri. With enthusiasm and zeal, they migrated to Missouri and began the grand enterprise. Within a few years all was in disarray.

The persecution they suffered is a large part of our heritage and legacy. If the early Saints had given "heed to all his words and commandments," Joseph Smith would have led them to "move the cause of Zion." (D&C 21:4, 7.) Time and time again he warned them of the enemy he saw "afar off" and gave counsel (D&C 101:54), but in its infant stage the early Church would not follow. They trusted their own counsel.

We must not be too judgmental of those wonderful early Saints. We have the advantage of hindsight and easy access to the scriptural record. Gratitude for their experiences should be our response. We can learn from them the crucial lesson that every word spoken by a seer should be attended to with great solemnity.

In December 1830 Joseph Smith received the revelation we know as Moses 7. It is a very beautiful chapter dealing with Enoch and his city, who are described as being "of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.)

This revelation led directly to Doctrine and Covenants 38 and others that followed. The date of section 38 is 2 January 1831. It is the foundation for the law of consecration, which the Saints were expected to live if they were to become a Zion people. Those principles are, first, "all flesh is mine, and I am no respecter of persons" (D&C 38:16); second, "I have made the earth rich" (D&C 38:17)—later the Lord revealed, "the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17); third, "let every man esteem his brother as himself, and practise virtue and holiness before me" (D&C 38:24); fourth, "it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give" (D&C 38:39); and fifth, "I give unto you a commandment, that every man, both elder, priest, teacher, and also member, go to with his might, with the labor of his hands, to prepare and accomplish the things which I have commanded" (D&C 38:40). Upon these five pillars a Zion people could be built through obedience to the law of consecration.

A month later, on 4 February 1831, Joseph Smith received another revelation. He had moved from Fayette to Kirtland. Some "false spirits had crept in among" the Saints, and the Lord gave the following warning. Although it deals with the situation at Kirtland, its implication for the future Saints in Missouri cannot be denied. "Hearken and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all cursings." (D&C 41:1; italics added.)

The Lord promised the Saints he would give them his "law" that they might "have all things right before" him, and he warned, "see that my law is kept." (D&C 41:4.) Those who would not keep it were not his disciples and would be "cast out." (D&C 41:5.) It was "not meet that the things which belong to the children of the kingdom should be given to them that are not worthy." (D&C 41:6.) The Lord's final words prior to revealing his law—the law that would govern Zion—were: "These words are given unto you, and they are pure before me; wherefore, beware how you hold them." (D&C 41:12.) The promised "law" was given five days later, on 9 February 1831, and is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 42. There the care of the poor and the building up of Zion through the consecration of the Saints is described.

In May 1831 more information concerning the law of consecration was revealed. The members were instructed to "deal honestly and be alike . . . , and receive alike, that ye may be one." (D&C 51:9.) They were also told that God was granting them the "privilege of organizing themselves according to [his] laws." (D&C 51:15.) During this time Oliver Cowdery and three others were serving a mission among the Indians in western Missouri. Joseph Smith wrote that "the mission to western Missouri and the gathering of the saints to that place was the most important subject which then engrossed the attention of the church." (History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 1:182.)

On 7 June 1831, Joseph was commanded to hold the next conference of the Church in Missouri. (D&C 52:2.) He was promised that the land of Zion would be "made known unto them." (D&C 52:5.) At the conclusion of this revelation, the Lord issued a subtle warning: "Remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted," he said, "for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple." (D&C 52:40.)

Before starting on his journey to Missouri, Thomas B. Marsh went to Joseph Smith to inquire of him. He had earlier been commanded to fill a mission, and his companion Ezra Thayre was not ready to go. In the revelation the Prophet received came a final warning from the Lord regarding covetousness and the corrupting influence of wealth. This worldly attitude would stand in the way of building Zion. It was the last revelation given before Independence, Missouri, was named as the spot for the modern city of Enoch.

"Behold, thus saith the Lord unto my people—you have many things to do and to repent of; for behold, your sins have come up unto me, and are not pardoned, because you seek to counsel in your own ways.

"And your hearts are not satisfied. And ye obey not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness.

"Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!

"Wo unto you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not contrite, and whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not stayed from laying hold upon other men's goods, whose eyes are full of greediness, and who will not labor with your own hands!" (D&C 56:14-17; italics added.)

This revelation also contains a warning to the "rebellious" who "profess my name": "I, the Lord, command; and he that will not obey shall be cut off in mine own due time, after I have commanded and the commandment is broken. Wherefore I, the Lord, command and revoke, as it seemeth me good; and all this to be answered upon the heads of the rebellious, saith the Lord." (D&C 56:1, 3-4.)

After receiving this revelation, Joseph journeyed to Missouri. On 20 July 1831 the Lord revealed, "This is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion." (D&C 57:2.) He also designated the spot for the building of a great latter-day temple. The principles, laws, and warnings had already been given by which Zion could flourish. With eagerness the early Saints began to purchase lands, build cabins, plant crops, and set about laying the foundation of Zion. A few days after Joseph's arrival, the Colesville branch of the Church arrived. At the same time, the first of a series of revelations warning of the coming persecution was given. From these revelations we find evidence that clearly demonstrates the nature of a seer. Whether or not those early Church members understood the significance of Joseph's words we are left to ponder, but with our advantage of hindsight, the words are plain. As the first logs were being laid for the cabins, the Lord spoke of tribulation: "He that is faithful in tribulation, the reward . . . is greater in the kingdom of heaven.

"Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation.

"For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand.

"Remember this, which I tell you before, that you may lay it to heart, and receive that which is to follow." (D&C 58:2-5; italics added.)

Immediately after these somewhat ominous words, the Lord gave counsel on how to avoid the eventual loss of the land of their inheritance. "I have sent you—that you might be obedient." (D&C 58:6; italics added.) But the Lord did not want just obedience; he wanted a people "anxiously engaged in a good cause," people who would "do many things of their own free will." (D&C 58:27.)

Then the Lord issued another warning. In light of what happened in Missouri, the words are prophetic:

"Who am I that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that obeys not my commandments?

"Who am I, saith the Lord, that have promised and have not fulfilled? . . .

"Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above." (D&C 58:30-31, 33.)

Six days after this revelation, the Lord gave Joseph the revelation recorded in section 59. It is a companion revelation to Doctrine and Covenants 42—an addition to the law of the Lord, except in this case the laws are made "especially applicable to the saints in Zion." (D&C 59, headnote.)

Late in August Joseph returned to Kirtland. There he received the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 63. Prefacing this revelation in his history, the Prophet wrote, "In these infant days of the Church, there was great anxiety to obtain the word of the Lord upon every subject that in any way concerned our salvation; and as the land of Zion was now the most important temporal object in view, I inquired of the Lord for further information upon the gathering of the Saints." (History of the Church, 1:206-11.) The revelation starts with the Lord's call to his Saints to "hearken . . . ; and listen, you that call yourselves the people of the Lord." (D&C 63:1.) He stated that his "anger is kindled against the . . . rebellious" and that he can "take even them whom he will take, and preserveth in life them whom he will preserve; [he] buildeth up at his own will and pleasure; and destroyeth when he pleases." (D&C 63:2-4.) He ended his introduction to the revelation concerning Zion with the words, "I, the Lord, utter my voice, and it shall be obeyed." (D&C 63:5.)

These words take on added significance in light of what happened in Missouri. After giving instruction and intelligence, the Lord spoke directly of the coming storm of persecution, but remember the introductory verses of this section: he could preserve whom he liked if they would be obedient. "Behold, the land of Zion—I the Lord, hold it in mine own hands." (D&C 63:25; italics added.) These are comforting words. The Lord then continued:

"For Satan putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the shedding of blood.

"Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you.

"And if by purchase, behold you are blessed;

"And if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." (D&C 63:28-31.)

All of the revelations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 58 through 63 were received within a month of the Saints' establishment in Zion. At this point, I am sure, they did not know what was coming. Perhaps even Joseph Smith was not fully aware of the import of his own words.

The headnote to Doctrine and Covenants 64 tells us that this revelation was given while a company of brethren were making preparations to leave for Missouri in October. It speaks of the need for all to forgive their brethren their trespasses and not to seek "occasion against one another." (D&C 64:8.) The importance of this counsel becomes much more apparent in light of the Lord's words to the Saints after the expulsion. He chided them for their "jarrings, and contentions, . . . and strifes." (D&C 101:6.) The Lord encouraged his Saints to pay their tithes and "labor while it is called today." (D&C 64:23-25.) He gave counsel concerning debt and then, speaking of Zion, he once again issued counsel that hinted at the coming troubles and the means of their prevention:

"And behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall not fail, that they shall obtain it.

"But all things must come to pass in their time.

"Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great.

"Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind, and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days.

"And the rebellious shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent away, and shall not inherit the land.

"For, verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim, wherefore they shall be plucked out." (D&C 64:31-36.)

The promise of a flourishing Zion is given, a Zion filled with the glory of the Lord, but Zion must also serve as an "ensign" to the people, a light to the world. (D&C 64:41-42.) The Lord's people can be a light only if they are different from the world. They must be a peculiar, holy people, or the ensign cannot stand high enough for the nations to flow unto it. A people who are to serve as an ensign must be obedient, not rebellious, anxiously engaged, unified, and so forth. In short, they must follow the counsel given by the Lord through Joseph Smith in the revelations already discussed.

In November 1831, about three and one-half months after the Saints first began to establish themselves upon the land of Missouri, a revelation was given in which the first indications of trouble and disobedience are spoken of. General counsel was given to the inhabitants of Zion that apply to all of her stakes. They were to teach their children, observe the Sabbath, pray, walk uprightly, and remember their labors. The Lord then directly said of the "inhabitants of Zion" that he was "not well pleased" with them, "for there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are full of greediness. These things ought not to be, and must be done away from among them; wherefore, let my servant Oliver Cowdery carry these sayings unto the land of Zion." (D&C 68:31-32.) Though the Saints in Missouri did not receive this revelation until Oliver Cowdery arrived, its importance relative to the coming storm cannot be denied.

In November and December 1831, further refinements to the law of consecration were given. Doctrine and Covenants 70 and 72 speak of the principle of stewardship and the accounting that must be made in both time and eternity. In these revelations the Lord once again spoke of the members of the Church who were "privileged to go up unto Zion." (D&C 72:24; italics added.) Obviously the Lord felt the opportunity to live his laws upon his promised land was a blessing worthy of the Saints' obedience, righteousness, and anxious engagement in his cause.

For a few months the revelations directly concerning Zion halted. The Lord watched the Saints to see if they could live the laws he told them they were "privileged" to receive. In March 1832, it was revealed to Joseph Smith that he, Sidney Rigdon, and Newel K. Whitney should sit in counsel with the Saints in Zion. "Otherwise," they were told, "Satan seeketh to turn their hearts away from the truth, that they become blinded and understand not the things which are prepared for them." (D&C 78:10.) On 26 April 1832, Joseph Smith, having arrived once again in Missouri, received a revelation instructing them concerning their duty. "There are those among you who have sinned exceedingly," the Lord began, "even all of you have sinned; but verily I say unto you, beware from henceforth, and refrain from sin, lest sore judgments fall upon your heads. For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." (D&C 82:2-3.)

It is a great responsibility to have the truth of the gospel. We must remember the Lord used the word privilege when referring both to his land and to his laws. The Lord had graciously given to his Saints the "riches of eternity," meaning his revelations. They were bound to live and act according to their directions:

"Ye call upon my name for revelations, and I give them unto you; and inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto my law.

"Therefore, what I say unto one I say unto all: Watch, for the adversary spreadeth his dominions, and darkness reigneth." (D&C 82:4-5.) The last phrase once again hints at the growing discontent and spirit of mobocracy that was present in Missouri.

In the next verses the Lord forgave his people and added a charge that they "sin no more" or their "former sins return." (D&C 82:7.) He then gave counsel concerning the law of consecration and the cause of the poor. With this instruction came a call that Zion must "arise and put on her beautiful garments." (D&C 82:14; in Revelation 19:7-8 we learn that Zion's beautiful garments are her righteous acts of obedience and dedication.) An assurance was given that "the kingdom is yours, and shall be forever, if you fall not from your steadfastness." (D&C 82:24.) Part of that steadfastness was the unity required of a Zion people, who were of one heart and one mind, with every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing "all things with an eye single to the glory of God." (D&C 82:19.) After strengthening the Church members and delivering this message, Joseph Smith returned to Kirtland.

No revelations are recorded as having been received between April and September of 1832. Again a period of probation was granted. Would the Saints respond to the Lord's forgiveness and counsel? Section 84 is one of the key sections in the Doctrine and Covenants. In the middle of this revelation the Lord corrected the Church and explained to them why they were under condemnation. He spoke specifically about those children of Zion who were on his "holy land." (D&C 84:59.) The words of this revelation should have special meaning to us today, for they are words we have often heard President Ezra Taft Benson apply to our own situation:

"And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received—

"Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation.

"And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all.

"And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written—

"That they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion.

"For shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? Verily, I say unto you, Nay." (D&C 84:54-59; italics added.)

The intent of these words is clear. The Lord had spoken before of the importance of heeding his revelations and not treating them lightly. If the Saints in Zion wanted to prevent the "scourge," they needed to give stricter heed to the words of Joseph Smith, particularly the Book of Mormon, which was and still is the most important and critical latter-day revelation.

It is hoped that some of the parallels to our own time have become apparent, for many of us have also covenanted to live the law of consecration. We too are urged to give strict heed to our prophet's counsel. We also are encouraged to spread the message of the kingdom to all the world. Although we are not as a people gathered upon the land of Missouri, we are endeavoring to establish Zion in all her stakes. Therefore, the lessons and experiences of our ancestors as they endeavored to build Zion in their own day should be looked to by our generation with great interest. The last revelation found in section 84 contains one of the last clear warnings of the coming struggle. The next time the Lord spoke about Missouri, the conflict had already started. It erupted in the summer of 1833. But it is easily seen that the Lord through his prophet told the people what he saw "afar off" and how to be ready for it. Zion requires great efforts of obedience and righteousness. It requires selflessness, zeal, and brotherly love. Pride must be destroyed along with envy and contention. We are not free of these things today in spite of more than one hundred fifty years of experience.

On 8 March 1833, the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 90 was given. This section deals primarily with the establishment of the First Presidency. In the opening verses the Lord forgave Joseph Smith of his sins and told him his prayers were heard. He promised Joseph that the keys he held "shall never be taken from" him. (D&C 90:3.) Then, speaking to the Church, the Lord explained how we should receive the oracles of a prophet. His words magnify a recurring theme of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how they hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house." (D&C 90:5; italics added.)

Within a few months, for the Saints in Missouri, a storm of tremendous fury would beat upon them. Yet even during the storm, counsel from the Prophet was given, which, if it had been obeyed, would have prevented the storm from mastering the people of Zion.

On 2 August 1833, the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 97 was given. The persecutions were already in full force. On 23 July 1833, the leaders of the Church in Missouri had been forced to sign an agreement to leave Jackson County.

Section 97 begins with words of hope and encouragement. Many of the brethren were "truly humble" and "seeking diligently to learn wisdom and to find truth." (D&C 97:1.) The Lord spoke of his pleasure with the School of the Prophets in Missouri and with its teacher, Parley P. Pratt. The Lord then spoke of his people as fruit trees, warning that the "ax is laid at the root" of those who will not bring forth "good fruit." (D&C 97:7.) The key to bringing forth acceptable fruit was given in verse 8. Those who are "willing to observe their covenants by sacrifice—yea, every sacrifice which, I, the Lord shall command—they are accepted of me." (D&C 97:8; italics added.) This attitude will make them as fruitful as a tree "planted in a goodly land by a pure stream." (D&C 97:9.)

The Lord had a specific sacrifice in mind. He commanded the Saints in Zion to build a temple to him "speedily, by the tithing of my people. . . . this is . . . the sacrifice which . . . the Lord, requires at their hands." (D&C 97:11-12.) As in almost all commandments the Lord extended a promise. "If Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible." (D&C 97:18.) Now, obviously these promises have a broader application than just to the Saints in Jackson County in 1833; however, the implication for those Saints remains clear. The Lord continued his promise to Zion by quoting what the nations of the earth would say of her: "Surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God . . . [would be] her high tower." (D&C 97:19-20.)

The revelation ends in the Lord's prediction of a "scourge" that awaits the wicked. "Nevertheless," the Lord stated, "Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

"But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

"Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord, have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these things shall come upon her." (D&C 97:25-27.)

It seems a strange thing, perhaps, that the Lord would choose this time to emphasize the building of the temple, especially in light of the agreement already reached by the Church leadership in Missouri to move. It would require great faith and unity among the Saints and an unquestioning sense of obedience to a prophet's counsel. It would also require the purity of heart that the Lord gave as a definition of Zion in this same section. The Saints did not rise to the challenge; nothing was done for the building of a temple. In the meantime, the persecution increased. Four days later Joseph Smith gave counsel to the persecuted Saints that in essence told them not to retaliate or seek revenge for their treatment at the hands of the mobs. Shortly after this revelation was given, Joseph Smith, in company with Sidney Rigdon, went to New York. They had been away from their families for a while and felt concern for their welfare. On 12 October 1833, the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 100 was given to ease their minds concerning their families. It is obvious from the revelation that Joseph also felt considerable anxiety for his brethren in Missouri. The Lord addressed those concerns in the last verses of section 100: "Now I give unto you a word concerning Zion," the Lord declared. "Zion shall be redeemed, . . .

"Therefore, let your hearts be comforted; for all things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly, and to the sanctification of the church.

"For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in righteousness." (D&C 100:13, 15-16.) The emphasis is still positive and filled with hope, but the hope is contingent upon the purity and righteousness that define a Zion society. This is the last revelation given about Zion before the actual expulsion. By December 1833 the Saints were driven to neighboring Clay County after suffering great loss.

On 16 December the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith the reasons for this final treatment. These reasons are not inclusive. Many historical factors caused friction between the Saints and the old settlers, but these could have been overcome by the influence of the Lord had his people obeyed his counsel—the counsel they had been given since day one of their settlement. In a single sweeping statement beginning Doctrine and Covenants 101, the Lord states the problem:

"I, the Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions; . . .

"For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified.

"Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

"They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

"In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me." (D&C 101:2, 5-8.)

In spite of these words, the Lord loved his people, and section 101 is full of hope and a promised redemption. The Lord, however, wanting the lesson of their failure to stand forever, related a parable. He introduced it with a reference to a teaching he gave in the Sermon on the Mount—that of the salt of the earth. Those who bind themselves to the Lord in the everlasting covenant are the salt of the earth and the "savor of men." But when they lose that savor, they are "cast out." The Lord then gave the parable concerning Zion.

We can glean many insights from this parable. The basic elements are plain. The nobleman is Christ, the choice piece of land is Missouri, the servants are the Saints, the watchman is the Prophet Joseph Smith. The tower is, in all probability, the temple they were commanded to build but which they never started. The following phrases taken from the parable carry a strong message and explain both the attitude of the Lord and the attitude of the Saints:

"What need hath my lord of this tower?" (D&C 101:47.) In reality, the Lord did not need the tower; the servants did.

"And [the servants] consulted for a long time, saying among themselves: What need hath my lord of this tower?" (D&C 101:48.) Notice they consulted among themselves instead of with the watchman or the Lord.

"And while they were at variance one with another they became very slothful, and they hearkened not unto the commandments of their lord." (D&C 101:50.) Two of the cornerstones of a Zion society are obedience to commandments and a unified people who are of "one heart and one mind." (Moses 7:18.)

The result of disobedience, disharmony, and consulting among themselves (or heeding their own counsel) was the loss of the choice piece of land and the olive trees, when "the enemy [Satan]" came. The lesson the Lord drew from this parable is plainly explained in verses 53 and 54. The Lord asked of his Saints a question and then supplied the answer. "Ought ye not to have done even as I commanded you?" (D&C 101:53.) If they had followed his counsel, "the watchman upon the tower would have seen the enemy while he was yet afar off; and then ye could have made ready and kept the enemy from breaking down the hedge thereof, and saved my vineyard from the hands of the destroyer." (D&C 101:54; italics added.)

Even at this point the Lord held out hope for the Saints. Zion could still be redeemed, if they had finally learned the lesson of obedience. Counsel was again given. The Saints were to gather together all the means they could and continue to purchase lands in Jackson County. The persecution of the Saints made this counsel appear unwise. Nevertheless, it was given. A command was also given to the Church members in the east. They were to gather funds for the redemption of Zion. The Lord instructed his Saints that "there is even now already in store sufficient, yea, even an abundance, to redeem Zion, and establish her waste places, no more to be thrown down, were the churches, who call themselves after my name, willing to hearken to my voice." (D&C 101:75.) A hint of the attitude of many of the Saints toward obeying the Lord's counsel through his prophet is easily seen in the last words of this verse. The Saints were also counseled to use the legal system of the American government to seek redress.

The rest of the Lord's counsel was given on 24 February 1834, several months later, in Doctrine and Covenants 103. The Lord reiterated the reason for their suffering: "They did not hearken altogether unto the precepts and commandments which I gave unto them." (D&C 103:4.)

"By hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever.

"But inasmuch as they keep not my commandments, and hearken not to observe all my words, the kingdoms of the world shall prevail against them.

"For they were set to be a light unto the world, and to be the saviors of men;

"And inasmuch as they are not the saviors of men, they are as salt that has lost its savor, and is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men." (D&C 103:7-10.)

Joseph Smith was instructed to gather together the "young men and the middle aged" and march to Missouri to the aid of the Saints. The Lord wanted five hundred men to go, but knowing the disposition of his Saints, he told Joseph Smith: "If you cannot obtain five hundred, seek diligently that . . . you may obtain three hundred. And if ye cannot obtain three hundred, . . . peradventure ye may obtain one hundred." (D&C 103:32-33.) Even in this counsel the Lord gave a hint to his Saints concerning their obedience: "Behold this is my will; ask and ye shall receive; but men do not always do my will." (D&C 103:31.) As a result of this revelation, Zion's Camp was organized. They did not obtain five hundred or even three hundred.

The Zion's Camp members marched to Missouri, but the march proved to be a testing ground for the Lord's future leaders, not a redemptive effort to reclaim Jackson County. When Zion's Camp arrived in Missouri and were camped on Fishing River, the last revelation concerning the first latter-day effort to build up the New Jerusalem was given on 22 June 1834. Even though it concludes that theme in the Doctrine and Covenants, this revelation should be read as the preface to the future building up of Zion. It is a revelation given especially to us, for in it are the keys to our own efforts. We should learn from those early Saints' attempt and avoid the pitfalls they were not able to overcome.

"Behold, I say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed even now.

"But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them;

"And are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom;

"And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself.

"And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer." (D&C 105:2-6; italics added.)

It is difficult to live the principles of the celestial kingdom in a fallen telestial world, but that is what the Lord expects. Therefore "it is expedient . . . that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion—that they themselves may be prepared, and that my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands." (D&C 105:9-10.) Part of that perfect teaching was to come, and it can still be had in the temples of the Lord. As a people we are gaining the necessary experience. We have a much better appreciation of prophets, seers, and revelators because of our heritage and the lessons those wonderful Missouri Saints left us. The hope and the promise of Zion are still the driving motivation of the Church, but it is a hope that must be supported by hearkening to the voice of our seer. "And inasmuch as they follow the counsel which they receive, they shall have power after many days to accomplish all things pertaining to Zion." (D&C 105:37; italics added.)

It may be well for us today when we hear the First Presidency and the Twelve give their counsel to realize that they are the modern watchmen upon the tower. We may then avoid the pitfalls to which the Doctrine and Covenants so pointedly testifies.
