A covenant in the Church is a sacred promise, an agreement between Heavenly Father and His children. Since the time of Adam and Eve, Father in Heaven has made covenants with His children to help us live righteously and be worthy to live with Him again.

In the scriptures, we learn about many people who made covenants. When the people of Alma gathered at the Waters of Mormon, Alma invited them to be baptized, to make a covenant (see Mosiah 18:8–14). The people were so happy they clapped their hands with joy. They wanted to show Heavenly Father their love and their desire to keep His commandments.

Alma taught his people how to keep and honor their baptismal covenant. He said they must be willing to be called God’s people and to obey His commandments. He told them they should help and comfort one another. They were to be “witnesses of God” (Mosiah 18:9). That means they promised to tell others about Heavenly Father and His love for His children. If they would do these things, the Lord promised to bless them with His Spirit. Alma’s people learned that Heavenly Father loves us and wants us to make sacred covenants with Him.

Like those baptized in the Waters of Mormon, when we make the baptismal covenant, we begin our journey back to Heavenly Father. When you are baptized, you make a covenant to serve Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and to obey the commandments. You covenant to take Jesus Christ’s name upon you, to always remember Him, and to keep His commandments. Just like the people of Alma, you promise to be a witness of the Savior—to testify of Him. Then you are confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and you receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. If you keep your part of the baptismal covenant, you will have His Spirit to be with you. That is God’s promise to you.

1.  Read the fourth article of faith with the children. Divide the children into four groups and assign each group to look up and then read aloud one of the following scriptures: Gal. 3:26; Prov. 28:13; 2 Ne. 31:4–5; 2 Ne. 31:8, 12. Have the children identify the principle or ordinance of the gospel mentioned in their scripture. Discuss the principles of faith and repentance and the ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Repeat the fourth article of faith several times until the children know it by memory; have the groups stand and say the phrases that correspond to their scriptures. Give each child a large piece of paper divided into quarters. Invite the children to illustrate the principles and ordinances taught in the fourth article of faith. When they finish, repeat the article of faith once more and bear testimony of these principles and ordinances. Encourage the children to use their drawings to share this article of faith with their families.

2.  Assign one of the following scriptures to each class. Have the classes read the scriptural account and plan how to share the story with the other children. They could dramatize the story, pantomime the story and let the other children guess, or pretend to interview the main characters. Their presentations should answer as many of these questions as possible: Where did this event take place? Who was baptized? Who performed the baptism? Did those who were baptized keep their baptismal covenants? What can we learn from this example? Scriptures: JS—H 1:68–73; Moses 6:64–68; Mosiah 18:7–15; Alma 23:1–6, 17; Acts 2:1–11, 37–46. Have the children stand and sing a song or hymn between each presentation. Finally, read Matt. 3:16–17, and bear testimony of Jesus Christ’s divine mission and His example to us. Conclude by singing “Beautiful Savior” (Children’s Songbook, 62–63; The Friend, October 1998, 4–5).

To make a mobile to help you remember your baptismal covenant, mount this page on heavy paper and cut out the figures. Using string or yarn, attach each figure as shown in the illustration. Display the mobile where you can see it each day.

When I Am Baptized, I Make a Sacred Covenant
“And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters” (Mosiah 5:7).

I become a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I am baptized by immersion.

I receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

I promise to testify of Jesus Christ.

I promise to serve others.

I promise to serve God and keep His commandments.
