James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Preface

The same chronological arrangement has been followed in this volume as in previous volumes in this series.

References and historical notes for the first two volumes in the series were drawn largely from standard histories of the L.D.S. Church. Volume three relied to a lesser extent, for historical notes and background, on the standard histories and more on the letters and letter-press books of the secretary to the First Presidency for the period covered by the volume.

In volume four I have relied on Roberts, CHC volume 6 as a standard reference but have also used some material from the papers, letters and letterpress books of Reed Smoot, Apostle and United States Senator, where appropriate. Mr. Hollis Scott, Archivist of Brigham Young University, has been particularly helpful in making available the materials in the Reed Smoot collection. Reference to other sources for historical background for the Messages in this volume will be supplied in a special bibliographical essay in the Introduction.

Acknowledgment is made, as for the previous volumes in the series, to the many agencies and persons who have given helpful suggestions and have cooperated in the locating of the Messages comprising this volume.

I am indebted again to the entire staff of the L.D.S. Church Historian's Office Library for their excellent cooperation in this entire project. Without this cooperation and unselfish interest many of these Messages would never have been located for publication.

To all others, unmentioned, who have helped with the project, I express my gratitude.

When the initial arrangements were made for the publication of this series, three or perhaps four volumes in the series were anticipated. The amount of material now available for publication, if the series should be continued down to date (1969), would bring the total number of volumes to at least six. This posed a problem both for the publisher and for myself as compiler. There seemed to be at least two alternatives. One alternative was to edit the presently available material in an attempt to condense it from three volumes into one. The second alternative was to continue the series under the original ground rules laid down in the Preface (pp. ix-x) to volume one of the series by not presuming to edit or condense and to end the present series chronologically wherever space demands, with the hope that a second series of volumes could later find a publisher to continue the project down to date. I have chosen the second alternative with some slight modifications, notations on which appear at appropriate places in the notes to this volume. JAMES R. CLARK, Ed. D.
