James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Introduction

This volume contains the Messages of the First Presidency during the period 1901-1915.

The impact of the Reed Smoot hearing before the United States Senate which took the spotlight early in the administration of President Joseph F. Smith was still having its reverberations at the close of his administration and carried over into the administration of President Heber J. Grant.

It is hardly conceivable that one can understand the history of the L.D.S. Church for this first part of the twentieth century without becoming familiar with the testimony offered by President Joseph F. Smith at the Smoot hearings in Washington D.C. early in March, 1904. These hearings are frequently referred to as a "trial" of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints rather than an investigation on the seating of a duly elected, monogamous United States Senator from Utah. With the vindication of Senator-Apostle Smoot in 1907 came also the vindication of the L.D.S. Church and its leadership. The State of Utah now for the first time had an Apostle-Senator in Congress and the Church had a high-ranking representative in Washington. For the next thirty years, or until his defeat for reelection in 1932, the First Presidency of the Church corresponded with and drew heavily on the services of Apostle-Senator Reed Smoot.

In President Smith's entire testimony at the Smoot hearing, covering over 200 pages in the official report, he is scrupulous to distinguish time after time his official role as president of the Church and his knowledge as an ordinary citizen in giving answers to the questions posed to him.

I have chosen to include in this volume a number of documents issued on the letterhead of the First Presidency and dealing with Church matters but signed by less than a full quorum of the First Presidency. The rationale for this procedure I have found in an analysis of a covenant that President Joseph F. Smith made with the priesthood and membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on the day he was sustained as the president of the Church, at a special general conference of the Church on November 10, 1901. The statement or covenant will appear in greater detail under the above date in the body of this work, but he said in essence: "I propose that my counselors and fellow presidents in the First Presidency shall share with me in the responsibility of every act which I shall perform in this capacity."

As indicated earlier, I have felt that the following bibliographical essay will be helpful to the readers of this volume:

Bibliographical Essay Recommended Background Reading to Accompany Volume Four, Messages of the First Presidency, 1901-1915

Paramount as a background source for this period is the discussion of B. H. Roberts in CHC, Volume 6:1-478, especially pp. 386-478. Roberts is not only one of our better sources for a discussion of many of the issues of this period, but he has the distinction of being a principal participant in the events, having met the same issues in 1898 concerning seating in Congress as Reed Smoot was to meet in 1904-1907. Roberts' discussion of his own case, which has some parallel to the Smoot case, is to be found in CHC 6:390-417. Roberts failed to gain his seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. Smoot was seated and after a three-year bitter struggle, 1904-1907, retained his seat in the U.S. Senate and was continuously re-elected for thirty years.

No study of this period can be meaningful or complete without familiarity with U.S. Senate Document 486, 59th Congress, 1st Session. This is a four-volume report of the Proceedings before the Committee on Privileges and Elections of the United States Senate in the matter of the protests against the right of Hon. Reed Smoot, a Senator from the State of Utah, to hold his seat. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1906. (Volume 1 especially)

In addition to the papers and letters of the Smoot collection in the Archives of Brigham Young University Library, the serious student should be familiar with the following studies by Dr. Milton Rees Merrill, undoubtedly the foremost authority on Reed Smoot and his role and period.

Dr. Merrill's doctor's dissertation at Columbia University is entitled "Reed Smoot, Apostle in Politics." (1950)

In 1951 Dr. Merrill published what may well be the definitive essay on Reed Smoot and his role in Mormon and United States history. His essay, entitled "Theodore Roosevelt and Reed Smoot," appeared in The Western Political Quarterly, VI 440-453 (September, 1951).

In May 1959 Dr. Merrill, vice president of Utah State University, addressed the annual meeting of the Utah State Historical Society on the subject of: "Reed Smoot, Apostle-Senator." An abridgment of his address was published under the same title in the Utah Historical Quarterly XXVIII:343-349 (October, 1960).

Since the Reed Smoot case, running with overtones through most of the years covered by this volume, involved federal, state and Church relations, the reader of volume four will probably want to be familiar with some of the literature in this field. The following are recommended for reading by the serious student.

Klaus Hansen has written and published three works dealing with the concept of the political Kingdom of God as it relates to the history of the L.D.S. Church.

His Master's thesis entitled "The Theory of the Political Kingdom of God in Mormon History, 1829-1890" was completed at Brigham Young University in July, 1959.

While a graduate student in history at Wayne State University in 1960 he wrote and had published in Brigham Young University Studies 2: No. 2 pp. 244-260 an essay entitled "The Political Kingdom of God as a cause for Mormon-Gentile conflict."

In 1967, Michigan State University Press, East Lansing, Michigan, published his book-length treatment of the same theme of political aspects of Mormon history with the title: Quest for Empire; The Political Aspects of the Kingdom of God and the Council of Fifty in Mormon History.

Two other briefer treatments of this same theme of the Political Kingdom of God are those of J. Keith Melville and James R. Clark.

Dr. Melville, at the time of writing, was Associate Professor of Political Science at Brigham Young University. His essay entitled "Brigham Young's Ideal Society: The Kingdom of God" appeared in Brigham Young University Studies 5: No. 5 pp. 3-18 (Autumn, 1962).

Dr. Clark's treatment of this same general theme appeared as the first three chapters in his doctor's dissertation at Utah State University in 1958. (Church and State Relationships in Education in Utah, Doctor's dissertation, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, 1958, pp. 14-114.)

A shorter treatment by Dr. Clark appeared in "The Kingdom of God, the Council of Fifty and the State of Deseret," Utah Historical Quarterly, XXVI:130-148 (1958).

While Leonard Arrington's economic history of the Latter-day Saints, The Great Basin Kingdom, by design ends with 1900, still the serious student will find added insights for understanding the first part of the twentieth century in Mormon history by reading his two final chapters entitled "The Raid" and "Aftermath," Harvard University Press, 1958, pp. 350-412.

However, lest this rather detailed Bibliographical Essay leave the impression that all of the Messages for the period 1901-1915 were concerned with Senator or Apostle Reed Smoot and politics, we hasten to add that other matters of greater importance were the subject of numerous Messages during this period. We refer to the great doctrinal treatises and revelations given under the presidency of President Joseph F. Smith.

Recommended background reading for the doctrinal and instructional messages contained in this volume are the Annual and the Semi-Annual Conference Reports for 1901-1915. A number of the messages contained in the volume were in fact announced and in some cases voted on by the general Church membership in these conferences. The related sermons in the Conference Reports thus become invaluable in placing these messages in their appropriate settings.

The Improvement Era, especially the editorial section entitled "Editor's Table," also provides valuable background material for an understanding of the messages of this period.

In 1930 when Brigham H. Roberts published his six-volume Comprehensive History of the Church under the sponsorship of the First Presidency of the L.D.S. Church, he wrote the following in the preface to the work (Volume 1:vi-ix) which might appropriately serve also as one summary statement of introduction to this present volume. He said:

The position is not assumed that the men of the New Dispensation -its prophets, apostles, presidencies, and other leaders-are without faults or infallible, rather they are treated as men of like passions with their fellow men. Bearing indeed a heavenly treasure, no less a thing than delegated authority from God to teach the gospel and administer its ordinances of salvation to the children of men; to gather modern Israel from among the nations of the earth, and establish Zion; to perfect the lives of those who receive the truth the church proclaims, and prepare the world for its coming lord, the rightful King of all the earth, Jesus the resurrected and glorified Christ. But while the officers and members of the Church possess this spiritual 'treasure,' they carried it in earthen vessels; and that earthliness, with their human limitations, was plainly manifested on many occasions and in various ways, both in personal conduct and in collective deportment. But back of all that, and it should never be lost sight of, is the supreme fact-and it was a controlling element in all their proceedings-that they occupied such relations with God that they were, on occasion, moved upon to speak and act as God would speak or act. And when they spoke and acted as prompted by the inspiration of God, then what they said and what they did was the word and will of God, and the power to God unto salvation. (Doctrine and Covenants 68:3-4).

It is always a difficult task to hold the scales of justice at an even balance when weighing the deeds of men. It becomes doubly more so when dealing with men engaged in a movement that one believes had its origin with God. Under such conditions to so state events as to be historically exact, and yet, on the other hand, so treat the course of events as not to destroy faith in these men, nor in their work, becomes a task of supreme delicacy; and one that tries the soul and the skill of the historian. The only way such a task can be accomplished, in the judgment of the writer, is to frankly state events as they occurred, in full consideration of all related circumstances, allowing the line of condemnation or of justification to fall where it may; being confident that in the sum of things justice will follow truth; and God will be glorified in His work, no matter what may befall individuals, or groups of individuals . . ."

In line with what Brigham H. Roberts, leading Mormon historian and politician thus wrote in 1930, is the following comment of Milton R. Merrill, Professor of Political Science, in 1960 before the Utah Historical Society on the dual role of Reed Smoot, Apostle-Senator:

There can be no question about Smoot's personal interpretation of his role. He was a Mormon Apostle whose mission to the Gentiles was divinely inspired and directed. The senator loved his assignment. Probably no man ever received more personal satisfaction from membership in the Senate. If he had been operating the universe he could not have assigned a more agreeable role for himself. Further, once chosen for the position by the president of the Church, he had no hesitation in using all of the devices of the astute practical politician to assure that the mission would be performed.

The record demonstrates that Smoot's interpretation was correct. In public speeches, in private correspondence, in personal conversations President Smith indicated, in fact stated, that Reed Smoot was chosen for his role, and that he was serving the Church in his capacity as senator. President Grant was less specific and direct, but the evidence is strong that he was in full agreement after he became president. In the earlier years he was not regarded as a supporter of the program.

As indicated, not all Mormons were in accord with the mission theory. This iconoclastic attitude often reached high in the councils of the Church, and on more than one occasion important officials denounced Smoot and urged his defeat. The senator recognized this fact fully, and he attempted to mollify opposing Church leaders. But to him President Joseph F. Smith and President Heber J. Grant were the authorities. He regretted, he was saddened by the critical attitude of others, but his course was determined by these two men whom he regarded without equivocation as prophets. . .

The problem of first loyalty was never critical for Utah's Apostle-Senator. In fact, it did not arise. The presidents of the Church never told Smoot how to vote. They never asked him to do anything that even skirted the question of his loyalty to his oath as United States Senator. Aside from requests that he perform the usual errands which any senator expects to do when requested by a substantial body of constituents, Smoot never received a directive. And even when the minor requests came they were couched in terms of appeal rather than command.

To Senator Smoot all of this was natural and expected. In the first place both the country and the Church were fashioned by the same hand. It was inconceivable to him that there would ever be a conflict.

In summary it can be stated without equivocation that Senator Reed Smoot regarded himself as a representative of the Mormon Church to the nation's capitol. Utah Historical Quarterly, XXVII:343-349ff (October, 1960).

Mormonism is in its second century. Following 1930, perhaps, it moved into a different world configuration. The centennial year of the Mormon Church truly seems to have marked the end of one epoch and the beginning of a new one. If this is true, either partially or wholly, then this volume also should mark the beginning of the end of an era in L.D.S. history. Perhaps it does. JAMES R. CLARK, Ed. D.
