James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Call for a special General Conference, October 17, 1901

1901-1915 1901-October 17-Deseret News (November 8, 1901)

President Lorenzo Snow died October 10, 1901, just after the October General Conference. The Quorum of Twelve Apostles met on October 17th and chose and sustained President Joseph F. Smith as the new President of the Church with John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund as counselors. This new First Presidency then called a special General Conference for November 10, 1901, to give Church members an opportunity to sustain the new authorities of the Church.

OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT to the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS:

Agreeable with the decision of the Council of Apostles at their regular meeting Thursday, October 17, we hereby call a general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to be held in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, on Sunday, the 10th of November, next, at 10 o'clock a.m. for the purpose of voting upon the Church authorities.

JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

THE ORDER OF VOTING

In voting upon the question of sustaining the General Authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as now constituted, at the special general conference on Sunday, November 10, 1901, it is desirable that the different quorums of the Melchisedec and Aaronic Priesthoods shall take their respective places in the assembly, according to the order which has been observed on previous similar occasions. The brethren will therefore please conform to this arrangement, and occupy the seats that will be designated in the afternoon on the floor of the Tabernacle. The gallery and other parts not occupied by the Priesthood, will be open to members of the Church and to the general public. The votes will be taken by quorums, and then by the body of the Church in Conference assembled. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
