James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Call for special Stake Conferences, October 22, 1901

1901-October 22-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The previous document was the announcement of the special conference of the Church to sustain President Smith, as it appeared in the public press. This letter sent to Stake Presidents and their counselors recognizes the difficulty involved in having the Saints come back for the second General Conference within five weeks. It proposes that where attendance at the forthcoming General Conference in Salt Lake City was not feasible due to "distance and expense" that the Stake President should call a special Stake Conference for November 3, 1901. The "authorities of the Church as they were sustained by the Council of Apostles on the 17th inst." were to he sustained in these special Stake Conferences and a certified copy he sent to the General Conference convening on November 10th.

This action by the First Presidency again illustrates the flexibility of Church procedure in dealing with special situations. The precedent and authority for such action as here outlined, however, is contained in early revelations to Joseph Smith on Church government, found in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Office of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, October 22nd, 1901.

Prest. Jos. Morrell, and Counselors, Dear Brethren:

As you will have learned through the columns of the Deseret News, we have called a special general conference of the church to be held on the 10th of November next, for the purpose of voting upon the authorities of the church as they were sustained by the Council of Apostles on the 17th inst., and officially announced in the Deseret News of the same date; and being desirous that as full a representation as possible of the stakes of Zion may be had upon that occasion, and fearing that distance and expense may prevent many of your people from attending, we therefore advise that you call and hold a special conference of your stake on Sunday, the 3rd prox., for the purpose of voting on the same question; and that the sense of said conference be expressed by resolution, and a certified copy thereof be sent either by mail or special representative to be read at the forthcoming conference in this city. Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency
