James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Duties and responsibilities of the First Presidency, November 10, 1901

1901-November 10-Conference Reports, November 10, 1901, p. 82.

This message of President Joseph F. Smith the day he was sustained in a Special General Conference of the Church clearly outlines his concept of the duties and responsibilities of the First Presidency. It contains his covenant with the Priesthood and with the membership of the Church, as represented in Conference, to act in concert with his two counselors on all matters of leadership. It is especially significant in establishing the authority of later messages and revelations which were sometimes issued and signed only by the President of the Church.

President Joseph F. Smith.

DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

I desire to make another remark or two before we close our conference. I will call your attention to the fact that the Lord in the beginning of this work revealed that there should be three High Priests to preside over the High Priesthood of His Church and over the whole Church (Doc. and Cov. 107:22, 64, 65,66, 67, 91, and 92). He conferred upon them all the authority necessary to preside over all the affairs of the Church. They hold the keys of the house of God, and of the ordinances of the Gospel, and of every blessing which has been restored to the earth in this dispensation. This authority is vested in a Presidency of three High Priests. They are three Presidents. The Lord himself so calls them. (D. & C., sec. 107:29.) But there is one presiding President, and his counselors are Presidents also. I propose that my counselors and fellow Presidents in the First Presidency shall share with me in the responsibility of every act which I shall perform in this capacity. I do not propose to take the reins in my own hands to do as I please; but I propose to do as my brethren and I agree upon and as the Spirit of the Lord manifests to us. I have always held, and do hold, and trust I always shall hold, that it is wrong for one man to exercise all the authority and power of presidency in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I dare not assume such a responsibility, and I will not, so long as I can have men like these [pointing to Presidents Winder and Lund] to stand by and counsel with me in the labors we have to perform and in doing all those things that shall tend to the peace, advancement and happiness of the people of God and the building up of Zion. If at any time my brethren of the Apostleship shall see in me a disposition to depart from this principle or a forgetfulness on my part of this covenant that I make today before this body of Priesthood, I ask them in the name of my Father, that they will come to me, as my brethren, as counselors in the Priesthood, as watchmen on the towers of Zion, and remind me of this covenant and promise which I make to the body of the Church in general conference assembled at this time. The Lord never did intend that one man should have all power, and for that reason He has placed in His Church Presidents, Apostles, High Priests, Seventies, Elders and the various offices of the Lesser Priesthood, all of which are essential in their order and place according to the authority bestowed on them. The Lord never did anything that was not essential or that was superfluous. There is a use for every branch of the Priesthood that He has established in His Church. We want every man to learn his duty, and we expect every man will do his duty as faithfully as he knows how, and carry off his portion of the responsibility of building up Zion in the latter days.

I felt like I wanted to say that much to these my brethren who bear the Holy Priesthood-men who wield influence for the salvation of souls, who set good examples before the people among whom they dwell, who teach them the right way, admonish them for sin, lead them in the path of duty, and enable them to stand firm and steadfast in the faith of the Gospel, wherewith they have been made free from sin and from the grasp of Satan. God bless all Israel, is my prayer in the name of Jesus, Amen.
