James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

The last days of Lorenzo Snow, November 15, 1901

1901-November 15-Juvenile Instructor, XXXVI:688-691 (November 15, 1901); Conference Reports, October, 1901, pp. 60-62.

B. H. Roberts (CHC 6:389-390) says of this editorial or message signed by President Joseph F. Smith:

Early in his administration President Joseph F. Smith gave full and complete endorsement to the views upon the priesthood, its organization and purpose of mission and the policy of the church in relation thereto. This in a signed article by him in the Juvenile InstructorÂ�. The article was entitled "The Last Days of President Snow"; and the discourse of the late president, at the regular conference of October the sixth, was declared to be the "word of the Lord to us all."

The doctrine of the late president on priesthood, then, thus so heartily endorsed by the newly elected president, and declared to be "the word of the Lord to us all," may be accepted as the policy of the church, viz., exalt the priesthood and make it function in the church as designed in the revelations of God to the church of the New Dispensation of the gospel.

It should be noted that President Smith in his signed article in the Juvenile Instructor not only endorses the last or final conference address of President Lorenzo Snow as the "word of the Lord to us all" but he also gives the details of council meetings held before the October Conference in which President Snow had communicated similar instructions to the presiding councils of the Church.

Because the last address of President Snow on October 6, 1901, seems to be a prerequisite part of the declaration of President Smith on November 15, 1901, I have included it also as a part of this message. Note the references to missionary work in Russia and South America.

The Last Days of President Snow.

Believing that some few details connected with the last weeks of the mortal life of President Lorenzo Snow would be appreciated by the readers of the Juvenile Instructor, the following is written: On the morning of Wednesday, October the 9th, the directors of the Salt Lake and Los Angeles Railway Corporation, of which I was one, met with him in the Beehive House instead of the President's Office, as we had been wont to do, and after the meeting, by his request we administered to him. We then thought, with him, that he was suffering from an ordinary cold on the lungs, and of course looked for his speedy recovery. At five o'clock the same day Sister Snow came into the office bearing the request that some of the brethren come and administer to President Snow, who was just reviving from a sinking spell. Myself, Brother John Henry Smith and others went immediately to his bedside, and it was apparent then that he was seriously and dangerously sick. After administering to him we urged the calling in of a physician and Drs. Joseph S. Richards and C. F. Wilcox were sent for, who pronounced the President's ailment to be pneumonia, and their opinion was to the effect that unless there was a decided change for the better, hope for recovery could not be consistently entertained. During that night and early the next morning, and again later, about 9:30 o'clock, the President showed signs of sinking, but still he appeared to believe that he would get over it. At twelve minutes past noon, while myself and the Apostles were in council meeting in the temple a messenger was admitted to the room bearing the news that the President was rapidly sinking. We at once adjourned our meeting and repaired in a body to the bedside of our beloved leader, where we found that many of the family had already gathered. Until within a couple of hours of his death the President was quite conscious and self-possessed, but not at all communicative. Besides members of his numerous family we found in the sick room the temple choir who, it appears, had been sent for the purpose of rendering a couple of favorite selections in keeping with a request said to have been made to Sister M. J. Snow by the President a few days before his death. As some questioned the propriety of the choir singing at that particular time, the President was asked if he wished to hear the choir sing. He unhesitatingly replied in the negative, but invited them to sing at his funeral. After this he called for members of his family at different times and with much difficulty tried to make himself understood, but afterwards his speech became less and less coherent until he failed entirely to do so, and at 3:35 that same afternoon the spirit of him who fully expected to tarry with us until at least certain undertakings should be completed and accomplished, passed from mortal life, and we were left appalled at the change so suddenly wrought, which may be better imagined than described.

It is with pleasure that we refer to the last public words of our departed President, delivered by him at the general conference on the Sunday afternoon, which have been already published. While it was plain to be seen that he was feeble, yet it was generally remarked how clear he was in his mind and with what emphasis and freedom his words flowed from him. All feel the deep import of his remarks and accept them as the culminating effort of serious thought and reflection. Indeed it was well known to some that the President's mind was being strongly led out in this direction some time before he delivered himself at conference. For instance, at a council meeting held on the 22nd of August, he said:

He had been thinking of late whether we were justified in keeping at home the Apostles and Seventies the way we were now doing. They were really ministers to the nations of the earth; their duties were clearly marked out by the Lord, and until the Gospel was preached thoroughly to the world he doubted whether the Savior would come, as the preaching of the Gospel to the world is certainly a part of the work that has to be done before He does come. The duties of the High Priests were also clearly marked out, their duties being to labor at home. The Apostles in going out might very appropriately take someone with them other than their associate Apostles or Presidents of Seventies; they might take High Priests, that the latter might become better qualified through the association with the Apostles, and the experience thus gained become valuable to them and the Church generally. It is proper that the Apostles visit as far as possible the conferences of the stakes of Zion, but I doubt, he said, that they can be satisfied to devote their time in this direction always. I think that the President of the Apostles should think about this and pray about it, and have his mind enlarged and brightened in reference to this matter. I feel that the Apostles should have their minds upon this subject, and that they should consider it in their quorum capacity. He referred to the experience of men, as given in the Book of Mormon, who went and labored among their bitterest enemies and accomplished a mighty work. The Lord, he said, was obliged to help them as they were in the line of their duty, and this he did in miraculous ways. The President named Austria and Russia, and said there were other countries where it seemed impossible to introduce the Gospel, but still it had been done partly in Austria, and Elders were making inroads into countries where they heretofore had been forbidden to preach. The President also said there were republics on this continent which never had been visited by an Apostle, and he did not know how far the Lord justified the Apostles and Seventies in waiting for things to become pleasant and agreeable before visiting such countries. He also said he did not know how far the Lord justifies the Apostles and Presiding Seventies in permitting the missionary Elders to do the work, evidently upon their own volition, of opening up new fields of labor in foreign lands. I now present this, he said, for the consideration of the brethren, how far the Apostles are justified in stopping at home. The Priesthood, he said, was established for certain purposes, and there is a certain work that has to be done, and I think it is our duty to reflect seriously upon this, and see how matters stand with us. For instance, here are the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, and it is astonishing, when we come to think about it, that the Apostles should be spending their time so largely among them. One would think that young men, properly instructed in a quorum capacity, ought to be able to carry on this work with such aid as they might get in their different stakes. It seems to me the quorums of the Priesthood will have to receive attention. The active work that is being done appears to be in the direction of Mutual Improvement, but the quorums are not doing much.

Again at the council meeting held September 28th, as soon as the meeting had commenced, and while nothing had been said to suggest the thoughts to his mind, he made the following remarks:

"I want to say, here are the Apostles and Seventies, their business is to warn the nations of the earth and prepare the world for the coming of the Savior. They have been engaged in this more or less. Now we find ourselves in a compact, gathered condition, the Church divided into stakes, and we come together from time to time in a council capacity to consider the interests of the cause generally, and make appointments for brethren to visit the stakes when holding their conferences. It looks to me that our minds ought to extend somewhat, and we get out of the beaten track, and a little change be made. For instance, we have started in this direction by sending Brother Grant over to Japan, but this is only a start. Things seem to be going favorably with him, but whether he will accomplish much or not matters not in one sense; it is for the Apostles to show to the Lord that they are His witnesses to all the nations, and that they are doing the best they can."

At the Council meeting held October 3rd, Elder Brigham Young, soon after the Presidency entered the room, arose and informed President Snow that the Apostles at the sessions of their conference that morning and previous days had taken into consideration his remarks, and were now united in recommending that a mission be established somewhere in South America. He also said that Russia had received their attention but that nothing definite in regard to that country had been determined upon.

The following day (Friday) while commenting upon the readiness in which the Apostles had considered his remarks, the President said he very much regretted that it should have become necessary for him to call the attention of the Apostles to their plain duty, that they should have sensed the situation themselves without rendering it necessary for him to point it out to them. Upon this particular occasion he said there was no doubt in his mind that the time was near at hand when the Savior would make his appearance, and he trembled at the thought that the Apostles were spending so much of their time in matters that should be attended to by others, while so little comparatively was being done in their own line of calling.

Feeling his own inability to attend the sessions of the general conference without running the risk of taking more cold, he studiously saved himself, so to speak, for the Sunday afternoon, expressing himself on the Sunday forenoon that he was going to make the effort of his life to speak in the afternoon, as he had something of importance to tell the people. That something has already been presented in the columns of the Deseret News, being the last public utterances of our departed President and leader.

By way of comment I may briefly add, that we accept what is contained therein on the duties of the Twelve, and presiding Priesthood, as the word of the Lord to us all. It is so plain and so convincing as to leave no room for doubt; and there remains but one thing for us to do, and that is to zealously and arduously labor to successfully accomplish all that is required at our hands.

As we now contemplate the mighty change that has taken place in so short a time, the feeling uppermost in our minds is expressed in the language of one of old, "How wonderfully hath God wrought!" And while we stand in wonder and almost bewilderment at so sudden and mighty a change, our hearts are filled with praise and gratitude to the Lord that so speedy a transition, as far as it affects us as His servants, is made possible; for we fully realize that it would be next to impossible for the Church to stand in its present perfectly organized condition so soon after the passing away of its President, did not faith and unity exist to such an extent in our hearts. It is this that fills us with joy and thanksgiving, as it must all our brethren and sisters; enabling us as it does to look confidently into the future and feel that all things necessary to be accomplished are possible with God. Joseph F. Smith.

PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW

Evidence of advancement-Responsibility of stake and ward officers-They must not lay their duties upon the Twelve-Apostles to look after interests of the world-Selection of Second Counselor.

My dear brethren and sisters, it is rather a marvel to me that I venture to talk to you this afternoon; not but that I have something to say and would really like to have the time and the voice to say it, and perhaps by the exercise of your faith and prayers I may have the voice to address you for a few minutes. I have been delighted to hear of the spirit that has attended the speakers since this conference opened. It shows to me one glorious fact-that during the last six months the Latter-day Saints have not been idle. When the Elders address this conference and the Spirit is upon them more than it was at the preceding conference, it shows most clearly that there has been an advance on the part of the Latter-day Saints in the performance of their duties. The next conference we have, if the Saints will continue to improve as they have done during the last six months, our Elders will have more of the Spirit, and their addresses will be even more intelligent and more serviceable to you than they have been during this conference.

Brethren and sisters, God bless you. This is what I wanted to say to you. I have had a distressing cold the last eight or ten days, which has made me very hoarse, and I feared that I would not be able to appear at all during this conference.

I want to say a few words in reference to one particular subject, and I do not want what I shall say to be forgotten. It is a matter that concerns all the Saints; you are all interested in it, and especially the Presidents of Stakes, their counselors, the High Councilors, the Bishops and their counselors, and all those who have been appointed to hold certain portions of the Holy Priesthood and to be actively engaged in the various Stakes of Zion. There are now fifty Stakes of Zion and these Stakes are composed of several wards. On an average there are probably seven or eight wards to each Stake. Over each Stake there are a president and two counselors and twelve High Councilors. Then there are Bishops and counselors over the respective wards. And now, what responsibilities rest upon the officials of these fifty Stakes! The dominion of the Latter-day Saints, to a large extent, and the highest and most sacred responsibilities are depending upon these fifty presidents; and there is something to do for each of these authorities that I have mentioned. The most extensive and important responsibilities devolve upon these officials. And although, I doubt not, they have been pretty faithful in the past, they have not been so faithful in some respects, as they ought to have been; they have not realized their sacred responsibilities so much as they might have done.

This Church is now nearly seventy-two years of age, and we are not expected to do the work of the days of our youth, but to do greater, larger and more extensive work. The Lord is coming one of these days, and He is interested in the work that you ought to be doing, and anxious to be doing. You ought to do all that you possibly can, and leave everything in your business affairs that you wisely can do and attend to these matters. The presidents of these fifty Stakes should consider the people in their respective Stakes, in their various dominions. They should regard them as their own family, as their sons and daughters; and take as deep an interest in them as they ought to take in their own wives and children. It should be their thought by day and by night, how and in what way they can be most serviceable to their respective charges. Oh! brethren, do remember these things that I am talking about; do not forget them. You presidents, when you retire to your rest, you probably can spend half an hour before you go to sleep, and let your thoughts run over your several jurisdictions. See wherein, either physically, financially or spiritually, you can help, and what can be done best in advancing the interests of your official family. These Bishops, however wise and energetic they may think themselves-and the most of them certainly are very wise and energetic-need to be looked after. It is not the duty of the Apostles to look after them.

The Apostles have a work that is in another direction altogether. I want the Presidents of Stakes hereafter to realize that it is their business, not the business of the Apostles; it is the business of the High Priests, the Elders, the Bishops, Priests, Teachers and Deacons to look after these things. Do not lay this duty upon the shoulders of the Apostles. It is not in their line, at least only occasionally. There is a certain channel by and through which the Lord intends to exalt His sons and daughters, to remove wickedness from the earth and to establish righteousness, and that channel is the Priesthood, which God has established and shown clearly the nature and character of the various officers and duties thereof. The Apostles and the Seventies, it is their business by the appointment of the Almighty, to look after the interests of the world. The Seventies and the Twelve Apostles are special witnesses unto the nations of the earth. The business of the High Priests, the Elders and the Bishops is to look after the interests in these various organizations that I have mentioned. You presiding officers of the various Stakes of Zion, the time is coming when you will not have to call and depend so much upon the Twelve Apostles. They will be directed in other channels, and I want you to distinctly understand it; and do not seek to throw responsibilities that belong to you upon these Twelve Apostles and upon the Seventies.

I wanted to say this, and to speak it with energy and in a way that you will not forget it, that you cannot forget it. It is a wonderful responsibility, and the Lord expects it of you. You ought to know how the laws of God are observed in your respective localities-how the Sabbath is kept; whether the young people are swearing, and off at midnight when they ought to be at home; how the parents govern and control them; how far the people are paying their tithing correctly; what they are doing in regard to their meeting houses, their school houses, and their house of amusement; whether they are expending their time and means too much in these directions, or not enough; and what you can do in helping them along. Look at these things and everything that pertains to the happiness of your children, the members of this family of yours, see what you can do about it. And the Lord God of Israel will help you in this, because it is just what He wants you to do. It is the duty that He has placed upon you to discharge, and He certainly will help you. But when you take any other course-when you depend upon the Apostles to reform your respective Stakes-you are doing that which you have no business to do. Do it yourselves, you Presidents of Stakes and counselors, you High Councilors, and you Bishops. The High Council should visit all through the Stake which they have charge of in connection with the President and his counselors. It is not the business altogether of the High Council to just wait till some persons come before them and want some little trifle settled. They have got to do something else, more noble and grand than such little matters. Go where you can do good, and be lively in it.

Now, God bless you Latter-day Saints. I am glad to see such a vast multitude as there is here, and that I understand has been throughout this conference. I repeat, I am so delighted to hear that the Spirit of God has been on the Elders so bountifully as it has, and that they have spoken so well and so wisely to you as they have. I thank you for the faith you have exercised, because when I arose here I did not know that I could speak five words; but now I have said what I wanted to say. A great deal could be enlarged upon this, and the brethren will do so as opportunity serves.

There is still one matter that I might speak of. I am going on pretty fast toward my eighty-eighth year; I will soon be eighty-eight years old; and I have been laboring now for some months with but one counselor-President Joseph F. Smith. I feel as though I wanted a little more help-another counselor; and I have selected one (through, I believe, the manifestations of the Lord), who, I think, will be energetic and strong, will serve the people, and help me and President Joseph F. Smith along in a proper way; and I hope you will sustain and support him. God bless you. Amen.
