James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual Tithing instructions, December 1, 1901

1901-December 1-Original pamphlet. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

During the period covered by this volume instructions were issued annually on the care of Tithes. The instructions, dated December 1, 1901, are reproduced here as a sample of the type of annual instruction issued on this topic. References to later Annual Instructions on Tithing will he given in the appropriate places in the volume but in the interest of space the text of these instructions will not be reproduced for each year.

Salt Lake City, Utah, December 1, 1901.

To Presidents of Stakes and Counselors, Bishops and Counselors and Stake Tithing Clerks in Zion:

Dear Brethren:

In order that the revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the Law of Tithing may be carried out in its spirit and meaning, and that the tithes might be received, handled, disbursed and accounted for in a systematic manner, and a record compiled and preserved of all those who observe this law, we direct your attention to this important subject and give the following detailed instructions:

CARE OF TITHES AND TITHING PREMISES

The tithes should be kept in good condition and nothing allowed to waste for want of proper care and attention. Tithing premises should be kept in good repair, side-walks graded and the lot kept free from weeds. Trees should be planted where water is obtainable. In fact, the Bishop's Storehouse should be in keeping, at least, with the general surroundings of the neighborhood. If buildings are needed for properly handling and caring for the tithes, the Bishop can forward an application, giving an estimate of the cost. Blank forms will be supplied upon request. All such applications should have the endorsement of the President of the Stake.

NEW WARDS 3. Where new wards are organized in agricultural districts, the Bishop will confer with the President of the Stake at the first convenient date, and arrange for the selection and purchase of a small piece of land suitable for tithing purposes, which should be conveniently located for the majority of the tithe-payers of that Ward. This selection should be promptly reported to the Presiding Bishop's Office when the necessary instructions will be given to acquire title to the property.

TITHING CREDIT

INSTRUCTIONS TO MISSIONS

It is not expected that all the instructions contained in this communication can be carried out in the Missions, but as far as they are practicable they should be applied, so that there may be a uniform system of receiving and accounting for the tithes throughout the Church. And we recommend, as far as it is convenient, that the instructions relating to a ward be applied to a conference, and such instructions as relate to a stake be applied to a mission.

Forms for the purpose of compiling the annual tithing accounts will be sent from the Presiding Bishop's Office in the near future, and on or before January 1, 1902, the President of each conference will make up the annual tithing report of that conference, which should show the tithing paid by each member of the Church, residing in that conference, for the year 1901, and the disposition of the tithes so received. This report should be forwarded to mission headquarters on or before January 12, 1902. The President of the mission will then compile a mission report in the manner provided on the forms, and forward one copy of the mission and conference report to the Presiding Bishop's Office, so that it will arrive at Salt Lake City on or before January 31, 1902. An individual tithing record will be kept of each person paying tithes in the mission in the same manner as outlined in paragraph No. 16.

Commencing with the year 1902, the Presidents of the several missions are expected to make an application to the First Presidency, in writing, before using the tithes of the mission for its maintenance or other purposes. If such application is approved, an order will be issued on the mission authorizing the use of the tithes for the purpose applied for. All such applications should state specific amount and be made quarterly in advance.

In conclusion, we desire again to impress the Presiding Officers in the stakes and wards of Zion with the necessity of teaching and observing the law of tithing, urging its importance to the spiritual and temporal welfare of the Latter-day Saints, and the many blessings promised to those who observe this law.

Praying that the blessings of the Lord may rest upon you continually in your labors among the people, we remain,

Your brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency
