James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Pre-Existent States, January 31, 1912

1912-January 31-Improvement Era 15:417-418 (Mar., 1912).

PRE-EXISTENT STATES*

January 31, 1912

*The Improvement Era comments editorially as follows:

Relating to the identity of Adam, it might be further stated that the Prophet Joseph Smith, at Far West, about 1839, gave some information on this subject, which is found in one of his sermons (page 465, Historical Record). From this we learn that Adam is Michael, the archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. He is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men. Jesus Christ stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Jesus, the Son of Man, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, and retains his standing as head of the human family. Jesus is the mediator of the new covenant. He is the great High Priest; Adam next.

From these statements, and from many others that might be quoted, it is clear that Adam and Christ are two persons-not the same Person. It is erroneous doctrine to consider them one and the same person, for Jesus is the Christ, a member of the Trinity, the God-head, and to whom Adam, the father of the human family upon this earth, is amenable. Adam will have to account for his stewardship to our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, whose blood atones for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam.

To Whom it May Concern: The First Presidency have nothing to advance concerning pre-existing states, but that which is contained in the revelations to the Church. The written standards of scripture show that all people who come to this earth and are born in mortality, had a pre-existent, spiritual personality, as the sons and daughters of the Eternal Father. (See Pearl of Great Price, Chap. 3, verses 5-7.) Jesus Christ was the first-born. A spirit born of God is an immortal being. When the body dies, the spirit does not die. In the resurrected state the body will be immortal as well as the spirit. Speculations as to the career of Adam before he came to the earth are of no real value. We learn by revelation that he was Michael, the archangel, and that he stands at the head of his posterity on earth. (Doctrine and Covenants, Section 107:53-56.) Dogmatic assertions do not take the place of revelation, and we should be satisfied with that which is accepted as doctrine, and not discuss matters that, after all disputes, are merely matters of theory.

Your brethren, (Signed) JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE. First Presidency.
