James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Identity and career of Adam; February 20, 1912

1912-February 20-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The statement of the First Presidency on "Pre-existent States" above under the date of January 31, 1912, treats the same subject, essentially, as this letter to Samuel O. Bennion, President of the Central States Mission. The present treatment, however, is more detailed.

It may be noted that the former statement, though bearing a date of January 31, 1912, did not appear in print in the Improvement Era until March, 1912, or until after the writing of this present statement.

Whereas the January statement only briefly refers to "Speculations as to the career of Adam before he came to the earth . . . this statement meets the problem head-on by referring to a sermon of Brigham Young found in Journal of Discourses 1:46-52 (under a date of April 9, 1852). This sermon, subsequent to publication by G. D. Watt in 1853, has been widely discussed and hotly debated.

The First Presidency in this letter to Samuel O. Bennion, Mission President, states that Brigham Young's sermon had been subject to misinterpretation. They then proceed to correct the misinterpretations by re-stating the doctrine of the Church on the Godhead. They particularly correct any misunderstanding that may have arisen over the correct interpretation of the person and role of Adam, the person and role of Jesus Christ, and the person and role of God the Father by stating that these are three distinct persons in L.D.S. and biblical revelations and are to be so considered despite any interpretations of the Brigham Young sermon of 1852 to the contrary.

This letter to Samuel O. Bennion has been quite widely circulated in mimeograph form. Many copies so circulated have serious errors including wrong scriptural references. The copy used for this printing is a correct copy reproduced from the original carbon copy in the Church Historian's Library and checked for accuracy by Thomas G. Truitt of the Historian's staff.

It is helpful to compare the contents of this letter with the contents of the statement of the First Presidency on the "Origin of Man" made in 1909; the statement of the First Presidency on "Pre-existent States" of January, 1912; and the statement of President Joseph F. Smith in Box Elder Stake Conference, December 20, 1914, all found in this volume of the Messages.

Salt Lake City, Utah February 20, 1912 Prest. Samuel O. Bennion Independence,

Dear Brother:

Your question concerning Adam has not been answered before because of pressure of important business. We now respond briefly, but, we hope, plainly. You speak of "the assertion made by Brigham Young that Jesus was begotten of the Father in the flesh by our father Adam, and that Adam is the father of Jesus Christ and not the Holy Ghost," and you say that Elders are challenged by certain critics to prove this.

If you will carefully examine the sermon to which you refer, in the Journal of Discourses, Vol. 1, you will discover that, while President Young denied that Jesus was "begotten of the Holy Ghost," he did not affirm, in so many words, that "Adam is the father of Jesus Christ in the flesh." He said, "Jesus, our elder brother, was begotten in the flesh by the same character that was in the garden of Eden and who is our Father in Heaven. Who is our "Father in Heaven"? Here is what President Young said about him; "Our Father in heaven begat all the spirits that ever were or ever will be upon this earth and they were born spirits in the eternal world. Then the Lord by his power and wisdom organized the mortal tabernacle of man." Was He in the Garden of Eden? Surely He gave commandments to Adam and Eve; He was their Father in Heaven; they worshiped Him and taught their children after the fall to worship and obey Him in the name of the Son who was to come.

But President Young went on to show that our father Adam,-that is, our earthly father,-the progenitor of the race of man, stands at our head, being "Michael the Archangel, the Ancient of Days," and that he was not fashioned from earth like an adobe, but "begotten by his Father in Heaven." Adam is called in the Bible "the son of God" (Luke 3:38). It was our Father in Heaven who begat the spirit of him who was "the Firstborn" of all the spirits that come to this earth, and who was, also his Father by the Virgin Mary, making him "the only begotten in the flesh." Read Luke 1:26-35. Where is Jesus called "the only begotten of the Holy Ghost?" He is always singled out as "the only begotten of the Father." (John 1:14; 3:16, 18, &c) The Holy Ghost came upon Mary, and her conception was under that influence, even of the spirit of life; our Father in Heaven was the Father of the Son of Mary, to whom the Savior prayed, as did our earthly father Adam.

when President Young asked, "who is the Father?" he was speaking of Adam as the father of our earthly bodies, who is at our head, as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants, Section 107, verses 53-56. In that sense he is one of the gods referred to in numerous scriptures, and particularly by Christ (John 10:34-36). He is the great Patriarch, the Ancient of Days, who will stand in his place as "a prince over us forever," and with whom we shall "have to do," as each family will have to do with its head, according to the holy patriarchal order. Our father, Adam, perfected and glorified as a God, will be the being who will carry out the behests of the great Elohim in relation to his posterity. (See Daniel 7:9-14.)

While, as Paul puts it, "there be gods many and Lords many (whether in heaven or in earth), unto us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things." The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints worships Him, and Him alone, who is the Father of Jesus Christ, whom He worshiped, whom Adam worshiped, and who is God the Eternal Father of us all.

Your brethren, (signed) JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
