James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Missionary training correspondence course, March 2, 1912

1912-March 2-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The letter is self-explanatory. Identical copies were also sent out under a dateline of December 1, 1912.

Salt Lake City, Utah, March 2nd, 1912 TO THE BISHOPRIC, DEAR BRETHREN:

There are now more than 2000 missionaries in the field, most of whom are young men. Many of this number, according to the reports of the Presidents of Missions, have not had the advantages of a thorough public school training. In this respect they do not represent our people fairly, nor do they accomplish as much good as they would if they were better informed. In some instances it requires the first year of their mission to prepare them for their calling. This is a great loss to themselves, their parents and the cause they represent.

To remedy this condition, classes for missionaries have been maintained in all of our larger Church Schools for many years, and while they have done much good, they do not satisfy all the needs of the missionaries. To quit work and go to a Church School for one or two years, and follow that with a mission of two or three years, is a greater sacrifice than many feel that they can make. For all such as need the work and cannot take a regular course in a Church School, a Correspondence Course has been provided. This Course includes thorough instruction in the principles of the gospel, the leading facts in our Church History, a practical course in English, and some statistical and other information that every missionary should possess. All the work in this course can be done by the students at home, without interfering with their earning capacity, utilizing evenings that otherwise might be wasted, and thereby establishing good habits to displace poorer ones.

The services of Bishop Edwin S. Sheets have been secured to conduct the course. He is a practical teacher and an experienced missionary. The text books used during the first part of the course are: "A Young Folks' History of the Church," by Nephi Anderson; "The Gospel," by B. H. Roberts; "Mormon Doctrine," by Charles W. Penrose; and a good text on English, the cost of said books is $2.50. The books used in the second part of the course are: "The Articles of Faith," by James E. Talmage; "Ecclesiastical History," by B. H. Roberts; together with a brief outline of statistics and other general information pertaining to the Church and also to our State. The cost of the books for the second part of the course is $2.25. Those who already have the above books will have no other expense than the $10.00 tuition fee, which is payable in advance.

Students may enroll at any time. The length of time required to complete the course will depend largely upon the ability of the student and the time that he can devote to the work. The course not only prepares brethren and sisters for the mission-field, but also for a life of usefulness at home in the quorums and the auxiliary organizations.

I request that you send at least the name of one person from your Ward who will enroll at once in the Course. Send the name to Principal Edwin S. Sheets, No. 40 North Main St., Salt Lake City.

I remain, your brother in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH
