James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Relief Society and Temple clothing, June 4, 1912

1912-June 4-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Since Temple clothing is sacred and therefore not for public distribution or view, it has always been somewhat of a problem as to how to safeguard its sacredness. The letter contains the instructions of the First Presidency for 1912 in this matter, making it the responsibility of the Relief Society under the supervision of the priesthood.

The Relief Society Magazine 4:608-609 (November, 1917) also contains a copy of this same letter but with a note that it was sent out "from the First Presidency to all Stake Presidents" on November 12, 1912. Apparently the identical instructions found here under date of June 4, 1912, were again circulated at the later date in 1912 and perhaps subsequently.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, June 4th, 1912. Prest. Nephi L. Morris, City.

Dear Brother:

We desire to inform you that the General Board of Relief Society has been instructed by us to take charge of the business of supplying temple clothing to all members of the Church coming to the temple from time to time in need of it, also for burial purposes; and that the Society has appointed a responsible committee to attend to this business who is now prepared to furnish suits or parts of suits at its headquarters in the Bishop's Building, 49 North Main Street, this city.

The committee referred to will take this matter up with the Stake President of the Relief Societies of your Stake, and impart to her all the information necessary in regard to this matter.

And we would thank you also to inform your Bishops of it, and at the same time request them to instruct all those coming to the temple from their respective wards to supply themselves with temple clothing before leaving home if they can do so conveniently, otherwise to call at the office of the Relief Society in the Bishop's Building where it may be purchased or rented.

On account of the sacredness of the character of our temple clothing we have felt for some time past that a safeguard ought to be thrown around it with a view to preventing it from being loosely handled or unnecessarily exposed, and it has occurred to us that the duty of handling the clothing may very properly be imposed upon and intrusted to our Relief Society, under supervision of the proper authority.

We are, with kindest regards. Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.

P. S.-Parties wishing to reach the committee by telephone may do so by calling up Wasatch 207, or Wasatch 3455
