James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Mexican colonists released, October 11, 1912

1912-October 11-Improvement Era 16:69-70 (November, 1912).

The heading and the statement are self-explanatory.

THE MEXICAN COLONISTS RELEASED

On October 11, the First Presidency issued the following advice to the Saints of Mexico:

"To Our Brethren and Sisters of Mexico, Greeting:-After a conference with Elders A. W. Ivins, President Junius Romney, Bishop Allen D. Thurber of Dublan, Bishop Joseph C. Bentley, of Juarez, and his counselor Thomas Romney, and others, at which members of the Quorum of the Twelve were present, including President Francis M. Lyman, which conference was convened for the purpose of considering the conditions now confronting our Mexican colonists, as a result of the revolution still being carried on in Mexico, we have concluded to advise:

"First: That the Juarez Stake and Ward officers and members, one and all, may consider themselves honorably released from any further sense of duty to return to or remain in Mexico. But the right and title to the property temporarily vacated should in all cases, and by every lawful means, be maintained.

"Second: That all those who wish to permanently remain in the United States should take immediate steps, with the aid of the committee appointed, to render needed assistance, to make definite arrangements to repair to the places decided on by themselves in which to settle.

"Third: Those who regard it as unsafe to return to their homes at present, but who expect to do so under changed conditions, are advised to take up their temporary abode as near to the border line as they can, where suitable and profitable employment may be obtained.

"Fourth: In view of what has happened, and what may yet take place, we have not felt, neither do we now feel, that we could consistently assume the responsibility of advising our colonists to return to their homes, and must therefore leave the responsibility of deciding this question with themselves. But to all who may decide to return, we cheerfully say, go with our sanction and blessing and our prayers for your preservation and success.

"Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, "First Presidency."
