James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual pastoral epistle, December 21, 1912

1912-December 21-MS 75:17-21 (January 9, 1913); also Deseret News, December 21, 1912.

Although coming at the time when the annual Christmas message was published, this one is entitled "Annual Greeting." It is a "pastoral" epistle reviewing the growth and health of the Church and its members for 1912.

ANNUAL GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY From the "Deseret News," December 21st, 1912

We congratulate the Latter-day Saints throughout the world on the privileges, blessings and progress they have attained, since they last celebrated the anniversary of the Savior's birthday, according to the date accepted in Christendom. Christmas means as much to them as to any body of believers on the earth. Christ is their Redeemer, their Lord and their King. Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, was and is, in their creed, the veritable Son of God, the light and life of the world, the sinless and immaculate One, the conqueror of Satan and of death, the resurrection, and the atoning substitute for human guilt, by whom mankind are reconciled to Deity and salvation may come to all. The annual commemoration of His birthday has become more general and more significant of His divinity as succeeding years have passed along, since the Star of Bethlehem guided the Magi to His birthplace and the shepherds listened to the angels' song of His nativity. That sweet refrain "On earth peace, good will to men," has echoed down through the corridors of the centuries, until at this Christmastide it is a universal anthem.

Since last Christmas the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has increased rapidly in unity, in strength, in numbers, in wide-spread influence, in its houses of worship at home and abroad, in the faith of its members and their understanding of its principles, in the order and power of its Priesthood organizations and auxiliary associations, in its missionary activities and in attracting public attention. All this has been a source of pleasure and gratification to the saints, and is to them strong evidence of the favor of heaven and of the truth of the prophetic utterances of their leaders.

The past year has been prolific in determined attempts of designing persons to bring trouble and disaster upon our people and block the way to proselytism abroad. The press and the pulpit, in many places, have combined to vilify, misrepresent and falsely accuse our ministers and our cause, in order to arouse the animosity of the uninformed populace and inflame the passions of intolerant mobs, leading to acts of lawless violence, to assaults upon persons and property and efforts to intimidate peaceable people, preventing their attendance at "Mormon" meetings and creating riot and disorder. Some of these endeavors have appeared to succeed for a time, but have eventually resulted in their signal defeat. Patience, perseverance and reliance upon Divine promises have gained peaceful victories, and truth has triumphed over falsehood. The newspaper and magazine attacks upon our leaders and the lectures and discourses of hired libelers have met with a similar fate and have accomplished the very reverse of the purpose intended, while the authors and workers of the evil have soon faded from the public view and sunk toward that oblivion which is their dread and will surely be their doom.

The good of all this, on which we congratulate our friends, and particularly those who have been assailed, is in the arousing of public attention to the cause which its enemies aim to destroy. After the excitement aroused by the outrageous and improbable stories against the elders and saints has subsided, investigation by rational persons ensues, the meetings held by our people are largely attended, conversions follow, or at least conviction that the people and principles so grossly maligned have been unjustly accused, and those who have figured in the falsehood stand condemned before their fellows. And thus the work goes on, in fulfillment of Divine promises and to the accomplishment of the warning of the world and the proclamation of the gospel of the Son of God, whose advent as the Babe of Bethlehem we delight to celebrate. Each Christmas day brings additional assurances that the word of the Lord to us in the beginning will certainly be fulfilled: "No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, and the tongue that rises in judgment against you shall be condemned."

We congratulate our friends in these mountain vales on the bountiful harvests of this year of grace, which have been so abundant, yielding good returns for the skill and labor expended, on the progress achieved and improvement exhibited in the raising of fine live stock, and in the erection of comfortable homes with modern conveniences and adornments to be seen in the various settlements of the saints, replacing the primitive dwellings of the early times of struggle and privation. Similarly, and in many places, greater advancement is noticeable in the public buildings for civic, educational and ecclesiastical purposes, adding beauty to the towns and cities where they are conspicuous, as well as benefiting the public in other ways and assisting in the general progress.

Commercial prosperity is also in pleasing evidence, stimulated by an awakened spirit of support to the home manufactures which add so greatly to the material riches of the State, coupled with the vast output of mineral treasures, brought from their mountain deposits and prepared for the factories and the markets in the great home smelting works which have been erected through the enterprise of labor and capital in unison. Utah ranks among the leading metal-producers of the several States, and her wool crop and sugar product contribute no less to her wealth and fame and show wondrous increase at each succeeding Christmas day.

While missions abroad and general education and higher learning at home, both secular and religious, mark the rising eminence of the latter-day work, the deepening faith of the saints is shown in their labors of love for the living and the dead in the sacred Temples of the Lord, where ordinances are daily performed for the salvation of mankind. Also in the numerous unions for time and eternity that are solemnized in holy places, welding together the past, the present and the future, and preparing the way for the glorious advent of the world's Redeemer. The spirit of devotion radiates from those sanctuaries throughout the Stakes and wards of Zion, and is felt in the homes of the faithful, where praise and prayer ascend in the morning and the evening to the throne of the Most High.

The year now passing has brought many thousands of inquiring people to our chief city, who have seen for themselves and heard with surprise the truth concerning the maligned "Mormons" and have gone back to their homes ready to refute the stories in popular circulation that have gained credence with the uninformed. Among those visitors have been many highminded and courageous men and women, who have become our fast friends and defenders, and who aid in bringing about a proper understanding between us and the honorable of the earth, whom we hail as members of the great family of the Eternal Father, no matter what may be their race or creed. We congratulate our brethren and sisters on this encouraging advancement and recognition.

Another cause for congratulation is the lifting of the dense cloud of prejudice against our people from the minds of the leading men of the nation, and their changed estimate of our, status and attitude towards the government. The "Mormons are no longer regarded with the disfavor and suspicion once exhibited, but are recognized as stable, conservative and patriotic, worthy of the rights and privileges of citizenship. In the Mexican uprising, the "Mormon" refugees have been accorded their full share of the generous appropriations made by Congress for the shelter and sustenance of Americans driven from their possessions, and for their transportation to points where they could be secure and be with relatives and friends and find means of self-support. The wise policy of the Administration in dealing with the questions arising in maintaining proper relations with the Mexican Republic, under the revolutionary outbreak, endangering the lives and prosperity of Americans residing there, is worthy of all praise and is duly appreciated by our friends who have escaped from threatened horrors and dangers. While deprived for a time of their homes and other fruits of their toil, they yet have cause for gratitude to God and their country in their salvation from greater possible evils. The ready responses of their co-religionists to calls for help, and the facility with which the great majority of the colonists have found temporary or permanent abiding places, speak forcibly in commendation of the good counsels and loving care of the leading men during the time of danger, and the splendid system of our Church organization.

The prospects of the latter-day work at the Christmas of 1912 are magnificent. Peace prevails in our mountain homes. Order and unity give strength to all our ecclesiastical organizations. Interest in doctrine, in discipline, in spiritual and secular education, in purity of life and character, in the care and culture of the young, in the study of civil government, in science, in art, in music, in literature and in those recreations that elevate as well as entertain, and the attendance at devotional gatherings, all tend towards the steady building up of the kingdom of the Lord. During the festive season now at hand we think it timely to draw attention to the subject of dancing parties, a diversion permitted to Latter-day Saints, but under certain rules that ought to be strictly observed. The indiscriminate association of saints and strangers in public balls, improperly encouraged often for the raising of funds, is not productive of that good and wholesome spirit that is desirable. In all our settlements such recreations should be in control of appointed committees, and regulations for order and decorum should be strictly maintained. Intoxicants should be barred entirely from dancing halls and their vicinity. Those dances that require or permit the close embrace and suggestive movements, that are beginning to be condemned in all respectable social parties, ought to be utterly prohibited. Immodesty in dress should be frowned down by parents and all decent people. The shameless exhibitions of the human form purposely presented in modern styles of dress, or rather undress, are indications of that sensuous and debasing tendency toward moral laxity and social corruption which have hurried nations into irretrievable ruin. Let not the brilliant prospects of a glorious millennium be clouded with such shadows as are threatened by customs and costumes and diversions of these licentious days.

The prospects of the work abroad are also of the most encouraging character. All the missions are flourishing. Interest has been aroused by violent opposition, and there are constant calls for additional missionaries. Especially are experienced elders needed in lands where other languages than English are spoken. In Sweden, Denmark and Norway, in Holland, Germany and France, in South Africa among the Boers, in New Zealand, Samoa, Tahiti and other Pacific Islands as well as in Japan, missionaries speaking the language of the natives are wanted, even if, because of having filled missions there before, they cannot reasonably spend a long time in such service again. At this time of rejoicing over the birth of the Savior of mankind, it seems fitting to remind our brethren who have enlisted in His cause that there are millions of earth's inhabitants who need to hear the gospel's joyful sound and have the opportunity given them to accept and obey it.

During the past year a few of our faithful missionaries have laid down their lives while in the service of the Master. Also a number of veterans, both men and women, who have been faithful to the end have passed into the world beyond the veil. They are rejoicing, with the hosts who have preceded them, in the progress of the work of salvation there, and have a livelier hope and a more certain assurance even than we have, of the rapid approach of the time for the second advent of the Lord and the glorious union of saints with Him when He comes "the second time without sin unto salvation." Then we shall rejoin our dear ones who have left us, and none will in anywise lose their full reward.

Now let the saints of God rejoice and be merry. Not in excess, nor in boisterous or disorderly speech or action, but with that temperance and moderation that bring no regrettable results. Remember the poor and unfortunate, and minister to their necessities. Make the children glad with suitable presents. Let gifts be bestowed in prudence without extravagance. Let family feuds be melted in the glow and geniality of Christmas cheer. Let forgiveness extend to all who have done us wrong. Let the mountains shout for joy, and the vales resound with praise, and let every believer in the Christ strive to extend the spirit of kindness and good will, that peace may prevail and strife be banished, and the world be prepared for the universal Christmas in the presence of its glorious King. Love and blessing to the good and true in every land and clime! JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
