James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Call for more missionaries, March 15, 1913

1913-March 15-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

An annual decrease in the number of missionaries going into the mission field for the three preceding years and the special needs of certain missions are noted in this appeal for missionaries.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, March 15th, 1913. President Nephi L. Morris, Salt Lake Stake

Dear Brother:

We are greatly in need of more missionaries. We have received a number of requests from the various missions for more elders, and some of the mission presidents have written that if their forces are not reinstated it will be necessary to close down some of the fields where elders are now laboring.

In 1910, one thousand missionaries left this city for the various missions, in 1911, nine hundred and in 1912, eight hundred; so you see the number is decreasing instead of increasing.

We will be pleased to receive from you the names of brethren whom you can recommend for missions and who are physically and financially able to go and worthy of recommendation.

Each bishop, before filling out the recommendation blank, should read the instructions thereon and follow them. Of late a number of brethren have been recommended who do not observe the Word of Wisdom. We feel that brethren should live up to this requirement before they are recommended for missions, and if a brother does not observe the Word of Wisdom, his bishop should take up a labor with him before sending his name to us to receive a missionary call, as brethren have reported at this office to be set apart who were users of tobacco and in some cases strong drinks. We feel that brethren should overcome their weaknesses at home and form good habits, so that it will not be necessary for them to overcome them in the mission field and bring reproach upon the other elders as well as the Church.

We have received a request from the Western States for some German-speaking elders to labor in North and South Dakota, where there are many German people. South Africa is in need of some Hollanders to labor among the Dutch people of that mission, as there are many Dutch people in South Africa and a good work can be accomplished if they can secure the services of three or four Dutch-speaking elders. The Netherlands Mission have sent several requests for an organist and chorister; the Scandinavian Mission is greatly in need of an Icelander to labor in his native land, and the missions in the United States are in need of stenographers and book-keepers.

We appreciate the ready response to our request for brethren to perform short missions of six months or a year. The mission presidents report that they are doing a good work. If you have any brethren in your stake who have already been on a mission, or capable men of experience who may not be able to remain in the field longer than six months or a year, we shall be pleased to receive their names.

Hoping to receive a goodly number of names of brethren who will be prepared to leave for missions in the near future, and praying for your success, we remain, Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
