James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Greetings and instructions to priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations, Church schools, December, 1913

1913-December-Improvement Era 17:168-172 (December, 1913).

Seemingly at least three distinct and separate annual or Christmas messages were prepared for release to the membership of the Church by the First Presidency during the month of December, 1913.

The first in the order in which we have arranged them is the "Greeting from the First Presidency," immediately below, to "the quorums of the priesthood, with the missionaries and the various auxiliary societies, particularly the Mutual Improvement Associations, the Church Schools, and all officers and members of the Church, not forgetting the readers of the Improvement Era.

The second is a special greeting to the "Saints and friends in the Swiss and German Mission" which was published in German in Der Stern in January, 1914.

The third is a "Christmas Salutation from The First Presidency" which appeared in the Deseret News of December 20, 1913, and in the Millennial Star in England, January 15, 1914.

Each of these messages not only extend Christmas greetings and salutations to the intended readers, but also review the past year's work in the Church for a special or particular reader audience.

GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

At the approach of another holiday season, and the close of another year, we greet and congratulate the quorums of the priesthood, with the missionaries and the various auxiliary societies, particularly the Mutual Improvement Associations, the Church Schools, and all the officers and members of the Church, not forgetting the readers of the Improvement Era, on the progress made, and the good feeling prevailing.

It is with thankful hearts and praises to our Heavenly Father, that we contemplate the growth of the Church during the past year. It has been highly satisfactory, both spiritually and temporally, both at home and abroad. In the various stakes and wards, the people have been diligent in building houses of worship, and there is a perceptible advancement in every department of our work. The officers in charge have fulfilled their mission of love in a manner gratifying to the presiding authorities, and, we believe, acceptable to the Lord. In season and out of season, they have worked with the old and the young to better the religious, physical and moral condition of the people. The Lord has blessed and prospered them, not only in spiritual things, but in temporal matters as well.

MISSION WORK

In the foreign mission fields, a force of nearly two thousand elders have labored diligently, during the year, to fulfil the great and important duty resting upon the Latter-day Saints "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel." They have thoroughly realized that God has given us the gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity, and that we owe it to our fellow-men to make known the glorious message to mankind. They have gone out willingly and with a determination to perform this duty. Some ministers declare that we do not send our missionaries to the Pagans. We are not yet a very numerous people, and have not the means to pay missionaries, as most sectarian societies do, even if that were the better way. Our elders depend upon the Lord and not upon the dollar, and so they go to the world believing in and depending upon God, and his Son Jesus, the Redeemer. But they do not preach to the Christian nations alone; they are also to be found among the Pagans, though we have not yet as many among them as we hope to have, for this gospel is unto every creature. A number of our missionaries are working in Japan. There is a branch of the Church in Hindustan, with a few Saints. We have also Saints in Syria, among the Mohammedans, and the work will doubtless further spread and grow. During the year, in England and Scandinavia, our elders have found considerable opposition, owing to a misapprehension of the nature of our work, but it has not hindered its progress. Where denied the use of halls to hold meetings in, we have built chapels and meetinghouses of our own, and we hope there will be a broad and Christian spirit sufficient to enable us to occupy them in peace. We invite all people to come and worship with us, and hear the message we have to bear to the world. In the South Sea Islands, also, among the Maoris and the Samoans, we have established schools for the people, in which are taught the common branches of education, and the doctrines of the Church. For the natives, in New Zealand, we have a high school where not only the gospel is taught, but also the general principles of education, and training in practical things, including manual labor, husbandry, and agriculture. This school has already achieved notable success. We rejoice in the work that is being done, and approve the zealous labors the elders are performing. The presidents of the twenty-one different missions are men of God, and they are commended for their untiring labors in conducting the missions, training the elders, and promulgating the gospel of Jesus Christ.

PRIESTHOOD QUORUMS

The General Priesthood committee has provided and will continue to supply the priesthood quorums throughout the Church with the necessary text-books for the study of the gospel, and for familiarizing them with their duties in priesthood and quorum capacity. Commendable efforts are being made to unite the quorums in fraternal strength and love. The growth of the quorum activities during the last five years is a cause for gratitude. The practical work performed, and the educational information disseminated by them, have tended greatly to the building up of Zion, and to the edification of her people. Efforts are being made to enroll all members of the priesthood in the various quorums to which they belong. This work should be zealously encouraged.

There is a praiseworthy advancement among the Priests of the Church. At present, in five hundred wards in the Church, there are priests' quorums, or classes each presided over by a bishop, and arrangements are making for an organization of such a quorum or class in every ward of the Church. The Bishops are gathering the young brethren around them, and taking a fatherly interest in their welfare, thus teaching the young men the commandments of the Lord and their daily duties, by precept and example. Another very important activity in the priesthood work is ward teaching. This work, in many places, has been seriously neglected, and we are delighted to learn that the spirit of teaching has been awakened generally. An effort is being made in many of the stakes of Zion to have all the families of the Church visited regularly every month by teachers, and all the officers are being enlisted in this very commendable work which is worthy of the best efforts of our brightest men. Not only the priests, teachers, but elders, high priests, and seventies, should be encouraged to do their part in this great labor. We trust that in addition to the consideration of the studies provided for the coming year, the practical work of the priesthood will not be neglected. It is necessary that every officer shall magnify his calling, and that the teachers visit the people in their homes, to teach them the word of God. The authorities throughout the Church should come close to the members, and particularly to the youth, to lead them in light and truth in spiritual affairs, and to that conduct in temporal and social affairs that should characterize Latter-day Saints.

MOVEMENTS IN THE M.I.A.

In the Mutual Improvement Associations of the young men and the young ladies, praiseworthy activity has been shown in the past year. There appears to be a new awakening among the young people, and the officers of these organizations are certainly to be congratulated upon the interest they have aroused. The boys are sought after, and new methods have been adopted to interest them in the work of the Lord, and in all that pertains to good citizenship in Church and state. The processes by which this is being accomplished are presented in detail from time to time by the officers, throughout the stakes and wards, who are instructed by the general board concerning this important work. The Y.M.M.I.A. offers splendid opportunity in class study, debating, musical exercises, oratory and public speaking, story-telling, scout organizations and athletic exercises, dramatic and literary entertainments, and dancing, all of which are presented with a view to winning and uplifting the boys. A force of some 3,500 officers, young men, devote some of their spare time and efforts in teaching the youth in these activities. We express our gratitude and thanks to them. This home work has its reward as great as the reward that comes to those who go out into the world to preach the gospel. In fact, there is a quicker and more satisfactory return for the labor expended with our own boys, our own flesh and blood, in holding them in the line of duty, and interesting them in their own development and welfare, than in any other work that a missionary can engage in. We trust that this will soon become a sphere for greater effort than at present, a field where our college graduates, educators, and men of special talent in the various activities of the associations may take part in the blessing and advancement of the young men of Zion. The age of eligibility for membership in the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations has recently been changed from 14 years up, to 12. It has been found difficult to enlist the interest of the boys from 12 to 14 in the Primary Associations, owing to ordinations to the priesthood at the age of 12, and also to the fact that they are admitted into the M.I.A. Scout organization at that age. Therefore, it has been thought wise to include these boys in the regular ranks of the Y.M.M.I.A. The necessary outlines for their class exercises, and for their entertainment in the various activities, will be provided by the general board.

In the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, commendable work is being done in every line which they have undertaken, and their officers, from the general board to the active teachers in the classes throughout the Church, are to be praised for their diligence in teaching the young ladies, not only the principles of the gospel, and social and literary knowledge, but for training them in practical work in sewing and domestic science. What is said in praise of the officers of these organizations may with equal emphasis be said of those of the great Sunday School Union, the Primaries, the Religion Class, and the Relief Society.

THE CHURCH SCHOOLS

Supplementing the labors of these organizations, or perhaps standing at their head, for the more favored students, are the Church schools. The people are urged to patronize them. They are organized to teach the principles of the gospel, as well as to impart a thorough general education. A great amount of good is thus being accomplished, which is making itself felt among the youth throughout the Church. Students of these schools are a wonderful help to the auxiliary associations as teachers, and are aiding all the organizations of the Church by their superior ability. Others who are not so engaged, should be induced to assist in this work, for men and women willing and able to instruct the youth in the very best methods of learning, and the right ways of living, are needed, and they will in nowise lose their reward.

Taking a broad view of the situation of the Latter-day Saints general, we see everything to encourage us, and our gratitude goes out to our Father in heaven for the many blessings, of every kind, he has granted unto the Saints. We believe that most of them appreciate these favors, and their gratitude will doubtless be manifested in their obedience and devotion, and in their active support of the Church, and all these organizations and activities.

With earnest wishes for the continued welfare and happiness of Israel, and of those who love the truth, and wishing all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year, we remain, Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
