James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas greeting to Saints and friends of the Swiss and German mission, December, 1913

1913-December-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; also Der Stern, January, 1914.

See note to preceding document.

Christmas 1913

Greetings of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the Saints and friends in the Swiss and German Mission.

We remember with much pleasure our visits to the Swiss and German Mission, and take this opportunity of extending to the people there the compliments of the season. We have a few thoughts which we desire to express at this season of the year.

We are always deeply interested in the welfare of the Elders and saints, both at home and abroad, and the prayers of the saints in Zion ascend daily to the throne of grace in their behalf. We pray that all may enjoy themselves during the coming festive season, that Christmas, with all that it signifies, may prove a blessing to them and that the dawn of the new year may bring increased prosperity and happiness. We join with all Christians incelebrating the birth of Jesus of Nazareth the Son of God and the Redeemer of the world.

We are grateful for His life and mission, for His teachings, for His atonement, as recorded in the sacred scriptures, which have come down to us through many centuries and have been and still are a light, a guide and a comfort to millions of honest souls.

While we are thus celebrating the coming of our Redeemer in the meridian of time, we are not unmindful of His second coming, which is near at hand. We believe literally in the second advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, that He who was resurrected from the dead and ascended into heaven, will come again to reign as King of kings and Lords of lords. We rejoice in the truth that He appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith, thus opening up a new dispensation, "the dispensation of the fulness of times." The heavens have again been opened, the Church of God has been established upon the earth by the ministering of angels, and His children are now officiating in the authority of the holy priesthood, preparing the way for His second coming. The warning message is being delivered by our Elders to the nations of the earth, and we are grateful that so many sincere investigators in the Swiss and German Mission have received the truth. May all who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ and engaged in this great and noble work of saving souls be blessed continually!

Each Christmas brings to us new cause for thanksgiving and praise. Year after year the evidence is increasing that God, who established this work, is blessing and preparing His people. Prejudices and persecution are diminishing in all parts of the earth. The Latter-day Saints are becoming better known for their honesty and integrity and their doctrines are better understood. In some localities our elders meet with opposition which is often incited by professed ministers or people who are ignorant of our real mission. Such hostility however attracts greater attention to our work and often opens the way for our Elders and members to explain the principles of the Gospel as revealed from heaven.

The Swiss and German saints will rejoice with us that the work of the Lord is spreading in the earth, that the Church is growing stronger and is doing much for the temporal and spiritual salvation of the human family. Never before have the Saints been more united, or shown greater faith and devotion to the work of God. The quorums of the priesthood and all the different auxiliary organizations and institutions of the Church are doing a great and wonderful work. The poor are cared for and the Church is doing much in the way of aiding to beautify Zion and to erect places of worship in the wards and stakes at home and in the missions abroad. Reports from our missions on the different continents and islands of the sea, show that the number of people accepting the truth by baptism is increasing. Another part of our glorious work which deserves mention is the ministry for the dead in the temples of our Lord. Much is being done, even by those not of our faith, in gathering genealogy. The saints come to the temples so numerously to perform work for the dead, that in at least one of the temples two sessions are held daily instead of one as heretofore. For all these and other blessings we feel truly grateful and pray that the Giver of all good may continue His blessings upon all Israel.

We take this opportunity to congratulate the Elders and Saints in the Swiss and German Mission on their loyalty and devotion to God's work and the marked success which has crowned their labors, notwithstanding the opposition and difficulties which they have had to meet. We exhort the Elders to be diligent in bearing their message to the people of those nations and to be united and love each other, and the saints to continue in their devotion and loyalty, to sustain the servants of God whom He sends to them, and to hearken to their teachings. May all the saints be able to see the opportunities to do good in the land where the Lord has planted their feet, so that all parts and branches of the Church may grow stronger and be a light unto those that yet sit in darkness. This is God's work, He is at the head. The light of truth will prevail against all darkness, and joy and happiness and eternal life will be ours if we only remain faithful and true. Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
