James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual Christmas pastoral epistle, December 20, 1913

1913-December 20-MS 76:33-39 (January 15, 1914); also Deseret News, December 20, 1913.

A CHRISTMAS SALUTATION FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

From the "Deseret News," December 20th, 1913

Brethren, sisters, friends of every creed and race, with joy we greet you! This is the season of good wishes and good will throughout Christendom; it should be so in all the world. The celebration of the birth of the incomparable Nazarene is a fitting occasion to draw peoples and families and nations together in peace. Jesus of Nazareth, according to history, came into the world as the Babe of Bethlehem, heralded by angels with the music of "Peace on earth." His advent was foretold by ancient sages as the coming of the "Prince of Peace." Although He prophesied that the discussion of His teachings would at first produce polemical discord and family strife, yet eventually they were to bring about universal harmony and fraternal union. It is certain that those results have everywhere followed their acceptance and practical adoption. The increasing custom of celebrating Christmas marks the progress of Christianizing force moving parallel with civilization, or rather preparing its way. It is a world-power to-day, though it sprang from a despised and rejected Jew in an antiquated town of the Orient near twenty centuries ago.

During the decades that have passed since the Christian gospel was introduced and the Christian Church was established, the departures, from its original principles and forms and powers have been varied and palpable, causing confusion and bloodshed and horror. Yet, through it all there have been gleams of light and beauty and practical truth, showing the fundamental divinity of the precepts promulgated and the Godlike examples set by the crucified Son of Mary. And now that the veritable doctrines and ordinances and authority and power that the Christ revealed in Palestine have been restored through the Prophet of the Nineteenth Century, Joseph Smith, the clouds of error that overspread Christendom during those ages of misconception and contention are clearing away, and a broadening prospect is opening to view of the speedy coming of the great Millennium predicted by all the inspired prophets of the past. We congratulate the whole world on the brightness and glory of the dawning of that millennial day, and the extending of its rays throughout the earth.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, set up anew by its first founder the Savior of men is growing in numbers, in faith, in unity, in knowledge, in strength, in experience, in order, and in that influence which impels attention and wins its way in the world. It is gratifying to be able to say with certainly that in all its departments the Church is advancing and expanding, so that at each succeeding Christmas day we can congratulate its officers and members on the undoubted increase in every grace and virtue and power that should be exhibited by the true disciples of the Christ. There are instances of failure to reach this high standard, as might be expected, but they are exceptions, while the body ecclesiastic is advancing on the "strait and narrow way" towards perfection.

During the past year there has been an increase of diligence on the part of the local and presiding officers that is very commendable. Presidents of Stakes and their Counselors, Bishops and their Counselors, visiting Priests and Teachers have worked together in systematic accord which has wrought splendid results. A larger percentage of the members have received the benefits of home teaching than has been usual for many years, and non-members have not been neglected in these house-to-house ministrations, the results showing in many baptisms of adult converts. Attendance at the Ward sacramental meetings has been increased and a greater interest in the performance of Church duties has been aroused. The Apostles, accompanied by presiding Seventies, have visited the different Stakes of Zion and directed these movements. They have also filled vacancies occurring therein and in the wards and quorums of the Priesthood, and have performed a splendid work.

Many new houses of worship in the Wards and Stakes of Zion have been erected, or commenced, or brought to the completion, and additions and improvements to others have been made; a number of amusement halls have been built, thus removing from the Ward meeting places everything that detracted from the sacred purpose for which they were dedicated. Gymnasiums have also been provided as aids in the development of physical manhood and womanhood, in harmony with mental and spiritual training, and all under ecclesiastical direction. This tends to enhance the strength and unity of the saints and their children and the consequent stability of the Church. The acquisition of property abroad for the building of chapels where the gospel can be preached, and the saints can have their own houses of worship instead of having to rent undesirable premises for that purpose, has placed the work on a higher plane than formerly in the estimation of the world. In the United States, in Great Britain, in Scandinavia, upon the European Continent and upon the islands of the sea, this policy has proved of great benefit. The steps taken toward the building of a Temple in Alberta, Canada, indicating the purpose of the Church to extend the blessing of holy ordinances for the living and the dead of other lands than Utah and former dwelling places of Zion, have awakened new interest and confidence in the cause of salvation. More Church edifices have been erected and such property acquired than ever before in our history, and we congratulate all who sense the importance of these movements on that which has been accomplished.

In addition to the expenditure of Church funds by the Trustee-in-Trust for the erection and improvement of other Church edifices, the enlargement of the Latter-day Saints' hospital, now in progress, has required a big outlay, but the institution deserves all that can be done, in reason, to make it adequate to the great demands upon it for space and the surgical operations and medical treatment of patients. The establishment has a deserved and widespread reputation as an unsurpassed hospital, whether in its splendid appointments, the skill of its physicians, the care of attentive nurses or any other special feature. There is now also in construction the long-needed building for general Church offices, which will require a great outlay, but which has become a pressing necessity, and will, when completed, be an ornament and pride to this city and to the Church.

The cause of education has received such support that our universities, colleges, academies and other Church schools have been generously provided for, a very large proportion of Church funds being thus expended. This aid has been extended to other States than Utah, and even Samoa and New Zealand have institutions of learning, with competent preceptors, established and supported by the Church. The convention held in this City by the National Education Association during 1913, brought the educational status of Utah into prominent attention, served to correct erroneous impressions on that matter, and put the Church, as well as the State, on high, as furnishing methods and examples that the whole country might study and follow with profit.

The auxiliary societies have performed a magnificent work during the year. The sisters of the Relief Society, always active and helpful, have been found at hand everywhere in time of need, aiding the poor, comforting the afflicted, visiting the widow and the fatherless, and traveling to distant points imparting valuable instruction. The Sunday School Union has been more than ever effective in its organized and untiring work. The Sabbath schools of Zion are unsurpassed in any part of the world, and the officers and teachers are worthy of all praise for their devotion and gratuitous services. The addition of the parents' classes has proved in the highest degree beneficial and has gained the support and services of competent lecturers on up-to-date topics of a practical and helpful character. The Mutual Improvement Associations, both the young men's and the young ladies', are better organized and officered than ever, and the studies they furnish are of a higher standard than in former years, showing advancement intellectually and spiritually. The Mutual Improvement Association Scout movement, now associated with the National organization, is becoming a power for good among the boys and gives promise of great future benefit to the community. It is to be hoped that the transfer from the Primary Association to the Mutual Improvement Association as scouts, of boys between twelve and fourteen years of age, will bring them into such training as will prove effectual in necessary discipline. The Primary Association is on a sound financial and progressive basis, and its influence for good among the young is felt in every Ward and Stake of Zion. The Religion Class work is increasing greatly and is receiving that support from the local authorities which was somewhat lacking in several places in past years. It has a sphere of its own and is filling it admirably. It is surmounting prejudice occasioned by a misunderstanding of its aims and purposes, and is rapidly gaining the permanency and power which it was designed to obtain.

The work in the holy Temples continues, and the number of baptisms and other ordinances for the dead therein is really astonishing, and shows a spirit of genuine self-sacrifice and charity. The power thus obtained by this union of purpose and effort between the sons and daughters of God in the flesh and those who are in the world of spirits, while not recognized or understood by the world, should be a source of joy to "the wise," as it is of combined influence of the two spheres in the great cause of human redemption. The marriages for time and eternity performed in those sacred edifices under the authority which binds on earth and in heaven, serve to join in eternal union the hearts and lives of many thousands of souls annually, and to bring about the Divine purposes associated with this heavenly order of wedlock. The recent arrangement of two sessions daily for attending to these holy ordinances in this city, has greatly facilitated the work. Associated therewith is the classwork of the Genealogical Society of Utah, which has been conducted chiefly by the womens' department of the society, and has made it comparatively easy for persons desirous of performing ordinances for their kindred dead, to prepare data in an intelligent and convenient form for officiating and recording. The sisters in charge of that work have labored with zeal and efficiency and have accomplished wonders, not only in the direction mentioned, but in arousing interest in it throughout the Church, and greatly increasing the membership of the society. The library, too, is growing rapidly in genealogical books and records obtained from various parts of both hemispheres.

The progress in music, both vocal and instrumental, in Utah has been general and gratifying. So with different branches of art. The erection of the beautiful monument to the gulls, the work of a Utah sculptor, has proved a great attraction on the Tabernacle grounds in this city. It commemorates a marvelous providential intervention which occurred in the early history of the State, and is evidence of the skill of the artist and its appreciation by our people. The work of the Bureau of Information, on the same grounds, continues to be of immense value, in correcting errors and spreading the truth concerning the Latter-day Saints through the world, as tourists from all quarters flock to that place and are always received with courtesy and impressed favorably. Among the numerous visitors who have been welcomed by the saints are the company of prominent Maoris from New Zealand, who gained information of great value to them and their friends at home.

One of the most forcible agencies in the promulgation of the doctrines of the Church has been the virulent hostility and extravagant misrepresentations of professed Christian ministers and lecturers. Their exaggerated stories about the "Mormons" has aroused public attention and opened the way for our missionaries to present the facts, and explain our principles and purposes to people who would have given them little notice but for the sensation so aroused. For the preaching of the gospel abroad there have been gratifying responses to the calls made for gratuitous service to different parts of the world, and there are yet more demands for elders than can be supplied. The change of sentiment concerning us and our people from that which obtained but a few years ago is certainly remarkable. One feature of it is the invitation for "Mormon" settlers to colonize tracts of land in many parts of the United States and other countries; and our leading elders are welcomed and respected in places from which the Church was once driven by mob violence; applications for our literature are received continually, indicating much interest in our faith and our institutions. Among the evidences of the Divine overruling for good the intentions of our opponents for evil, is the recent agitation over the transliteration by the Prophet Joseph Smith of the Book of Abraham, and his explanation of Egyptian characters and figures in drawings upon papyrus found with mummies that came into his possession. The intent of the attack upon his veracity and gift as a translator was to cast ridicule upon him as one vainly professing to be inspired. The attempt has not only failed signally, but has awakened attention and interest in the work itself, also in the Book of Mormon and the real doctrines of "Mormonism," such as was not previously exhibited.

The cause of Temperance, which has made such headway in Utah, is spreading throughout the whole country, and the Word of Wisdom, given by inspiration to the Prophet Joseph Smith, is guiding the saints at home and abroad and influencing the habits of many people of different creeds. The attendance of our delegates at national and international conventions has aided in placing our institutions before the world in their true light, and the ladies and gentlemen appointed for that purpose have been received with due courtesy and appreciation and have accomplished a noble work.

Utah is advancing on all lines of general unity and in material as well as intellectual and spiritual benefits, all aided by so-called "Mormon" influence. The railroads have been a powerful agency in the development and prosperity of the State, and merit the support and encouragement of our people, instead of the adverse criticism and hindrances which some mistaken persons seek to interpose. New branches of the well-established lines have been built and are in operation, greatly to the advantage of the adjacent settlers, and other roads are projected and in contemplation, bringing our friends into closer and easier communication. New coal mines are being opened as one of the interests thus made possible, and mineral resources have in similar manner been made profitable. The abundant crops of the year 1913 are another source of congratulation and gratitude. The splendid fall weather, too, has greatly helped in the general prosperity. Some of our material interests have received a setback by threatened depressions, but "hope smiles brightly before us," and bids us look for better things while we wisely prepare for the worst.

Our co-religionists in Mexico, who had to leave their possessions, made valuable to them by many years of diligent and well-directed toil, have exhibited a calm and patient faith in the over-ruling power of Providence, and in the midst of their great trials, have been made glad by the help received from kind friends in many parts of this State and the country surrounding. They have found places of refuge and are anxiously looking for change in the affairs of that distracted country, by which peace may be established and their lawful rights and property be restored. In this desire, as well as by needful aid, they should be encouraged and comforted.

At this Christmas celebration let all the saints rejoice in temperate recreation. Our gospel is that of peace and goodwill, of happiness and harmony, of physical, mental and spiritual enjoyment and common sense. So we say, A Merry Christmas to all! Promote joy and unity. Remember the poor. Make the children glad. Be sensible in the season's gifts. Forgive one another. Be truly Christian in act and conversation. Have faith in Him whose birthday we commemorate, who died that we might live forever. Look forward to that Christmas when He shall come again, this time as King of kings, and all nations shall unite in fraternal love, and the earth shall be clothed with the light and gladness of His glory. In His holy name we salute you with the benedictions of the season! JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
