James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual instructions, January, 1914

1914-January-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As indicated in the notes for the Annual Instructions or Circulars for 1909 and 1910 (Circulars 10 and 11), these Circulars were gradually evolving into a handbook for Stake Presidents and Bishops and other officers of the the Church. Note in this connection paragraph 4 in the First Presidency's introduction to Circular No. 12 below.

To Presidents of Stakes and Counselors, Bishops and Counselors, Stake and Ward Clerks, Presidents of Missions and all Church Authorities.

DEAR BRETHREN:

In order that there may he uniformity in the methods of conducting the business of the Church in its stakes, wards and missions, we direct your attention to the instructions in the following pages.

During the past year special endeavors have been made to encourage the payment of tithes monthly or at other regular intervals, and to improve the quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood through the bishop giving them his personal attention and presiding over the Priests' quorum or class in person, in harmony with the instructions of the Lord in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

A very desirable movement has been developed in the stakes of Zion to improve the work of the ward teachers. Detailed instructions as to how this can be done have been addressed to the presiding officers of every stake and ward and to the ward teachers themselves.

We hope that this circular of instructions will be read by the officers of the Church, and that its instructions shall be adhered to as far as practicable. Such items contained herein as are applicable to them should be presented to the Priesthood and to the Saints generally. The book should be preserved for reference and consulted frequently. Its perusal will serve to remind one of matters that require attention; and many of the questions that arise in stakes and wards may be answered by reference to its contents.

We commend the presiding authorities of the stakes and wards and the missions of the Church for their diligence and efficiency, and trust that they will continue their faithful labors in looking after the interests of the people under their care. Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
