James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Reminiscences by the First Presidency, December 21, 1901 President Joseph F. Smith President John R. Winder President Anthon H. Lund

1901-December 21-Deseret News, December 21, 1901, p. 57.

These "Reminiscences of the First Presidency," although published under the names of the members of the First Presidency individually, nevertheless constitute the Christmas message of the First Presidency for 1901. However, they are more than an annual Christmas message. President Smith's article is especially interesting for its historical material dealing with his past experiences in the Church.

REMINISCENSES BY THE FIRST PRESIDENCY By special request of the "Deseret News," the First Presidency of the Church has prepared the following sketches, which will be of deep interest to the Latter-day Saints, and will furnish valuable information to the general readers of this Christmas edition:

MY MISSIONS By President Joseph F. Smith

Among the most precious memories in the life of an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, are the periods spent by him upon missions, laboring for the salvation of mankind. The nature of the service expected of such men, and in most cases faithfully performed by them, is the best explanation of the almost universal verdict rendered by our returned missionaries, that their experiences in the mission field, despite the hardships and persecutions they encounter, are among the happiest, if not the very happiest of their lives. It is easily deductible from the teachings of the Savior, that the secret of true happiness is found in unselfishness, in devoting one's mind, heart and soul to the work of glorifying God by benefiting and saving mankind; and these teachings are amply confirmed by the experiences of the Elders of Israel in modern times.

I have chosen as the subject of the Christmas communication you have requested, those periods of my life when I have been absent from home, preaching the Gospel or otherwise subserving the sacred cause with which we are identified:

My first call to the mission field came when I was a youth of fifteen, and had been for about five and a half years a resident of Salt Lake Valley. My father and mother were both dead, and much of the care of the family they left devolved upon me, then a farm boy upon a piece of land about midway between Mill Creek and Parley's canyon creek; land taken up by my widowed mother soon after her arrival in the mountains. I had worked hard during my boyhood, and consequently had little schooling, but I felt in my heart that God lived and that I had been called to engage in his work, and I cheerfully responded to the summons to serve him in a foreign land. My mission was to the Sandwich Islands, and I was gone nearly four years, leaving home in May 1854, and returning in February 1858. To say that I enjoyed my mission would be superfluous, after what I have stated in the beginning. I shall never cease to be grateful for that experience, hard though it was at times, and shall ever remember the kindness manifested towards me by many of the good native people of Hawaii.

When I reached home all Utah was aflame with the war spirit. Johnston's army was in winter quarters, east of the Wasatch mountains, and the local militia, called out by Governor Brigham Young, who had placed the territory under martial law, were preparing to resist the impending invasion of Salt Lake Valley; the success of which meant to the inhabitants of this peaceful region-misrepresented to the general government, which had sent the troops to quell an imaginary Mormon uprising-a repetition of the bloody scenes through which our people had passed in Missouri and Illinois. It was determined that the progress of that army should be checked until a full and fair investigation could be had, and a peaceful adjustment of the difficulty secured. The militia were under express orders to "shed no blood," save in individual self-defense, but to harass the troops by running off their stock, capturing their supply trains, and in every way impeding their advance.

I reported for duty to Governor Young the next morning after arriving home from the Islands, and was assigned to Colonel Callister's cavalry command in Echo canyon. I sat up all night molding rifle bullets from a pig of lead I had brought with me from a "Mormon" smelter at Las Vegas, the ore for which had been carried by teams from the mountains about twenty miles distant. I then proceeded to the front. I was with Colonel Callister's and Colonel H. P. Kimball's commands up to the time of Governor Cumming's entry into Salt Lake Valley, and was one of a dozen cavalrymen who followed the governor as a detail and to his destination. Subsequently I went with Porter Rockwell and a squad of ten or twelve rangers appointed to watch further movements of the government troops at Camp Scott. On this trip we met the peace commissioners, Messrs. Powell and McCullough, and received from them copies of President Buchanan's "pardon to the Mormons." We also met Mr. Morrell, the first non-Mormon appointee as postmaster of Salt Lake City, and were hospitably entertained by him. When Johnston's army, under the terms of arbitration agreed upon by Governor Young and the peace commissioners, passed through Salt Lake City, I was among those who had been left to guard the all but deserted town. I afterwards joined my brothers and sisters at Provo, from which place, in July of that year, the war then being over, we returned with the general community to our homes.

My next mission (taken after I became a married man), was to England, for which country I started in the spring of the year 1860, crossing the plains in company with two of the Twelve Apostles, Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, who were going to Europe to preside. Elder Francis M. Lyman, now an Apostle presiding over the same mission, was also in the company, as was Walter M. Gibson, an Elder of the Church whom I next met as an apostate in the Sandwich Islands. He went with us as far as the States. A twenty-dollar gold piece, given me by President Brigham Young just before my departure, was all the money I had, and we who were bound for Liverpool were forced to borrow money in the East in order to reach our destination. I prize very highly my many pleasant reminiscences of the Saints in the European mission, where I labored successively as a traveling Elder in the Leeds conference, as president of the Sheffield conference, and as pastor of the Sheffield district, comprising the Sheffield, Leeds, Hull and Linconshire Conferences. Towards the latter part of my mission, while Apostle George Q. Cannon was presiding in that land, I accompanied him, by his invitation, on a tour through the Scandinavian conferences; a very pleasant trip, lasting about six weeks.

Sailing for America in the summer of 1863, the ship on which I was a passenger had two narrow escapes; one a barely averted collision with a sailing vessel in the midst of a dense fog one night in mid-ocean; the other while endeavoring to deliver the mail at St. Johns, Newfoundland, during a heavy fog. This time the ship, driven by the breakers, struck upon a rock, causing the utmost consternation until she succeeded in clearing herself and steaming into safe waters. Among the passengers bound for Utah was Sister Elizabeth H. Cannon, wife of President George Q. Cannon, whose infant child died during her journey across the plains.

I acted as chaplain of Captain John Woolley's company, which followed later, but at Green River I joined a party, led by Lewis Robinson, which had come out to meet the train and take charge of a wagon-load of powder, which it was supposed Colonel Connor and the troops at Fort Douglas intended to confiscate. The powder was unkegged, sacked, loaded upon mules and conveyed by an unbroken route across the mountains and desert to Salt Lake City, where we arrived late in September.

The next spring I was again on my way to a foreign land, having been given a second mission to the Sandwich Islands. This time I accompanied Apostles Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow, Elders William W. Cluff and Alma L. Smith, the special object of our errand being to put a stop to the fraudulent operations of the imposter, Walter M. Gibson, who was deceiving the credulous and simple-minded native members of the Church, not only in matters of doctrine, but with grotesquely false representations of his own power and authority. He had re-organized the Church according to his own fancies, ordained Twelve Apostles and other officers, selling them their ordinations, and imposing himself upon the people as a priestly and kingly ruler, to whom they must pay abject homage. We confronted him, charged him with his misdeeds, and labored faithfully to reclaim him, but he proved obdurate and impenitent and was therefore cut off from the Church. We then directed our energies towards reclaiming those whom he had misled, and in this work, under the blessing of God, we were very successful.

While upon this mission, and at its very outset, I witnessed the drowning of Apostle Lorenzo Snow, by the capsizing of a boat in the rough waters of Lahaina harbor, March 31, 1864. We had reached Honolulu in safety, and had proceeded thence to Lahaina, on the Schooner Nettie Merrill, from whose deck, I beheld the accident. The only reason I was not involved in it, as were all the other members of our party, was because, being familiar with the coast at that point, I had declined to enter the ship's boat with the rest, or to disembark while the waves were running high. Brothers Cluff and Smith were equally averse to going in that boat, but yielded to Brother Benson's persuasions. In due time I rejoined them on shore, and assisted to care for Brother Snow, who was resuscitated after much labor and difficulty, being rolled upon a barrel until all the water he had swallowed, was ejected, and his lungs then reinflated from the mouth of one of his companions; an ingenious process which suggested itself to the mind of Brother Cluff.

We set in order the affairs of the Hawaiian mission, of which, after Elder Gibson's excommunication, I was given charge, with Elders Cluff and Smith as my assistants; the two Apostles returning to Utah. The three of us made a tour of all the islands, and meantime were joined by Elders Benjamin Cluff and John R. Young. We worked energetically against the imposture, and gradually won back those whom Gibson had deceived. We recommended by letter to President Young the gathering of all the Hawaiian Saints, to one place, where they might be better disciplined in religious duties and doctrines, as well as industrial pursuits. Our recommendation was adopted, and one of the spots proposed by us for this purpose, and the one we most favored, was afterwards chosen, and it remains to this day the headquarters of the mission; namely, the celebrated sugar plantation of Laie on the island of Oahu. The purchase of the property was made by Elders Francis A. Hammond and George Nebeker, whom I met at San Francisco while on my way home early in 1865.

I will here remark that my first ordination in the Priesthood was to the office of Elder, in May, 1854, just prior to leaving upon my first mission. In March, 1858, I became a Seventy, and in October, 1859, a High Priest and a member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. I was ordained an Apostle July 1, 1866, by President Brigham Young, assisted by the Twelve, and on the 8th of October, 1867, was set apart to take the place previously occupied by Amasa M. Lyman in the Council of the Apostles.

Between the spring of 1874 and the fall of 1877 I filled two more missions to Europe, where I was called to preside; being summoned home in 1875 on account of the death of President Geo. A. Smith, and in 1877 on account of the death of President Brigham Young. In the interim of these two missions I presided over the Davis Stake of Zion, and while in England on the latter occasion I visited with Apostle Orson Pratt various parts of Great Britain, for the purpose of selecting phonetic type for the publication of the Book of Mormon in the characters of the Deseret alphabet.

In 1878 I accompanied Brother Pratt to the states during which trip we called upon David Whitmer at Richmond, and upon William E. McLellin at Independence, Missouri; also touching at Far West, Plano and Kirtland. At New York I wrote an account of our journey for publication, and returned home in time to attend the October conference.

Our interview with David Whitmer was exceedingly interesting. He bore to us his usual strong and undeviating testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and his connection therewith as one of the three witnesses to whom the angel of God showed the golden plates from which it was translated. Nothing could be more earnest, more sincere, than that aged man's solemn affirmation that he saw the angel and heard his voice declaring that the characters upon those plates had been divinely translated. Mr. Whitmer showed to us what he claimed was the copy of the original-the copy furnished Mormon, but which in reality was a copy of the original-the copy furnished to the printer when the book was first published. Why I am positive that it was not the original, is because I have indisputable evidences that the original was deposited by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, from which it was taken, many years later, when the house was in a ruined state, by Emma Smith's second husband, Major Bidamon, and by him given to parties who brought it to Utah. It is now in the possession of this Church. There is no truth in the story that we offered to David Whitmer money for the manuscript then in his possession, and now in the possession of his kindred. I merely suggested to him that the Church had better facilities for taking care of such things than he had and would gladly give it a place in the archives if he were willing to part with it. This, however, he declined to do, regarding the manuscript as a talisman upon which his safety depended.

As for William E. McLellin, his conduct, though kind, was very peculiar. He, it will be remembered, was one of the original Twelve Apostles, chosen in 1835, but excommunicated with David Whitmer and others for apostasy a few years later. He treated Brother Pratt and myself with every consideration, fairly gluing himself to our society as long as we remained at Independence, acting as our guide in visiting every point of interest in that historic town, loitering about our hotel while we took our meals, and waiting to rejoin us at every possible opportunity. He was full of reminiscences, but seemed to be all unsettled in his feelings and convictions, at one moment praising the Prophet Joseph to the skies, and at the next casting reflections upon him and the other Church leaders of his period. I never saw the sad effects of apostasy more plainly manifested. He stated that he was writing a book about his early connection with the Church, but I have never learned that he completed it. When we departed he accompanied us to the railroad station and stood gazing after us until our train disappeared in the distance. I corresponded with him afterwards as long as he lived.

My most recent foreign mission was performed under somewhat peculiar circumstances. It began in the midst of what is known as "the crusade" under the Edmunds law, enacted by Congress in March, 1882. Since the 10th of October, 1880, I had been second counselor in the First Presidency, and when the anti-polygamy crusade began I went with President John Taylor and other Church leaders, into exile, owing to the extreme bitterness that then prevailed. I remained "on the underground" from October 1, 1884, to September 10, 1891, and spent much of this time in the Sandwich Islands, returning just before the death of President Taylor, July 25, 1887. I attended him during his last moments, still in exile. My public ministries since that time have been an open book to the people.

Grateful to the Lord for my present good health, peace and prosperity, from the summit of my sixty-three years I look back upon a life in which joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain, are intermingled, but with the former greatly predominating. No man that I know of has been more bounteously blessed by the Almighty than I have been; and no one, I believe, is more willing to acknowledge the Lord's hand in His blessings, or is more anxious to merit them and to make a good, wise use of them. And with these sentiments in my heart and with feelings of kindness and good-will for the entire Church of God and for mankind everywhere, I wish all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.

INCIDENTS IN MY LIFE By President John R. Winder You request from me a brief story of my life, a life of over eighty years, the greater part of which has been passed as a member of this community. Adverse as I am to writing about myself, I cannot refuse to comply with your wish, since it is the universal season for gratifying all reasonable desires, and it affords me much pleasure to give Christmas greetings to you and your wide circle of readers, many of whom are doubtless young people with their careers yet before them, who may possibly be benefited by this simple narrative.

As you are aware, I am not a native of this land of liberty, though I have always been a lover of freedom and an ardent admirer of American institutions. For the sake of these, and above all for the Gospel of Jesus Christ-"the perfect law of liberty"-I left my native land, many years ago, and came to this country. All that I am I owe to "Mormonism." The blessings of the Lord have followed me all the days of my life, and to Him I give the glory for what may have been accomplished through my humble endeavors. Under Him, I may say, my success has been due to a determination, formed early in life, to do my duty faithfully and conscientiously in whatever position I might be placed. I have always believed that a thing worth doing at all is worth doing well, and I have done the best I could to reduce that principle to practice. As a youth my education was limited, and I was forced by circumstances to depend upon my own exertions, but I found that an honest desire to labor and a persevering effort to obtain employment would not go long unrequired, and I kept steadily at work at any and every honorable task that came my way.

A native of Biddenden, Kent, England, where I was born December 11, 1821, I was baptized (sprinkled) as an infant into the Church of England, of which my father and mother were both members. At the age of fourteen I was confirmed a member of that church by the Archbishop of Canterbury. I was nearly twenty-seven when I first heard of the Latter-day Saints and their religion, and became a convert to what the world terms "Mormonism." By that time I was a husband and father; I had been an employee for several years at a West End shoe store in London, and had then taken up my residence in Liverpool, where I had charge of a similar establishment for a gentleman named Collinson.

The occasion of my conversion to the new faith was somewhat peculiar. One day in July, 1848, while in the store, I chanced to stoop and pick from the floor a small bit of paper, a fragment of a torn-up letter, on which were the words "Latter-day Saints." I inquired of one of the clerks what it meant, as I had never seen or heard the name before. He replied that there was a religious sect in America whose members called themselves Latter-day Saints, though they were commonly known as "Mormons"; that they had a prophet named Joseph Smith, and that some of them held regular meetings in the Music Hall, Bold Street, Liverpool.

I was so impressed with what I heard, and so anxious to learn more concerning these people, that I went to their meeting, creeping up a back stairs and peeping through the banisters to get a glimpse of the inside, where a congregation was addressed by a speaker whom I afterwards learned to be Elder Orson Spencer of Salt Lake City. He was speaking on the first principles of the Gospel-faith, repentance, baptism by immersion and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. I thought he must know that I was there, for every word fitted my case and seemed meant especially for me. I investigated the principles taught, became convinced of their truth, and was baptized September 28, 1848.

My wife, Ellen Walters Winder, also joined the Church, and we were connected with the Liverpool branch until February, 1853, when we set sail for America, taking with us three children, and leaving one behind in its grave. Two of the living were twin daughters, then about four months old.

This ship on which we sailed, the "Elvira Owen," was only a few days out from Liverpool, when it was discovered that smallpox was on board, a child infected with the malady being among the ship's passengers and in the apartment next to mine. I was the first to discover it, and one of the first among five who came down with the disease, and had to be quarantined in a little house built on deck for that purpose. This was a trying time both to me and to my wife, who was thus left without my assistance to care for her twin babies, which was no small task on shipboard. To add to our anxiety, one of the patients, lying next to me, a young brother named William Jones, died a few days later, about nine o'clock in the evening, and soon the sailors came and took the body out and cast it into the sea. I heard them say, "We will have him next," meaning me, but I had faith that I would recover and get to Zion, and in due time my faith was confirmed. There was but one death during the voyage. By way of New Orleans and St. Louis we reached Keokuk, Iowa, and crossed the plains in a company commanded by Elder Joseph W. Young, arriving at Salt Lake City on the 10th of October.

Utah was still in the early colonizing period. There were but eight settlements in Salt Lake county. Men had been called at the general conference, which had just closed, to go with their families and strengthen the outlying places. In Iron, Tooele, Sanpete and other parts, an Indian war was in progress, and grasshopper visitations were imminent. The population of the territory was about twenty thousand souls.

In April of that year the cornerstones of the Salt Lake Temple had been laid. Little did I dream as I gazed upon those humble though massive beginnings, that I would have charge, forty years later, of the work of completing the sacred edifice, and that I would be an assistant to its presiding authority during the happy years that followed.

In those times men had not much choice of employment in this mountain region. They had to do whatever they could get to do, and take their pay largely in articles produced by the farmer and the artisan. It was no uncommon sight to see artists, musicians and men of education hauling wood from the canyon, building fences, or cultivating the soil.

Luckily my vocation was in demand. Being an experienced shoe and leather man, I engaged, soon after my arrival in Salt Lake Valley (which has ever since been my home) in the manufacture of saddles, boots and shoes, and in the conduct of a tannery. My partner in this venture was Samuel Mulliner. Subsequently I formed a similar partnership with William Jennings, and we together built a tannery and kept a meat shop, besides making harness, saddles, boots and shoes. After "the move" in 1858, I was a partner with President Brigham Young and Feramorz Little, and we built a tannery on Parley's canyon creek. While so engaged I purchased my present home, "Poplar Farm," and went to farming and stock-raising, pursuits which have always given me great pleasure. Later I was associated with Messrs. Hooper, Jennings, Little, Romney and others in running a tannery in the Nineteenth ward of this city. My interest in farming, stock raising and industrial pursuits led to my connection with the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing society of which I was president and a director for a period of forty-four years. Of my more recent business associations as a stockholder and officer of the Deseret National bank, Z.C.M.I., the Utah Iron Manufacturing company, the Utah Light and Power company and its predecessors, the Deseret Investment, Saltair Beach and Inland Crystal Salt companies, the Utah and Ogden Sugar companies, and the Utah and California Railroad company, I need say nothing.

My long connection with Utah military affairs began in 1855, when I joined the Nauvoo Legion, as the local militia was then styled. I was captain of a company of lancers in the Echo Canyon campaign, and during the winter of 1857-8, after most of the militia had returned home and Johnston's army had gone into winter quarters at Fort Bridger, I was left with fifty men to guard the canyon and its approaches and give notice to Gen. Wells and the authorities at Salt Lake City of any further movements of the invading host. In March, 1858, I was with Gen. George D. Grant and about eighty other mounted men who went in pursuit of a marauding band of Indians in Tooele county, and was caught with my comrades in a terrible storm on the desert. Afterwards I had charge of the defenses at Echo canyon, and remained there until peace was declared. My commission as lieutenant-colonel of cavalry came later. During the Blackhawk Indian war in Sanpete county, I acted part of the time as aid to Gen. Wells, and in 1868 collected and made up the accounts of the expenses of the war, amounting to over a million dollars. This claim was duly submitted to Congress, but has never been paid.

For fourteen consecutive years from 1870, I was assessor and collector of Salt Lake City and during that period served three terms in the city council. From 1884 to 1887 I was city watermaster. I was a member of one of the early constitutional conventions, and at one time United States gauger in the internal revenue department. My extended official connection with the old political regime as chairman of the territorial and county committees of the People's party, may also be mentioned.

I was appointed United States receiver by the supreme court of Utah when the escheated property of the Church was in litigation, and held possession of it, receiving the rental, until it was turned back to the Church by Act of Congress.

My ecclesiastical ordinations and appointments date from the year 1848, and comprise the offices of Priest, Elder, Seventy, High Priest, ward Bishop, High Councilor, second counselor to Presiding Bishop William B. Preston, and finally first counselor to President Joseph F. Smith. My connection with the Presiding Bishopric, which began in 1887, covered a period of fourteen years, and my labors as an assistant to the President of the Temple began in May, 1893, when I was appointed first assistant to President Lorenzo Snow. This position I now hold under his successor.

As may readily be surmised, my life has been a very busy one, a fact to which I believe I owe much of my longevity and present good health, and spirits. It is far better to wear out than to rust out, and my experience and observation teach me that those who work, if they avoid excesses and live temperately, will outlive those who shirk.

Wishing you and your readers the compliments of the season.

CHRISTMAS REFLECTIONS By Anthon H. Lund Having been asked to write a few lines for the Christmas News, I shall jot down some thoughts suggested by the approaching holidays, days which more than any others in the year, inspire good will to all.

Before Christianity was introduced among the worshipers of Odin (or Woden) northern Europe celebrated a feast, called Ule, which commenced on the shortest day in the year. This, the most joyous of all their feasts, was characterized by games and merry gatherings, in which the home-brewed beer and mead were passed around to the guests. The latter beverage was made of honey and was considered a drink fit for their gods. Friends made one another presents, and during the days of this feast all feuds rested. All was peace.

The early Christian missionaries found much in the religion of Odin and Thor that resembled the new doctrines they were trying to introduce, and to facilitate the transition from one religion to the other, they avoided making too many changes. As the Odin worship prevailed among the Germans and Saxons as well as the Scandinavians, the heathen Yule feast became the Christian "Weihnact's-fest" in Germany and Christmas in England, but it retained its old name among the Christianized Scandinavians. It has also perpetuated its ancient characteristics down to our day. It is essentially the same now as in heathen times; the feast of games and merrymaking, of good cheer and hospitality, of peace and good will to all. A hearty welcome awaits one everywhere, the doors are open to all comers, and merry Christmas is heard wherever acquaintances meet.

Washington Irving aptly calls Christmas "the season for kindling not merely the fire of hospitality in the hall, but the genial flame of charity in the heart."

Christmas should have a deep religious character as well as a sociable one. It is one of the great Christian festivals-Easter and Whitsuntide alone outranking it. Its name, Christmas was meaning feast-indicates at once in whose honor it is observed. It is eminently proper that the festivities that commemorate the Lord's coming in the flesh should be fittingly celebrated.

His advent was contemplated with longing by the people of God, and was a theme on which the prophets of old delighted to dwell. The great results of His earthly mission and the glory of His coming, filled their minds to the exclusion of the thought of His being poor and of humble birth; yet Isaiah in his prophecy, sometimes called the fifth Gospel, depicts with a few masterstrokes the Redeemer's meek and lowly sojourn, and the great purpose of His coming. The prophet makes this almost as clear as either of the eye witnesses who wrote the story of His life. The people, however, were looking for a Messiah who should deliver them from the foreign yoke under which they were groaning. Their spiritual bondage and captivity did not seem to concern them; and when the Lord of lords came to take captivity captive they rejected him.

No event has had such deep and lasting influence upon the affairs of the world and the character of man, as has the coming of the Son of God to the earth. That the importance of this has been recognized is shown by the fact that Europe, America, Oceania and parts of Asia and Africa reckon their era from the year of his birth.

We are not told in the Scriptures the exact date on which Jesus was born. Some think it foolish to commemorate an uncertain date. The same objection can be raised in regard to other important Christian festivals. Easter and Pentecost may vary more than a month in dates on which they are kept, yet they are held in the highest reverence by nearly all Christian denominations.

Christmas has been given a fixed date, but this has been done arbitrarily. Before the fifth century it appears that it was kept on the 6th of January. Some have held the opinion that Jesus was born in October, and others that He was born in the spring. The account given in the Gospels affords no clue to the exact date, but it does give particulars which show that this event is not likely to have taken place in mid-winter. We are told by Luke that there were "shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night." It is not probable that they would have done this at a time of the year when the rainy season was at its height. I had my first view of the Holy Land from the deck of a steamer as I approached Joppa in the month of February, 1898. North and south, as far as my vision extended, I saw the hills of Judea covered with snow. When I saw them again, six weeks later, they were clad with the finest verdure and afforded ideal pastures for the flocks. From my own observation I consider that the month of April complies better with the conditions mentioned by the evangelist, as surrounding the Savior's birth, than any other time of the year. That Christmas is not celebrated on the exact date of the Lord's nativity should not lessen our regard for this festival. We know that Jesus came and dwelt among men, and we know how infinitely his advent affects our lives, both here and hereafter, and hence it befits us to devote at least one day to meditate upon and contemplate this grand event.

There is no doubt about the place where the Savior was born. More than seven hundred years before that birth, Micah said: "But thou, Bethlehem, Ephrata, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto me that is to be a ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." The Church of the Nativity in that city is believed to be standing just on the spot where stood the old khan or hostelry, to which Joseph and Mary repaired. They had no doubt been belated, and were unable to get one of the upper rooms reserved for strangers, and hence were under the necessity of taking one of the rooms underneath, opening out upon the yard, where the stock was kept. Thus was the Son of God born in a stable and cradled in a manger. On the floor of the church is placed a golden star, said to be on the exact spot of the Savior's birth.

At this time of the year it would be interesting to go in and see the scenes enacted in that church. Zealous devotees of many denominations are there, but though all claim to be followers of the Prince of Peace, they are far from being tolerant of one another. The sultan, therefore, has been under the necessity of stationing soldiers in the very sanctuary, to prevent the members of the different churches from engaging in disgraceful conflicts. It shocked me, when I entered the church, to see a Turkish soldier guarding its portals, and soldiers stationed in the aisles of the church or churches.

Here was the place where the wise men from the East found the mother and child. They had come to worship the "King of the Jews, for they had seen His star," and had been miraculously guided to the very house. The lowly condition in which they found Him did not have influence with them, but they fell down and worshiped Him. What comfort this must have given the young mother, and how her heart swelled with joy to know that she was indeed blessed among women! Yet her exalted station could not shield her from that "sword which should also pierce her soul," as foretold a few days later by the aged Simeon.

On my visit to Bethlehem I stood on the outskirts of the city and looked over the surrounding country. The field of Boaz was pointed out to me. There cannot be much doubt in regard to the fact that the great-grandfather of King David titled those acres, and there was enacted that beautiful idyl narrated in the Book of Ruth, which gives us a glimpse of manners and customs three thousand years ago. There lay the land before me where Ruth gleaned so busily and where she won the heart of the owner of the field. Her truth and integrity, her love and sacrifice endeared her to all, and God chose her to become the ancestress of His Only Begotten. In that field, and the surrounding country, David, as a boy, herded his father's flocks and fought the lion and the bear. In this same field also were shepherds watching their flocks on the night that Jesus was born.

Shepherds are said to have been the first astronomers. Their business often required them to abide in the fields at night, caring for the sheep and the lambs; and during the silent watches their gaze would no doubt be turned upward with wonder and awe at the sublime spectacle presented by the rising, culminating and setting of the grand host of shining stars. These they grouped into constellations, and named, from some fancied resemblance of form, or arbitrarily, to perpetuate the memory of some of their heroes or deities.

We can imagine the shepherds who were camped on this field on that holy and peaceful night, contemplating the beautiful appearance that the heavens presented. Nowhere do the stars shine brighter than in the Syrian sky. Overhead they would see the lovely constellation Orion, culminating, and further west they would see the Pleiades, both mentioned in the oldest writings in the Bible. The Lord says to Job: "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?" In the northwest they could see Cygnus, whose brilliant stars strikingly form a cross. Little thought they however, that the Redeemer who was to expiate on a cross the sins of all the world, was then lying in swaddling clothes in a manger so close to them. If they turned their eyes further to the east and north, Jerusalem-ward, did they see His star guilding the footsteps of the wise men to their city? If so, how great was their astonishment to behold that brilliant body moving slowly yet perceptibly around the west side of the hill on which they were standing, and then remaining stationary over Bethlehem. But a still greater wonder is in store for them. In the stillness of the night, strains of music, sweeter far than any earthly performer can produce, fell upon their ears. These sounds come not from Bethlehem below them or from revellers in the illuminated palace of Herod, which they see to the east; they come from above. Their rapturous gaze is turned heavenward, "and lo! the angel of the Lord came upon them and the glory of the Lord shone round about them." Then a multitude of heavenly beings are seen, and ineffaceably impressed upon the memories of the simple Judean shepherds are the sublime words which form the burden of the song of praise, "Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, good will towards men."

How pleasant it is to dwell upon the scenes connected with the first advent of Christ! How grand and sublime is the contemplation of the momentous events that are at our doors, presaging the glorious second coming of our Savior.

I wish the readers of the "News" a joyous Christmas and a happy New Year.
