James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Church Chronology by Andrew Jenson, June 30, 1914

1914-June 30-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

On July 9, 1898, the First Presidency had announced the acquisition of the rights to Andrew Jenson's Church Chronology. (See Messages 3:300-301.) They at that time also announced the forthcoming publication of an enlarged new edition and asked for the cooperation of Church officers and members in gathering materials for it. The purpose of the Church's acquisition of the Chronology was, among other things, a fund-raising project for a new Historian's office. (See Messages 3:309-310, 319.) This project which was started under President Wilford Woodruff and continued under President Lorenzo Snow is here renewed with a new enlarged edition under President Joseph F. Smith who, incidentally, had served as counselor in the First Presidency to both President Woodruff and President Snow.

PRESIDENT'S OFFICE, Salt Lake City, Utah, June 30, 1914.

"The first instalment of the new edition of Church Chronology, compiled by Assistant Historian Andrew Jenson, was issued from the Deseret News book bindery on Monday. It is a very comprehensive and valuable work, bringing data concerning prominent persons and incidents in Church history down to present times. The utmost care has been taken to insure accuracy in everything recorded, rendering the volume practically indispensable to every library of importance in the Church.

"The full edition will total 10,000 copies, which will be disposed of at $2.00 each, and the proceeds will be devoted to the benefit of the Historian's Office. Although the work is the result of the earnest, arduous and continuous labor for years of Elder Andrew Jenson, it is not his personal property, but is under the control and direction of the Church. It is desired that Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards, Superintendents of Auxiliary Societies, Presidents of Quorums and of Missions and other organizations throughout the Church, use their influence to place this useful volume in every library, public and private, for the diffusion of valuable information, and the disposition of the entire edition for the benefit of the Historian's Office. No Ward or Quorum, or Association or publication should be without this volume, and we recommend it to the Latter-day Saints everywhere as a reliable work of reference worthy of their support. Send orders to the Historian's Office, 60 East South Temple Street, Salt Lake City. "JOSEPH F. SMITH, "ANTHON H. LUND, "CHARLES W. PENROSE "First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

This new edition of the Church Chronology brings the thread of events down to the close of the year 1913. It also contains an elaborate index which makes the book a most valuable work of reference to all students of Church History.

For convenience in shipping the work has been wrapped in bundles containing 10 copies each. To each Ward selling 10 copies a special bound copy will be sent with the compliments of the Historian's Office. Address all communications, and make all checks, money orders and drafts payable to A. Wm. Lund, Historian's Office, 60 E. South Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah. ANTHON H. LUND, Church Historian.
