James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Peace movement favored, September 15, 1914

1914-September 15-Deseret News (Tuesday, September 15, 1914).

Like the response of the First Presidency to the President of the United States for a day of prayer for peace, this telegram of the President of the Church to the Los Angeles Examiner expresses the deep concern of the Church for peace but pointed out "the right of nations as well as individuals to protect themselves . . . must not be denied."

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH FAVORS PEACE MOVEMENT

In response to a telegram from the Los Angeles Examiner, requesting President Joseph F. Smith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to give an expression on the movement now taking form in the United States for world-wide peace and to send a peace commission to the war-ridden nations of Europe, President Smith today dictated a reply in response to the request. The Examiner in its request, said that many leading men of the Nation including Vice-President Thomas R. Marshall and others, are endorsing the movement. President Smith's reply, which was wired to the Examiner today, is as follows:

Salt Lake City, September 15th, 1914 Examiner, Los Angeles, California.

Answering your telegram: Any practical movement for the establishment of peace, local or universal, likely to effect the purpose in view, has the moral support of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The choice of representatives to present the matter of world-wide peace to the nations of Europe, just now, would depend upon serious considerations, personal and otherwise. Also the right of nations as well as individuals to protect and defend themselves against unlawful and unjust assaults, even to the extent of taking up arms, must not be denied. War is to be deplored and steps to prevent it or avert its consequences should be promoted and encouraged, within the bounds of justice and mercy and self-protection. A world-wide peace enterprise is worthy the attention and aid of every religious institution, if it acts as well as theorizes, and recognizes human and national rights. JOSEPH F. SMITH, President, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
