James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual visits of Bishoprics to homes, November 6, 1914

1914-November 6-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The program of the Church for house-to-house visits of Bishops to the members or families of their wards which had been previously mentioned in the Annual Instruction circulars are here extended by instruction of the First Presidency to priesthood quorums. Like the Bishops, the priesthood quorum officers have a responsibility for the well-being of their members. Individual visits would do much to revitalize inactive priesthood quorum members. The identical letter was also sent out one year later with a date of November 5, 1915.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, Nov. 6, 1914 The following letter was sent to the Presidency of each stake of Zion:

Dear Brother:

You, no doubt, have been impressed with the excellent results that have followed the annual visits of the Bishoprics to the homes of the members of their respective wards. It has occurred to us that similar good results could be obtained if the officers of the quorums of the Melchisedek Priesthood of your stake could make an annual visit to the homes of all those over whom they preside in quorum capacity.

The records of the Presiding Bishop's Office indicate that there are thousands of brethren who have been honored with the Priesthood, but who are not enrolled in the quorum having jurisdiction in the ward where they reside. An annual visit would, no doubt, result in a large number of the brethren mentioned, becoming enrolled in the quorum; thus a missionary work of great importance would be accomplished.

As far as circumstances will permit, this annual house to house visit should be made by the Presidency of the quorum, but in case they cannot do it alone, the class should be asked to assist in making this visit, giving special attention to the inactive and those not enrolled in the quorum.

If this movement is properly inaugurated and becomes an annual event with the officers of each quorum, it will develop a quorum spirit, broaden the spirit of brotherhood and fellowship and make Priesthood quorums a more effective force for good and usefulness in your stake of Zion.

We sincerely hope that you will give this subject the consideration it deserves, at your next meeting with the High Council, and that you will decide on ways and means through the officers of the quorums to have a house to house visit by the quorum officers, or representatives, to every person holding the Melchisedek Priesthood in your stake of Zion.

With sincere regards, we are, Your brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
