James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 19, 1914

1914-December 19-MS 77:1-7, 11-12 (January 7, 1915): also Deseret News, December 19, 1914.

Again the annual "Christmas Greeting" from the First Presidency went beyond a strictly "Christmas" theme and reviewed the conditions of the world and of the Church in 1914, noting among other things the recent outbreak of war in Europe.

The First Presidency state, interestingly enough, that: "The sudden 'outpouring' of the spirit of War upon the European nations ... had long been expected by the Latter-day Saints."

A CHRISTMAS GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

The Latter-day Saints unite with the people of every creed and tongue and race in the general commemoration of the day observed throughout Christendom as the anniversary of the God-Man's earthly birth. To Him be honor and service and praise! In Him was combined the human and the divine in perfect unity. Whether viewed as Deity embodied or as mortal deified He shines out in the history of the earth as the one effulgent Sun that is the light and glory of the world, compared to whom all mundane luminaries are but as glittering satellites. He was indeed the Master among men, and appears more and more in His true nature and character as the centuries pass on and each succeeding Christmas holiday is celebrated. We bow to Him as the veritable Son of the living God in the fullest sense of the hallowed term. As Mary was His saintly mother, so the Mighty God was His everlasting and literal Father. He was "the only begotten" of Deity, in the flesh, to die that man may live. This we once more affirm and declare as a glorious truth and a fundamental of "Mormon" faith. However this may be regarded by dissenting persons and societies, all enlightened men and women who have looked upon His work and studied His doctrines and example, yield to Him the palm as the greatest of mankind, and with them we join in adoration at this festive season of the year, the Christmas of the nations.

While rejoicing over the birth of the Incomparable One, the light of our gladness is overshadowed with the war clouds that have darkened the skies of Europe, and our songs and salutations of joy and good will are rendered sadly discordant by the thunders of artillery and the groans of the wounded and dying, echoing from afar, but harrowing to our souls as the awful tidings come sounding o'er the sea. Nations rising against nations, brothers against brothers, "Christians" against "Christians," each invoking the aid of the God of love in their gory strife and claiming fellowship with the Prince of peace! What an awful spectacle is thus presented before the angelic host, a band of whom sang the immortal song of "good will toward men" at the birth of the babe of Bethlehem!

The sudden "outpouring" of the spirit of war upon the European nations which startled the whole world and was unexpected at the time of its occurrence, had been long expected by the Latter-day Saints, as it was foretold by the Prophet Joseph Smith on Christmas day, December 25th, 1832, in that remarkable revelation on the subject of war, giving particulars of the outbreak of the Civil War in the United States, twenty-eight years later, "beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina," and the prophecy was literally fulfilled, as may be seen from verse three of section eighty-seven of the Doctrine and Covenants, which says:

"For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and thus war shall be poured out upon all nations."

We need not quote further on this matter. The entire revelation was published in 1851 at Liverpool, England, in a pamphlet entitled, "The Pearl of Great Price," which contained many choice divine communications. This was ten years before the breaking out of the Civil War in our own country.

In consequence of the sudden and widespread uprising of European nations, advice was given by the national administration, through Secretary Bryan, to all Americans to leave at once the countries involved. We were moved upon to co-operate to some extent in the execution of this counsel, and therefore our missionaries in France, Germany, Switzerland and Belgium were withdrawn from their fields of labor there, to return home or be transferred to other places. It was deemed wise also to withdraw most of the missionaries from Holland, Sweden, Denmark and Norway, leaving only a sufficient number to take care of the work, with a view to a revival as soon as opportunities would be afforded, and to call upon some local elders to aid in the care of the property of the Church in those countries. The missionary work in Great Britain has been continued, as well as in other parts of the world, and will be carried on as the Lord may open the way, but will not be abandoned entirely.

The horrors of these conflicts are made still more dreadful by the sufferings of the widows and orphans and the sorrows of the relatives and friends of the soldiers in the trenches and at the battle's front; also by the destruction of famed triumphs of art, of grand structures of bygone centuries and of modern marvels of skill and science and culture, now lying in ruins. The waste of wealth and splendor thus effected, and the enormous debts entailed cannot be recovered but by ages of toil and riches untold. The cries for relief that salute our ears and sadden our souls are receiving responses worthy of the season and the needs of the times. They should not be mere spurts of charity, but be continued as necessity requires. At the same time it must not be forgotten that there are hosts of needy on our own shores and within our reach, who are fit objects for our benevolence, and He whom we now delight to honor reminded us that "the poor ye have always with you," and left them as a legacy to His true disciples.

The Latter-day Saints are to be congratulated on the efficient system by which means are obtained and expended for the worthy poor, so that none need be unsupplied, not only at Christmas time, but whenever want is felt and misfortune overtakes their neighbors. The monthly fast offerings and the contributions from the tithes and Relief Society funds, judiciously distributed, form a source of supply that meets the situation as the Lord has directed. In these times of need the generous and able should increase their liberality, and the help afforded, whether to the poor at home or the suffering abroad, should be extended through authorized channels and not be scattered indiscriminately.

The troubles in Mexico have greatly affected our colonies in that land. Our people there were advised to withdraw and either make new homes at convenient localities in Utah, or obtain lands or suitable employment near the border, so that when conditions shall be changed they may obtain that redress which is their due and if possible rebuild and restore the settlements thus vacated. Some of them have returned, and are doing their best to retain their homes and properties, but are in continual danger of incursions from brigands and other disturbers of the peace. At present there appears to be little prospect of permanent order in that unhappy land.

Notwithstanding the obstacles in the way, the gospel propaganda is extending and numerous additions to the Church have been made both at home and abroad since our last Christmas address, some of them as far off as the East Indies and Japan. In the various parts of the Union, also, converts have been made in large numbers, and the missions there are in a flourishing condition. This can be said also of the work of the Lord in Great Britain, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Samoa, the Society Islands, Hawaii and in other places where our faithful missionaries have labored with praiseworthy zeal and gratifying success. The erection or purchase of suitable, and in many cases, beautiful meeting-houses abroad has aided greatly in our missionary work, and for this we are grateful to God and our friends who have assisted in their acquisition. There has also been great advance in the construction of new places of worship in our home settlements; modern improvements also have been added to edifices already erected, requiring the expenditure of large sums of money from the general Church funds, as well as contributions from faithful saints and sympathizing friends.

The building and furnishing of Church high schools and academies, and amusement halls, gymnasiums, etc., have entailed much outlay, but the effects thereof have been so advantageous as to warrant the expense. The new wing to the Latter-day Saints' Hospital in this city, including up-to-date modern equipments and appliances, marks one more step in the way of Church building improvements that give evidence of the broad spirit of advancement and humanitarian feeling which animates the Church of Christ. Good progress has been made upon the large edifice for the use of Church offices, including the Historian's office, the leading quorums of the Priesthood and other organizations, and when completed it will be another structure of which our people may be proud.

The increase of attendance at the holy Temples has been greater, particularly in Salt Lake City, than ever before, and the ordinances for the living and for the dead have been performed in greater numbers than in any year since these sacred edifices were erected. Thus the work of salvation is going forward with rapid strides, and hundreds of thousands of the departed are rejoicing in the spirit world, in unison with our gladness at this Christmas-tide.

The classwork that has been developed in the Genealogical Society of Utah has aroused great attention and enthusiasm among those who desire to understand the means by which a knowledge of their ancestors may be obtained, and arranged for the performance of that proxy work that can only be attended to within the sacred precincts of the Temples of the Lord. Highest encomiums are due to those active instructors engaged in this labor of love. New stakes and wards have been organized in Zion, bringing to the front hundreds of active men and women to fill the offices in the Priesthood and the various auxiliary societies, developing their energies, and giving them opportunities to gain eternal jewels for their crowns of glory, when all shall be rewarded according to their works. In this way "Zion is growing," and the increase of faith and devotion exhibited by the members of the Church gives great encouragement to all who participate in the labors needful for the work of redemption.

Much improvement has been made in the continuous work of the ward teachers, and the saints generally are being visited in their homes and taught the things of the kingdom and their respective duties as required by the revelations of God. The quarterly conferences in the Stakes of Zion have been regularly held and largely attended. The Twelve Apostles and the Presiding Council of the Seventies, with other prominent elders of the Church, have been diligent and untiring in their travels and ministrations among the people. The Presiding Patriarch has traveled extensively and the local Patriarchs have united with him in their official duties in blessing the people. The Bishops also, and their Counselors as well as the Presidents of Stakes, their Counselors and the High Council have exhibited renewed activity in their arduous labors for the benefit of the people under their watchcare. The results of their splendid work are to be seen in order, peace, good will and devotion of the saints in this state and the regions surrounding. The Presiding Bishopric, with their aids, have continued with increased activity the remarkable labors for which their office has become famous, in the keeping of tithing and other records in perfect order and accuracy, accounting for every cent of receipts and expenditures.

The clerical and other work performed by the attaches of the President's office is also entitled to the highest commendation, as every person connected therewith has been faithful and diligent, and all the accounts kept and work done have been accomplished in the spirit of willing service that places it fully in line with the duties alluded to as associated with the Presiding Bishop's office. Every man and woman in each of the departments has been engaged, heart and soul, in the regular daily occupation with a fidelity that is admirable and worthy of the positions they occupy. The Historian's Office also is conducted with the assiduity, intelligence and comprehension of details required, that demands encomiums equal, at least, to those already passed upon other employees of the Church. The compiling of historical data proceeds with a view of the publication, eventually, of the important details which are necessary to Church history. The records in the Temples also are kept in perfect order, according to the revelations of God, and the instructions of the presiding authorities, involving great labor and close application, as well as accuracy and precision, showing fully the labors performed in behalf of both living and the dead.

The Church publications form a powerful aid in the dissemination of intelligence concerning the progress of the Church and in advocacy of the doctrines and principles revealed in the latter-day dispensation, for the enlightenment of the saints and people of all sects and societies throughout the world. The Deseret News, in both daily and semi-weekly editions, continues to he the leading periodical of the Church having all the modern facilities of a publishing enterprise, with its competent business management, editorial and reportorial staff, linotype and stereotype machinery, book-binding and job departments, power presses and all the equipments of a first class establishment. The Bikuben in the Danish language, the Utah Posten in the Swedish language, the Beobachter in German, and De Utah Nederlander in Dutch, all in Salt Lake City, with many excellent papers published in various parts of Utah and surrounding states, are worthy of the support and attention of people everywhere.

The Improvement Era, a monthly magazine, organ of the Young Mens' Mutual Improvement Association and of the Priesthood quorums, stands in the front rank of literary periodicals. The Juvenile Instructor, organ of the Sunday School Union, has maintained its enviable reputation for over half a century as a first-class monthly, and is not surpassed by any magazine for young people. The Relief Society has a monthly magazine called the Bulletin, which is doing excellent work among the organizations of that association. The Young Women's Journal, also a monthly magazine, organ of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, and the Children's Friend, organ of the Primary Associations, are also flourishing periodicals, each in its own sphere, spreading information and giving wise counsel suited to the conditions of the different societies represented. Liahona the Elders' Journal, published in Independence, Missouri, represents all the Church missions throughout the United States, and is also doing magnificent work. Abroad, the Millennial Star still shines, as of old, as the leading luminary in the Church firmament, which for over seventy-four years has shed abroad the light of the gospel throughout the European countries. The Scandinavian Stjerne, the Swedish Nordstjarnan, the Dutch Ster, the New Zealand Messenger, and the Society Islands Te Heheuraa Api, also reflect the light of truth and aid in the great work of promulgating the gospel of peace.

All the auxiliary societies are being conducted with zeal and energy and wisdom. The Religion classes, the Primaries, the Sunday schools, including the Parents' classes, the Young Mens' and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement associations, the Relief societies, as well as the quorums of the higher and the lesser priesthood, are all in praiseworthy condition, exhibiting that order and interest which are characteristic of the house of God. These are all causes of great rejoicing at this time of Christmas celebration, for they are preparing a people for the coming of the Lord, and getting them ready for the work of promulgating the doctrines of Christ, and diffusing the spirit of harmony and peace throughout the world, which will certainly be accomplished after "this cruel war" is over, and the inhabitants of the countries now in conflict shall have been humiliated and brought to repentance, and to the realization of the folly as well as the wickedness of war, and will thus become ready to receive the messengers of salvation. For the sunshine of light and truth will be shed abroad when the dense clouds of wrath and bitterness and bloodthirstiness are dispelled, and the world will yet enjoy the reign of righteousness and amity and brotherly love foreseen by all the holy prophets since the world began.

Another cause of great rejoicing and encouragement is the evident change of sentiment among thinking people everywhere in reference to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Numerous visitors to our chief cities have become acquainted with actual conditions here, in seeing the "fruits of 'Mormonism' " for themselves. Numerous tourists who have been on our Temple block and have obtained knowledge through our efficient Bureau of Information established there, have carried back to their homes an understanding of the truth concerning us. And the missionaries, in their travels, by their excellent example they set of purity in their lives, sincerity in their callings and the "love of the neighbor," shown forth in their gratuitous work for the uplifting of humanity, have made a favorable impression upon the public mind, and the former feeling of animosity has in a great degree changed to one of admiration.

In the recent tour of two of the First Presidency and party through the Central and Southern States and California missions, this change has been manifested in a most striking manner. In regions where our elders in times past have been beaten with many stripes, and some of them have lost their lives while promulgating the gospel of peace, this company of ministers have been received with the greatest respect and courtesy. Prominent people in the different cities that were visited came forward and expressed their good will and their appreciation of the discourses that were delivered and the presence among them of the servants of the Lord. The journey was made through seventeen different States of the Union, covering over six thousand one hundred miles of railway transportation, holding numerous crowded meetings, and paying brief visits to notable places, without any accident or misfortune; and the kindness exhibited and the aid afforded by railway officials everywhere, as well as the numerous friendly newspaper notices, combined to prove clearly that public opinion is changing wonderfully, and the faith and works of the Latter-day Saints are being discovered in their true light.

We acknowledge the hand of the Lord in all the events occurring in these latter days, and look for the complete accomplishment of His divine purposes concerning the redemption of the earth through Jesus Christ, His beloved Son. While we do not charge the Almighty with causing the evils of any kind that afflict humanity, and which we regard as the fruits of disobedience to His holy laws, we recognize the fact that He is over all and that He will eventually control everything to bring about His own almighty plans. The agency of man is not interfered with by Divine Providence. If men were not left free to choose the good and refuse the evil, or vice versa, there would be no righteousness or even reason in bringing them to judgment. In consequence of the power of volition they become responsible beings, and therefore will receive the results of their own doings. They will be rewarded or punished according to their works, when the books are opened and they are judged out of the things written therein.

God, doubtless, could avert war, prevent crime, destroy poverty, chase away darkness, overcome error, and make all things bright, beautiful and joyful. But this would involve the destruction of a vital and fundamental attribute in man-the right of agency. It is for the benefit of His sons and daughters that they become acquainted with evil as well as good, with darkness as well as light, with error as well as truth, and with the results of the infraction of eternal laws. Therefore he has permitted the evils which have been brought about by the acts of His creatures, but will control their ultimate results for His own glory and the progress and exaltation of His sons and daughters, when they have learned obedience by the things they suffer. The contrasts experienced in this world of mingled sorrow and joy are educational in their nature, and will be the means of raising humanity to a full appreciation of all that is right and true and good. The foreknowledge of God does not imply His action in bringing about that which He foresees, nor make Him responsible in any degree for that which man does or refuses to do. The comprehension of this principle makes clear many questions that puzzle the uninformed as to the works and power of Deity.

We invite all people to search for the truth as it is in Him, and to be joyful over its perception and practice, and for the great fact of the coming of the Redeemer to lift mankind out of death and hell and suffering into the light and glory that is to be revealed in the triumph of the Christ over sin and Satan and sorrow, into the perfect joys of the Father's presence when all things are made new. At this Christmas time we breathe out blessings and good will to all humanity. Toward those who have persecuted and maligned and borne false witness against us and our people we feel no enmity and desire no retribution. We only hope for their repentance and conversion. We pray that peace may come to the jarring nations abroad, and that it may be fully enjoyed by the saints at home. We desire the amelioration of conditions everywhere. We pray for the rich benisons of the gospel of Christ to rest upon all His people, and hope that the Christmas of 1914 will prove the happiest of all they have known. Let joy be in every heart, praise and thanksgiving in every soul, and as the years roll by may they become brighter and better until the earth itself is redeemed, and from the heights above and the depths beneath shall hear songs of praise to God and His Son, the everlasting Savior, with peace on earth and good will to men. JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
