James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Division of responsibility in Stake Presidencies and Bishoprics, December 30, 1914

1914-December 30-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The pattern of the division of responsibilities of members of Bishoprics and clerks and Stake Presidencies and clerks now (1969) seems a well-established pattern. Here such division and assignment of responsibilities is suggested as new procedure in the Church. The accompanying letter prepared by the Presiding Bishopric is enclosed and made official by this cover letter of the First Presidency.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, December 30, 1914. President Serge F. Ballif, Cache Stake.

Dear Brother:

The Presiding Bishopric have sent to each Bishop of your stake a letter outlining a suggestive division of the duties and responsibilities of each member of the Bishopric and of the ward clerk. We wish you to take cognizance of this matter and supervise it so as to secure the results desired, as presented in the said letter.

We also recommend that you take into consideration a similar division of your duties, so that each member of the Stake Presidency will have definite duties assigned to him. All working in unison for the good of the saints and the promotion of the cause to which we are all devoted.

With kind regards and wishing you a prosperous and happy New Year, we are, Your brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.

December 28, 1914 Dear Brethren:

This is the season of the year when it is customary to prepare for changes and improvements in the method of doing business in the stakes and wards, and the present, we think, is an opportune time to call your attention to the remarks of President Joseph F. Smith at the recent October conference concerning the distribution of the duties and labors of the Bishoprics, as follows:

"The work of the Bishop is both temporal and spiritual. He should not try to do all the work that is necessary to be done in his ward. His counselors are there to help him, and a due portion of the responsibility of the Bishop should be placed upon his counselors. Neither is it wise that the Bishopric should feel that they should do all that is necessary to be done in their respective wards. They should exercise their right to call upon the Priesthood. It is sometimes advisable to give to each counselor special duties, the Bishop assigning to each of the counselors his proportion of the responsibilities that belong to the Bishopric, each one doing some special work for which he is adapted, so that all may be active."

In well managed wards, the Bishopric have systematized their work, and while the Bishop has complete oversight of all the affairs of the ward, many of the details are assigned to others. In such wards the Bishopric thoroughly enjoy their labors and do not feel overworked. For the purpose of assisting those who are not familiar with the plan of dividing the responsibility, we make the following suggestions:

Let the Bishopric hold a regular weekly council meeting, at which the ward clerk should be present, and a regular order of business be followed. At this meeting, correspondence from the First Presidency, Presiding Bishopric and stake officers should be read and discussed. Members of the Bishopric should report their labors for the previous week concerning the departments to which they are assigned. There should be considered recommendations for ordinations to the priesthood, the selection and assignment of ward teachers, the selection of missionaries and all other business of the ward.

As stated by President Joseph F. Smith, the assignment of work should be according to the special adaptability of each member of the Bishopric, and the following is an arrangement which is in operation in a number of wards:-The Bishop attends to all tithing matters; the aid of the worthy poor; the issuing of temple recommends; signing certificates of membership; overseeing the work of the Relief Society; presiding personally over the Priest's quorum and supervising one-third of the Teachers' districts. To one counselor is assigned ward financial matters, including the up-keep of meeting house and grounds; the supervision of the work of the ordained teachers; the charge of ward amusements; the oversight of the work of the Y.M.M.I.A. and Y.L.M.I.A. The other counselor supervises the work of the deacons in a quorum capacity and their labors in the ward; also the Sunday School, Ward Choir, Primary Association and Religion Class. The Ward Clerk prepares all certificates of membership, requests for certificates; supervises the work of the secretaries of all the auxiliary organizations; the weekly priesthood classes; keeps the ward records and performs such other duties as may be assigned to him. These are suggestions only. They have been carried out successfully in a number of wards. Each ward must work out its own problems and adapt these suggestions to its local conditions.

In order that the arrangement outlined above may be made effective and to avoid confusion, the heads of the various ward activities should confer freely with the member of the Bishopric in charge of that part of the business of the ward; and the Bishop's counselors should consult freely with the Bishop, both at the weekly council meetings and at other times, on all matters pertaining to the business of the ward placed in their charge. This should not be taken to indicate that the Bishop's counselors assume at any time the duty of presiding over the ward, except in the absence of the Bishop. It is the duty of the Bishop to preside whenever he is present, although he may direct his counselors in conducting meetings, etc.

In view of the importance of this movement, we recommend that you, as the Bishopric of the ward, meet in council, at which the ward clerk should be present and adapt the recommendations outlined in this letter to the business of your ward, providing you have not already followed this matter of dividing your duties.

With kind regards, and wishing you a happy and prosperous new year, we are, Your brethren in the Gospel, [Signed by the Presiding Bishopric]
