James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost, January 24, 1902

1902-January 24 & February 10-Original letter, in possession of James R. Clark, Provo, Utah.

Joshua R. Clark, father of J. Reuben Clark, Jr., of Grantsville, Utah, wrote to President Joseph F. Smith for clarification of questions of a doctrinal nature. He had been certified or licensed by the First Presidency in 1898 as an Instructor in the Religion Classes of the Grantsville Ward. On January 22, 1902, he wrote President Smith seeking clarification of the questions: "Is the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost one and the same?" and "Was Paul one of the Twelve Apostles?"

President Smith turned the answering of the letter over to his son, Hyrum M. Smith, newly sustained Apostle, and then reviewed and corrected the answer.

SALT LAKE CITY Jan. 24, 1902

JOSHUA R. CLARK Esq: Grantsville, Utah

Dear Bro: Your letter, bearing date of 22 inst, was duly received and referred to me to answer the questions it contained. Question No. 1: "Is the 'Spirit of the Lord' and the 'Holy Ghost' one and the same?"

Answer, Yes. Holy Ghost: In the English language ghost means, both by derivation and usage, practically the same as spirit. It refers to the immortal part of man as distinguished from the body. "Holy Ghost" therefore, means "Holy Spirit" and is properly applied to the third member of the Godhead. The names or titles of the Holy Ghost used in the scripture are numerous. Among the most common are the following: "Spirit of God" (Matt. 3:16; 12:28; 1st Nephi 13:12); "Spirit of the Lord," or simply "Spirit' (Acts 2:4; 8:29; 10:19; Romans 8:10, 26; 1st Thess. 5:19; 1st Nephi 4:6; 11:8; Mosiah 13:5); "Comforter" (John 14:16-26; 15:26); "Spirit of Truth" (John 15:26; 16:13).

All the above terms are synonymous, and are all properly applied to the third person of the Godhead. "The person of the Holy Ghost should not be confounded with the forces or powers by which He operates, thus, when the scriptures speak of men being filled with the Holy Ghost, and of the Spirit falling upon men (see Luke 1:15; 4:1; Acts 6:3; 13:19; Alma 36:24; Doc. & Cov. 107:56; Acts 10) the passages have reference to the power and influence of the Holy Ghost, rather than to the person of the Holy Ghost. It is through the agency and power of the Holy Ghost that the Father and the Son usually operate in their dealings with the human family."

This power or influence is also spoken of as the "Spirit of God" or "of the Lord." It is the power or the spirit that "lighteneth every man that cometh into the world," that prompteth a man to do good, speak the truth, love his neighbor as himself and to "serve God and keep all His commandments." This Spirit of the Lord is the antithesis of the spirit of the Devil, for the fruits of which see Galatians 5:16 to end of chapter.

Question No. 2: There is no direct evidence that Paul was one of the Twelve Apostles, so far as I know. But, considered from the standpoint of our knowledge of the organization of the church of Christ, I believe that he (Paul) was one of the Twelve. The fact that he was ordained an apostle; met and labored with the other apostles is strong presumptive evidence that he was. If Peter, James & John formed the presiding council of the church, then in order to have a full Quorum of the Twelve others, besides those chosen by Jesus, must have been called. I think therefore, Paul and Barnabas were both members of the quorum and that others were called to fill vacancies as they occurred. Trusting the above answer will satisfy your mind I remain your Bro. Hyrum M. Smith, approved by—

Dear Brother Clark:-When your letter of Jan. 22d last came to hand, I was very busy. I passed it over to my son who was present, and said to him-"answer that"-He soon afterwards handed me this letter to look over, and, if approved-to send to you. I have not had time to do so until now. I should have answered you very briefly -viz:-you ask: "Is the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost one and the same?" When they are used synonymously-yes-and they are frequently used in the same sense. But literally-they are not one and the same. Sec. 84; pp. 45-46 D&C has no reference to the Holy Ghost who is a personage of Spirit (D&C Sec. 130:33) but to the Spirit of God which giveth light to every man that cometh into the world. The Holy Ghost is only given to those baptized.

Question 2: "Was the Apostle Paul one of the Twelve Apostles?" To my mind, without doubt he was. How could he have met with the Twelve, and why should Peter have chided him for saying some things hard to be understood &c and how could he have been recognized and regarded as having authority in the Church if he had not been one of the Twelve? Could the house of God be a house of order with Paul preaching the gospel as an Apostle independently of the Twelve? It does not matter to me if the Bible is silent on the matter-common sense and a knowledge of the Order of the Priesthood proves to me beyond doubt that neither Paul nor Barnabas would have been recognized as Apostles if they had not been of the Twelve. Respectfully &c., JOSEPH F. SMITH Feb. 10th 1902
