James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Approval of book, Jesus the Christ by Elder James E. Talmage, August 13, 1915

1915-August 13-Improvement Era 18:1011 (September, 1915).

This announcement of the forthcoming publication of the book Jesus the Christ by James E. Talmage states that the book was written or "prepared by appointment" and was to be published by the Church. It was the desire of the First Presidency that it "be read and studied by the Latter-day Saints, in their families, and in organizations that are devoted wholly or in part to theological study." Additional historical background on the writing and first publication of this book was supplied through the columns of the Improvement Era in November, 1962, at the time the book was recently used as a course of study by the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums of the Church. (See Improvement Era, November 1962, pp. 806-809.)

OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT

Within the month of September, 1915, there will be issued from The Deseret News press a book entitled Jesus the Christ, written by Elder James E. Talmage, of the Council of the Twelve. This important work has been prepared by appointment, and is to be published by the Church. The field of treatment is indicated on the title-page as "A study of the Messiah and his mission, according to Holy Scriptures both ancient and modern."

The book is more than a "Life of Christ" in the ordinary acceptation of that title, as it not only treats at length the narrative of our Lord's life and ministry in the flesh, together with his death, resurrection, and ascension, but deals also with his antemortal existence and Godship, and with his ministry in the resurrected state, both of old and in the current dispensation. The sacred subject of our Savior's life and mission is presented as it is accepted and proclaimed by the Church that bears his Holy Name.

We desire that the work, "Jesus the Christ" be read and studied by the Latter-day Saints, in their families, and in the organizations that are devoted wholly or in part to theological study. We commend it especially for use in our Church schools, as also for the advanced theological classes in Sunday schools and priesthood quorums, for the instruction of our missionaries, and for general reading.

JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, Utah, Aug. 13, 1915.
