James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas greeting to readers of the Liahona, December 18, 1915

1915-December 18-Liahona, the Elders' Journal, Vol. 13, No. 27, pp. 425-427, December 28, 1915.

The succeeding message in this volume seemingly is the greeting mentioned in paragraph eight of this message. If this is correct, then the Christmas message carried in the Deseret News was written earlier.

December 18, 1915. To the Editor of "Liahona, the Elders' Journal," Independence, Missouri

Dear Brother:

I regret very much that owing to my absence from the city, it was impossible for me to comply with your kind request to send the LIAHONA a Christmas greeting. If it is not too late I desire to make up for my inability to send you a Christmas greeting by wishing the missions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints in the United States, a happy and prosperous New Year. This, of course, includes all the officers, the missionaries and the Saints everywhere.

It gives me great pleasure and satisfaction to learn that the missions in the United States are prospering, The reports which we receive from them are very gratifying indeed. The labors of the elders are bearing fruit, in results that were never more satisfactory. At no time has there been more inquiry among the people concerning the principles of the Gospel, than today, a truth confirmed by the brethren who have recently visited the missions.

It appears that the war affecting the nations in Europe and on our north and south is turning the minds of the people in this country to the Lord their God, giving the elders an opportunity to explain the true principles of the Gospel as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the day in which we live.

I congratulate the missionaries who are laboring in these missions, upon the results of their labors, and do encourage them to continue in the good work, so that they may be ever more diligent in teaching the principles of the everlasting Gospel, which the Lord has entrusted to us to proclaim to the nations.

It is a wonderful responsibility that you bear. You are the heralds of salvation to mankind. The message which you bear must first be understood and observed by you in person, in order that you may the more effectively establish the Word in the hearts of others. You have no time to lose. Every moment should be occupied by study or by the proclamation of the word of God. Those whom you convert should be induced to join you in this labor and do their part to proclaim the message of salvation, which is to all people.

Your message should be: I know that God lives; that he has revealed Himself personally, by which we know He is in the likeness of man; that in answer to prayer His Son Jesus Christ has revealed Himself to His Prophet Joseph Smith and restored again the true plan of salvation; that by means of His revelations the true Church of Christ is organized upon earth, with an authorized Priesthood to officiate in its ordinances, and to receive continual revelation for the building up of His Church upon the earth. Repent all ye people, therefore, turn from your sins, be baptized, and by God's authorized servants ye shall receive the Holy Ghost as a light to your path, and a guide to your feet.

Your lives must be exemplary, and so conform to the principles of the Gospel and the commandment of God, that no man shall be offended in your words and actions. It is your privilege through prayer to God to live near to Him, so that His Holy Spirit shall be a light and a guide to your words and actions. You are set up as examples before the world, and it behooves you to "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven."

I heartily join with the First Presidency in wishing you success and prosperity during the New Year, and pray that you may prove worthy representatives of the Church in your fields of labor. The desire of our hearts and our earnest wishes are that the Holy Ghost may continue to abide with you, and that your labors may result in continued growth and increase to the salvation of souls and the advancement of the kingdom of God.

We are grateful that our Nation is in the enjoyment of peace, and we pray that its leaders may receive wisdom of our Father in Heaven, to so direct the affairs in their charge that we may continue in the enjoyment of peace and prosperity throughout the land.

We hope for a settlement of the strife and contention that is tearing asunder the nations of the earth. We pray that the Spirit of God may so work with the rulers and in the hearts of the people, that they may soon come to an understanding, that peace may bring rest upon the warring nations. We pray that the Spirit of God may work upon their hearts, that they may see the light of Truth and the Spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ may dwell uppermost in their hearts and bring them peace. May the Church in the land of Zion succeed; may its publications for the spread of the word of the Lord find many eager readers; may the word preached by the elders find lodgment in the hearts of the righteous, and may the members of the Church be blessed and prospered, that ultimately Truth may triumph, righteousness prevail, and Zion be established, are my earnest prayers and desires. Affectionately your brother and friend, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
