James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 18, 1915

1915-December 18-MS 78:1-6 (January 6, 1916); also Deseret News, December 18, 1915.

This annual Christmas and pastoral epistle, among other things, makes reference to a number of new books being published by the Church or with its sanction which it recommends to Church members. These included the book Jesus the Christ by James E. Talmage and the comprehensive History of the Mormon Church by B. H. Roberts.

Roberts in the preface to volume one of his History (CHC 1:vi) indicates that it was the usage of the word comprehensive by the First Presidency when referring to his work in this greeting that caused the adoption of the word in the title of his history.

"TIDINGS OF COMFORT AND JOY" FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

The Message of Peace comes with Christmas of the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifteen, amid the dreadful din of war echoing from far-off eastern lands, and reverberating from nearer points in the western hemisphere. "Good will to men" sounds strangely discordant, mingled with the roar of artillery, the crash of bombs, the cries of the wounded and dying, the yells of infuriated foes, the moans of widows and orphans, the curses of fellow "Christian" antagonists, and the fiery blasts of burning homes and ruined cities. Can there be any worse hells than those now on earth, created by professed followers of the Prince of Peace? But as darkness deepens before the dawn, and calm follows the tempest, let us look for the contrast to come, and hope that it may come quickly with all the joys and serene blessings of a long-predicted Millennium.

Christmas is an annual foreword of that volume of benisons to come forth in the fulfilment of Divine promises. A reign of righteousness is to hold dominion on earth, and the result is to be Universal Peace. Therefore, let us all observe it in the true spirit of the occasion. While we sympathize with the suffering, we need not ignore the blessings at hand, nor fail to enjoy the favors within our reach, extended by a bountiful Providence, and gathered by industry and frugality. Zion is blest indeed. Rich harvests have rewarded the toil of the farmers and fruitgrowers, not only in this western region, but generally throughout the land. The sugar industry has received an impetus here which places it in the front rank of Utah's great products. The beet-grower is thus benefited as well as the manufacturer, and the investor receives fair returns for his capital, and the whole community is the richer and prosperity abounds, every branch of business reaping the fruits of this increase, and thus Plenty reigns and Poverty is driven into narrow quarters. The general health here is good. Utah's death-rate is small in comparison with that in other states, while her birth-rate is higher.

There have been some disasters during the year now passing, by floods caused by bursting dams and reservoirs; but the fatalities have been very few, and the united efforts of individuals and the Church have started the unfortunate sufferers on the road to new endeavors and new returns. Refugees from the Mexican colonies, abandoned because of the wars in that unhappy country, are making homes in Utah and surrounding places, and are rapidly recovering from the losses incurred, and the sufferings sustained. Many missionaries who were laboring in the countries now involved in deadly strife have returned in safety to their homes in the mountains, a number of them finishing the usual term of service in various parts of the United States, not having completed it abroad. All come home rejoicing in the manifestations of a protecting Providence, and in their remarkable deliverance from harm and danger.

Missionary work in this country and in those regions not seriously menaced by war is carried on with new vigor and success. Converts are made in large numbers in each of the American missions, and excellent reports come from Australia, New Zealand, the Society Islands, Samoa, Hawaii, and other Pacific islands. And this is true also of Great Britain, Ireland, Canada, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Holland, Switzerland, South Africa, and Japan. Even in the belligerent nations interest is aroused in the latter-day cause through the fulfilment of the prophecies concerning this conflict uttered by the Seer of the nineteenth century.

The work of proselyting has been greatly aided by the World's Expositions on the Pacific coast. Hundreds of thousands of tourists to and from the west, have visited Salt Lake City, and learned something true about the much-maligned "Mormons." The Bureau of Information, with its able corps of workers, has disseminated knowledge concerning the latter-day gospel which is being carried throughout this country and to the "ends of the earth." People of high standing, as well as those in lower degree, have been astonished at what they have seen and heard for themselves, on the spot, which they had been led to believe was a sink-hole of iniquity and ignorance, but where they have learned much to admire and even wish to see prevail in their home neighborhoods. This proves a stronger refutation of the calumnies of anti-"Mormon" agitators and pulpit and platform prevaricators, than anything that could be said or written in reply by our own advocates or defenders. Some of the effects thus produced are seen in rational and fairly-stated articles on "Mormonism" and the "Mormons" in numerous newspapers and magazines.

Utah people have had opportunity to visit the Pacific coast, through reachable rates on the railroads, and large numbers, including many Church officials, have availed themselves of it, and have enjoyed the rich displays of the world's products at the great expositions, and at the same time have made an excellent impression upon other travelers and the Californians whom they met. The conventions held in San Francisco were attended by many Utah delegates, who were received with marked honors and special attention.

Among them were the Genealogical convention, at which Utah's workers were very prominent and helpful; the Congress of Religious Philosophies, where our Dr. James E. Talmage delivered an exceptionally fine address on the Philosophical Basis of Mormonism, which was published in full; the celebration of Utah's day-the advent of the Pioneers on July 24th, 1847-honored by the presence and speeches of leading men and high officials of the city and State. This great gathering was held in front of the Utah building on the Fair grounds, and the general enthusiasm was enhanced by the splendid appearance and marchings of the Salt Lake High School cadets, and the notable address of the Mormon' President, which made a profound impression upon all who heard it. The tour of the Ogden Tabernacle Choir was another grand feature of Utah's participation in California's great enterprise. The musical treat thus furnished will never be forgotten by the hosts of appreciative listeners in the several cities favored with a visit. Utah and California have been mutually benefited by the closer union that has resulted from this "getting together."

Our Salt Lake Tabernacle choir and organ have played important parts in the work of removing prejudices from the minds of visitors from all parts of the world, and opening their hearts to the reception of the truth concerning our faith and our mission. So with our public buildings, projects and industries. The Church universities and academies, with our State education institutions, are viewed with wonder and as evidences that the people of Utah are up-to-date, and in some respects ahead of older communities in these important matters.

The revival of the "Home Products" movement, recently put in force, attracts attention to the art and skill and labors of Utah's workers, and shows the benefits of a general use of those fruits of the soil, and of manufactures that are the results of our own industry instead of relying upon imports and sending away funds that are needed at home. This is like an echo of past words of advice from eminent Church leaders, but it rings with wise counsel and is timely and profitable, and should be heeded throughout the State.

The prohibition cause under local option in the districts where the Latter-day Saints are in the majority, has proved of great benefit to the public, and gives evidence of the good citizenship and social purity of the "Mormons." And while Salt Lake City has not been in close line with that movement, the civic regulations, with efficient police enforcement, have maintained order and suppressed vice, so as to present to investigators the elements of a clean, well-governed municipality.

The Latter-day Saints' Church office building is advancing towards completion, and its fine, granite exterior and noble proportions claim the admiration of all beholders. The erection of numerous ward chapels, stake meeting-houses, gymnasiums, amusement halls, additions and improvements to other Church edifices, with the rearing of a great Temple in Alberta, Canada, mark progress in the building up of Zion and the need of faithful observance of the law of tithing. The maintenance of Temples and Church Schools, the return expenses of numerous missionaries, the aid extended to sufferers from floods and other calamities, the assistance rendered to the poor, with many other expenditures, form a continual drain on the Church treasury. The contemplated Temple at Laie, Hawaii, it is expected, will be built chiefly with funds obtained from native sources. It will prove a great boon to the saints of the Pacific Islands, who are already rejoicing in anticipation of its blessings. The ordinance work in the four completed Temples is of remarkable magnitude. Those sacred sanctuaries are kept in constant service for the living and for the dead, and the Salt Lake Temple, especially, is crowded to over-flowing, and double duty is daily required to the faithful workers there to meet the desires of the hosts of eager devotees from all parts of the Church.

The railroads that traverse this State and connect it with surrounding regions are of incalculable value to the public in general, and the Latter-day Saints in particular. It would be almost impossible for visitors to the Temples and business and education centers, but for these essential aids to inter-communication. The courtesies and general fair treatment they extend, and the new lines connecting our settlements with the main roads that reach out to far distant parts, render the railway service of immeasurable worth and convenience to the community, and suggest proper consideration by the legislative and executive departments of our State government, and the public in general.

The prospects before the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at this Christmas season are exceedingly bright and encouraging. The wonderful organization set up by divine power and authority is kept in complete order and active operation. It is rare that any of its officials prove recreant to their trust, unworthy of confidence, or slothful in the performance of duty. There is a general, hearty and pleasing response to every requirement, and such gratuitous work from willing hands as cannot be found in any other church or society on the earth. In the quorums of the holy Priesthood and in the auxiliary associations, there is emulation and continuity of effort worthy of the highest praise and of the eternal rewards that await the fervent and faithful brethren and sisters thus engaged.

Throughout the Church a spirit of unity, devotion, and faith prevails. The visits of Teachers to the members help greatly in the diffusion of this happy influence, and in the settlement of such differences as may arise in families or in neighborhoods. Therefore, Bishop's courts and High Council trials are few and far between, and civil litigation is rendered infrequent, and in many places almost unnecessary. The introduction of the home-meeting movement has been an aid in this direction. One evening a week, or at least a month, for home family recreation, improvement and enjoyment, conducted in order and under a religious spirit, proves successful in the desired direction, and is to be heartily recommended everywhere.

The dissemination of Church literature and the publication of the newspapers and magazines containing Church and general news and doctrinal articles for old and young, are an increasing factor in the promulgation of the gospel of the Savior, the anniversary of whose birth we are just about to celebrate. A notable work of this character, recently issued from the press of the Deseret News, written by Elder James E. Talmage, of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, Jesus the Christ, is appropriate for Christmas circulation, and, being published by authority of the Church, is worthy of perusal by its members and instructors. It differs from all other volumes on the history of the world's Redeemer, in scope and extent of the subject, and accuracy of detail. It may be ranked as a standard of historical and religious information.

The latest reprint of Church History, published by the Historian's Office, has reached the sixth volume, and forms a valuable collection for every library, public and private. It is furnished at reduced rates by the Deseret News Book Store, to place the whole set within the reach of the societies and members of the Church. The comprehensive History of the Mormon Church, by Elder B. H. Roberts, of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, and published in The Americana, is completed to recent date, and will also form six large volumes when bound in book form, containing data and details collated in forcible style, most comprehensive and valuable for reference.

The advancement of the Church in every department is truly gratifying, and a potent reason for seasonable rejoicing. In spite of "man's inhumanity to man," so awfully manifested in the dreadful struggle between nations now impending, we may rationally take cognizance of present causes for gladness and thanksgiving, and look through the clouds of direful war to the sure and certain fulfilment of the promises of permanent peace in the approaching advent of our Lord and King. The conflict of nations is one of the signs of His coming. Attended by earthquake and famine, pestilence and tempest, volcanic eruptions, fear and commotion, destruction from air and ocean, on land and sea, and the development of novel methods of diabolical slaughter, rapine and horror, these tokens of the approaching crisis are rendered vividly striking as another proof of the coming of the "end," by the present fulfilment of His further prediction: "Then shall this gospel of the kingdom be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come." (Matt. 24:12).

It is the calling and duty and business of the Latter-day Saints to carry on this mission given to them of the Christ by revelation in these latter days. There should be no slackening of effort, nor shrinking from sacrifice, nor delay because of difficulties. This Christmas time is a reminder of Christ's commands. At the same time it is a whisper from angelic regions that the work is to be done in the spirit of, "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth and good-will to all men." With this feeling uppermost in our hearts, we send Christmas greeting to our brethren and sisters everywhere, with good wishes to all people throughout the wide, wide world, in hope and anticipation and assurance, that right will triumph over wrongful might, truth will conquer error, and light will dissipate the darkness, and He whose right it is to rule, will come in glory and in strength, as the mighty God, the Everlasting Savior, the Prince of Peace. JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.—Deseret News.
