James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Record Keeping, February 1, 1902

1902-February 1-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

As is evident by the opening paragraph, the decision to establish a system of inspection and audit of all Church records was a joint decision of the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles.

Office of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

RECORD KEEPING

SALT LAKE CITY, February 1, 1902. To Presidents of Stakes and Missions, Bishops of Wards, and Other Presiding Authorities.

DEAR BRETHREN:-At a meeting of the First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, held in Salt Lake City, January 24, 1901, it was decided to establish in the Church what shall hereafter be known as

RECORD DAY

This means that once a year, in every Stake of Zion and in every Ward of the Church, all the records belonging to the organizations in such Stakes or Wards shall be brought to appointed places to be audited and inspected by such Stake and Ward officers that may be present for that purpose. In case of a Stake Record, the records of all Stake organizations should be brought for inspection; this will also include the records of the quorums of High Priests and Elders within the limits of the Stake. In the case of a Ward Record Day, the general records of the Ward, together with those of the Lesser Priesthood and of the Auxiliary organizations, such as Relief Society, Sunday Schools, Y.M.M.I.A., Y.W.M.I.A., Primary Associations and Religion Classes should be brought forward and submitted to the inspection of the Ward Bishopric and members of the Stake Presidency that may be in attendance.

In order to save time and expense it was also decided in the above named meeting that this Record Day might be appointed on the same dates as the respective Stake and Ward Conferences are held.

Hitherto presiding officers have in many instances been unacquainted with the condition of the records in their Wards or Branches, everything having been left to the judgment and discretion of the respective secretaries and recorders. Some of these have been careless and indifferent in discharging their duties, in consequence of which much ordinance work and many transactions of great importance have not been properly recorded and preserved. Thousands of members of the Church are therefore at the present time unable to obtain the correct data of their baptisms, ordinations and other blessings. By proper inspection and auditing of the records once a year, due praise, or criticism, may be administered, according to merits and circumstances. And whenever clerks or recorders are dilatory in attending to their duties, others may be appointed in their stead.

Record-keeping has been enjoined upon the Saints by divine command from the very beginning of the Church, and neglecting it has often brought about the most unpleasant and embarrassing results. With the commencement of the new century, improved methods having been recommended throughout the Church, it is fondly anticipated that no historian, clerk or recorder who is now in office or, who may hereafter be appointed, will neglect the sacred trust imposed upon him of making true and complete records.

STAKE RECORDS

In each Stake of Zion, one general record book, or history, should be kept, to contain minutes of Stake Conferences, Priesthood Meetings, proceedings of the High Council, in trial cases as well as general business meetings, and official acts of the Stake Presidency, important ordinations to the Priesthood (such as Patriarchs, High Priests, etc.), the organization of new Wards and Stake Associations, or important changes in organizations of this kind already existing, and any other important event that may take place. All this should be recorded as a continuous narrative or history, i.e. every item being written in regular chronological order. This record is intended to take the place of the several special records hitherto kept.

WARD RECORDS

Two record books should be kept in each Ward and Branch in the Church, to-wit., A Genealogical Book, containing a record of members, officers and children, on forms prepared by the committee and approved by the First Presidency and Apostles at a meeting held March 22, 1900, for universal use throughout the Church; this book is for sale at the "Deseret News" office; A General Minute Book, or history, containing minutes of general Ward meetings, acting Teachers' meetings, Bishop's court proceedings, the organization of quorums and local organizations, and important changes in the presiding officers of the same, the erection of meeting houses, public buildings and other improvements, deaths of prominent members, the departure and return of missionaries, and all important events as they take place from time to time.

This record should be to the Ward what the same kind of a record is to the Stake, every event being recorded in chronological order.

In a former circular, dated March 14, 1901, the committee suggested that proceedings of Bishop's courts and of High Councils should be kept in separate books; but having given the matter a closer study, and obtained the opinions of leading Stake officials in relation thereto, we now recommend that the minutes of such proceedings be incorporated with the general chronological history, as set forth in the foregoing.

QUORUM RECORDS

Two records should be kept by each quorum of High Priests, Seventies, Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons, namely, a record of members (genealogical record) and a minute book. The two records may, however, be bound together in one book, if so desired, for convenience sake. A form, suitable for all quorums, has been adopted by this committee, and for the sake of uniformity it is hoped that said form will be adopted by all quorums as soon as possible. Books suitable for the several quorums will be printed and kept for sale at the "Deseret News" office.

Special care should be taken in recording the name and genealogy of each member with accurate dates of ordinations and the names of those who officiate in the same.

RECORDS OF AUXILIARY ASSOCIATIONS

One general record, namely, a minute book, should be kept by each Stake and Ward organization, such as Sunday Schools, Relief Societies, Y.M.M.I.A., Y.W.M.I.A., Primary Associations and Religion Classes. All records should contain good paper and be well bound, and all entries made with good ink and in a legible hand-writing. The clerks should be instructed to record all minutes immediately after they have been approved, and otherwise keep up with current events in their entries. A roll of attendance should be kept by each quorum and association and made a part of the minute book.

FOREIGN MISSION BOOKS So far as record-keeping and recording is concerned, a foreign mission ranks with a Stake of Zion, and a Conference of a missionary field may be compared to a Ward in any organized Stake. Hence the rules for record-keeping suggested in this communication for Stakes and Wards, can be applied to Missions and Conferences. In order to guard against loss of important data in foreign lands where the organizations of the Church are more temporary than at home, it would be well for each Conference to keep a duplicate record of all ordinance work done in the respective branches, included in such Conference.

A special feature of Record Day should be the devising of means and methods for preserving and taking good care of books and records, particularly the older ones, so that none shall be lost or destroyed.
