James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Missionaries not required to tithe, February 4, 1902

1902-February 4-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The question of whether full-time missionaries who are being supported by their families are under obligation to pay tithing on the money they receive for their support is here discussed in some detail.

Office of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, February 4, 1902

TO PRESIDENTS OF MISSIONS:

Complaints have reached us that missionaries are required to pay tithing on the money they receive from home for their maintenance and for buying their tracts and clothing. In many instances the wife, parent or relatives are under the necessity of borrowing money to furnish the husband, son, or friend, with the money to continue his labors in the missionary field. It is evident that they do not want to incur a greater debt than is absolutely necessary to maintain the missionaries until they are honorably released, but, if the money sent to them is to be tithed, they will be obliged to borrow a sum of money one ninth larger than the amount actually needed by the Elder. It has never been required at home to pay tithing on money received through borrowing, and money received by many of the missionaries abroad are simply loans made them. Some of the Elders draw money of their own from home on which they have already paid their tithing, and others receive means from friends and relatives who are tithe payers, and hence the money has already been tithed.

It is admitted that what money a missionary receives from others by donation can be classed as his income or "interest," the word used in the law of tithing; and that persons should pay tithing on their interest; but the Elder who is exclusively engaged in the Lord's work and who spends all the money he receives in necessary expenses to prosecute his labors, not only pays one tenth, but also the other nine tenths. He devotes his whole time and his all to the cause of the Lord, and we consider that no more is required of him in regard to tithing while thus engaged and thus spending all he receives. The custom, of Elders paying tithing on the money received from home, has been introduced in some missions, in order to give the Saints a good example. We honor the brethren who have been willing to pay tithing on such money, and we have no objection to their continuing doing it, if they themselves so desire; but we want it distinctly understood that this is not required of them, and we feel to instruct Presidents of missions not to lay this upon the Elders as a duty.

When missionaries in their travels receive money from strangers we consider that it would be right for the Elders to pay their tithing on such amounts. In case they receive clothing, shoes and other necessities to help them in the discharge of their duties they should not feel conscience-smitten if they have not the money to pay tithing on such gifts.

These instructions are not given to make the law of tithing less binding upon any individual in the Church; but to make lighter the already great burden upon the missionaries.

Very respectfully your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND.
