James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Bureau of Information, Salt Lake City, March 6, 1902

1902-March 6-Improvement Era 25:134, December, 1921.

According to the records of the Salt Lake Stake, at a meeting held November 30, 1898, Elder Benjamin Geddard, a home missionary of the Stake recommended that some effort be made to place the Gospel before visitors passing through Salt Lake City. In July, 1901, Elder LeRoy C. Snow, son of Lorenzo Snow, protested to the General Board of the Y.M.M.I.A. that misinformation was being given tourists by "hack drivers" in Salt Lake. Because of interlocking memberships this matter also came to the attention of the First Council of Seventy in March, 1902.

On March 6, 1902, the First Presidency, at their meeting, considered the subject, and the following is quoted from the records: (by The Improvement Era, 1921.) For additional background see: CHC 6:422-426.

BUREAU OF INFORMATION Letter read from the First Council of Seventy, enclosing a communication from Elder Richard W. Young, setting forth the following: that many come here with a desire to learn all they can concerning us as a community, and they make it a point to attend Sabbath meetings in the Tabernacle. And having in view the education of the Seventies in the work pertaining to their special calling, he suggested that a piece of improved property be purchased on Main Street in which to hold nightly meetings under the auspices of the several quorums of Seventy located in this city, in turn; and that the upper rooms of the proposed building be rented to obtain revenue with which to meet interest on long time bonds issued for the purpose of raising the purchase price.

The communication added that in connection with this scheme a bureau of information might ultimately be found to be expedient.

President Smith remarked that he had had some talk with Brother Young on this subject, and had intimated to him that the Church was not in a position to furnish the means for such a purpose; but that if it should be deemed advisable to try the experiment, the Thirteenth or Fourteenth ward meetinghouses might be obtained.

After briefly considering the subject, President Smith thought it well to refer the communication back to the First Council of Seventy, to take such action as they themselves may deem desirable; but whatever might be done that it be in harmony with the Stake Presidency.

President Smith added that the subject of doing something by way of establishing a bureau of information had been talked about by the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Board for some time past, and it was quite possible that Brother Young had heard of this, and therefore connected it with what he had now proposed.

On motion of President Winder, this communication was referred back to the Seventies with the request that they look into the matter, and act upon the suggestion themselves as they may deem advisable; also that they consider the matter of organizing a bureau of information for the purpose of imparting correct information to tourists.

Motion seconded and carried.
