James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Church schools and Sunday Schools, December, 1902

1902-December-MS 65:33-35 (January 15, 1903).

During the administration of President Joseph F. Smith, the First Presidency wrote a number of what might be termed "Pastoral Epistles." More often than not these were written at Christmas time. A "pastoral" letter or epistle in New Testament times usually contained a review of the conditions of the Church or the "pastorate." Paul wrote a number of letters of this kind. Brigham Young also was inclined to write pastoral epistles which were known in his day as "General Epistles." A number of these are to be found in volume two of this series. This letter of the First Presidency is addressed to the President of the European Mission and speaks of the condition of Church schools and Sunday Schools in 1902. Other "pastoral epistles" were issued at Christmas time to the Church as a whole.

A letter from the First Presidency

[The following letter recently received by President Lyman contains so much information that will be of interest to the Saints in Europe that it is herewith presented for their perusal.]

December 22, 1902

PRESIDENT FRANCIS M. LYMAN,

Dear Brother:

We owe you acknowledgments of the receipt of two letters, the one addressed to ourselves, the other to Brother George Reynolds, the latter containing several enclosures regarding matters in the European mission.

A general idea of the progress of events at home you get through the Deseret News, the Era, the Juvenile Instructor and other local publications, so we will not touch on that which is already public, but will refer to some items connected with matters in which you are interested that are not so widely published.

First we shall speak of our Church schools: The educational interests of the Church are becoming more and more important, and the influence of our schools is extending, not only among our own people, but their value is beginning to be recognized among educators not of our faith. In almost every Church college or academy there is an increased attendance this year, and they are more thoroughly equipped than ever before for their work. The authorities of the different stakes recognize the value of Church schools in their midst, and in several stakes we have been compelled to repress a desire on their part to establish academies, for the reason that we are not in a position to render more financial aid for educational purposes than we are doing at present. The Church appropriation to the various schools for the current year will nearly, if not quite, reach the $100,000 mark, and our present financial condition will not justify us in going beyond that. But, despite the heavy expense the Church school system is to the Church, we feel greatly encouraged by the knowledge that it is bearing such excellent fruit. Our missionary classes are more numerous and more largely attended than in former years, and we receive favorable reports from nearly all of them-the bade of the students is in most cases higher. This is one feature of our educational work that we have every reason to believe will be potential for good.

The demand for more laborers in the various fields does not decrease. There is scarcely a mission where the president is not urging that more men be sent, or complaining that so few come. Our last company for 1902 have now taken their departure; and our records show that during the year 839 Elders have left. Of these, 304 have gone to Europe, 5 to Mexico, 45 to the islands of the Pacific (including Japan), one each to Hindostan and San Salvador, and 483 have remained in the United States. To this must be added 27 lady missionaries, making in all 866. The above figures do not include visiting missionaries or those that go from home for educational purposes.

Reports concerning the Sunday schools of the Church indicate that the organizations are progressing favorably, and that they are advancing satisfactorily. The special efforts made by the brethren of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board in the matter of teaching the payment of tithes and keeping the Word of Wisdom are bearing good fruit, and the reports show a gratifying increase in the number of officers and pupils who observe both these requirements of heaven. New schools are being organized wherever practicable, and special efforts have been made this year to carry the work into obscure places and mining towns where there were previously no Church organizations. The year 1903 will witness a new departure. A system of "outline plans" has been adopted for all the Sunday schools of the Church, covering a period of four years in each department, and as there are four departments there will practically be a systematic line of study for sixteen years. It is felt that this system will unify and strengthen the schools, and be the cause of greater efficiency among the teachers. Altogether this work is in a gratifying condition, and the Saints are realizing more fully the value of the organization as an aid in the study of the Gospel.

As an aid to the Sunday school cause the Juvenile Instructor is making good headway, and since its acquisition by the Deseret Sunday School Union the subscription list has been increased from six thousand to about nine thousand four hundred. We are taking a personal interest in this valuable little paper, and expect the circulation will grow to more than ten thousand during the coming year.

Our religion classes are doing very well in many of the stakes, especially where the stake presidencies are lending their aid to the superintendents and instructors. In quite a number of wards the Bishoprics have not yet become converted to the work, consequently they, with some of the parents, make it difficult for the workers, and their children are the losers. But some, through the conversion of the presidents of stakes, are of late showing more energy, so we look for better results. To get at more active field work, Elder Louis A. Kelsh was, on the thirteenth of October, called to be a member of the Board of Directors and appointed as a field worker to carry the religion class interests to the several wards who were behind. He has attended a few conferences, mostly with Elder Matthias F. Cowley, but he is now engaged with Brother William A. Morton (a brother who has had some experience in the Granite stake) and they together are visiting the several wards in the Jordan and Granite stakes, so that Elder Kelsch may become more familiar with the detail work in all its parts, and thus be enabled, after the holidays, to take a tour of several stakes and conduct the work after the manner that Superintendent Karl G. Maeser used to do. The general superintendency and other members of the board will also make visits and back up the labors of these brethren.

We are pleased to be able to tell you that our own health is good, as is also that of the brethren generally. On Saturday last we visited Brother Brigham, and were much gratified to find him in so good a condition. There was a marked improvement with him in many respects, his spirits were good and the swelling somewhat reduced. Of course we cannot say whether this improvement will be permanent, but we trust it will be, and we feel much encouraged at the outlook.

You have our constant prayers for your personal welfare and for the success of the work under your charge, and we send you our best wishes and warm congratulations. We also wish you the compliments of the season, and with you all your associates.

May the Lord ever have you in His keeping, is the prayer of Your brethren and fellow-laborers, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND.
