James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Condition of Church-Reed Smoot hearing, May 20,1903

1903-May 20-MS 65:380-383 (June 11, 1903).

Another "pastoral" letter addressed to President Francis M. Lyman.

This letter mentions that "The opposition to the seating of Senator Reed Smoot is being engineered with zealous effort, and we may expect the movement to grow in force and malignity whatever the results may he."

Apostle Reed Smoot had been duly elected United States Senator from Utah by the Utah Legislature on January 20, 1903. On January 26, 1903, a protest against his taking his seat was filed by eighteen citizens of Utah "upon the ground and for the reason that he is one of a self-perpetuating body of fifteen men who, constituting the ruling authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or 'Mormon' church, claim, and by their followers are accorded the right to claim, supreme authority, divinely sanctioned, to shape the belief and control the conduct of those under them in all matters whatsoever, civil and religious, temporal and spiritual, and who thus, uniting in themselves authority in church and state, do exercise the same as to inculcate and encourage a belief in polygamy and polygamous cohabitation. The protest cited or stated seven counts on which they would seek to establish this basic claim against the Mormon "hierarchy" of which Apostle-Senator Smoot was one. This they felt disqualified Senator Smoot to sit in the United States Senate as a representative of the people of Utah.

While this epistle of the First Presidency in May, 1903, is the first that we have found that mentions the Smoot case, it was not the first of the battle. As we have said, a group of ministers, merchants, lawyers, business men and miners filed their protest in late January.

In February, 1903, Senator Smoot received a number of letters from equally prominent non-Mormon citizens of Utah and of the nation disagreeing with the protest. The following is typical of the support he began to receive through letters.

T. Marioneaux, Judge of the Fifth District Court of the State of Utah wrote Senator-elect Reed Smoot from his chambers in Nephi, Utah, on February 27, 1903. His letter from the Reed Smoot Collection in the Brigham Young University Archives is quoted at length because of its judicial appraisal of the position in which the anti-Smoot protest had placed the Church, Reed Smoot, and the First Presidency.

"I regret very much that my name is not upon the petition prepared in your behalf and signed by a number of the citizens of this State who hold fair play above partisanship and prejudice. I therefore take pleasure in expressing the hope that you will not be denied your seat in the United States Senate. I desire to see you seated because: 1st. I believe your election to have been legal and fair: 2nd. Because you have all the qualifications required by the Constitution of the United States; 3rd. Because I believe the opposition to you is prompted by religious intolerance, and is supported by arguments too weak to merit serious consideration or refutation; 4th. Whatever your belief may be in respect to polygamy or monogamy you have a right as a free man and free citizen to entertain it so long as you do not practice, or counsel and advise the practice of polygamy; and no one has any right to assume that you do practice, counsel or advise it. Every man is presumed to be innocent of crime until his guilt has been proved, and I believe there will be no attempt made to prove you guilty of practicing or advising the practice of plural marriage. The attempt to do so would, in my judgment, be absurd, for the purity of your private life is a matter of common report. 5th. Because a Mormon Apostle has as good and legal right to a seat in the United States Senate, when duly elected and possessing the requirements demanded by the Constitution, as any other member of the Mormon church, and any member of that church has as good legal right to such a seat as any member of any other church. If it is suggested that it is bad policy to permit high ecclesiastics to become senators of the United States, a sufficient answer (as it seems to me) is, that there is a plain way to prevent it by amending the fundamental law of the land; and there is no worse policy than setting aside the law of the land in response to popular clamor, or even because it may be deemed that the law ought to be different.

Being deeply attached to the Constitution of my country and emphatically opposed to religious dictation or church interference with the affairs of state, and perceiving more triumph for church dictation if your opponents should be successful in preventing you from taking your seat than I can see in your success, I earnestly hope your legal rights will be accorded you. To refuse you your seat would, in my judgment, be equivalent to a disfranchisement not only of the Mormon people but of the Gentile people of the State of Utah.

The vast majority of the people of this state, without regard to church affiliation, and without regard to partisan predilection, so far as I have been able to acquaint myself with the prevailing sentiment, acquiesce in your election by our legislature.

In conclusion I beg leave to state that I am favorably disposed toward the recognition of your legal rights because I believe you to be a man of principle and a good American; and while I know nothing of any oath you may have taken as a Mormon Apostle, I am fully convinced that if you are permitted to take the oath as a senator of the United States, you will faithfully and conscientiously observe it.

Believe me sir, Very respectfully yours, T. MARIONEAUX.

Thus were drawn the battle lines that were to continue for four years as Reed Smoot sought to retain his seat in the U.S. Senate and defend the Church. A year later in March, 1904, President Joseph F. Smith was on the witness stand before a Senate committee defending Senator Smoot and the Church.

Letter from the First Presidency

We publish below a personal letter from the First Presidency of the Church to President Lyman. As it contains many items of interest to the Elders and Saints, they will no doubt take pleasure in perusing it. The letter is written from Salt Lake City, and bears date of May 20th, 1903.

PRESIDENT FRANCIS M. LYMAN,

Dear Brother,

We have perused with interest your recent favors, the latest dated May 6th. We have been in entire accord with you and President Hugh J. Cannon in the efforts you have made to ascertain what rights our missionaries have in Germany. To obtain freedom of action for our Elders and exemption from being banished were objects worthy of our best efforts, but through the prejudice existing against us we have not succeeded in gaining these desired ends, and the Prussian Cabinet has issued its order against us. We have labored with the government through our Senators, and have even got President Roosevelt interested in the matter; but as all the governments of Europe, except, perhaps, England, claim the right to invite all foreigners obnoxious to them to leave their country, and in some countries they have even passed laws giving the judges power to do this without the process of law, the government cannot help us without making it an international affair. Now even if we could force the German government to let our Elders remain, they could do very little good, as the authorities would hamper them in so many ways. The local priesthood should be educated to take the responsibilities upon themselves.

In regard to the work in Finland we would say: The Elders who have labored there in the past have been Swedes. The Swedish language is spoken in the populous parts and the Swedish Elders have had no difficulty in being understood. Several have emigrated from there, but we are not aware of any belonging to the Finnish race having embraced the Gospel. We think that good bright Elders could be sent from Sweden and labor there. The Russian government is cruelly oppressing Finland at present, and since 1872 has made the study of the Russian language compulsory on all the children. The promised liberty of worship in Russia, we fear, will take some time before it will be enjoyed.

The daily happenings throughout Zion you get from the newspapers. By such reading you have undoubtedly realized that the devil is not dead, neither is he sleeping. All indications point to a renewal of the crusade in divers shapes against the growing work. The Evil One's emissaries have again wakened to the fact that "something must be done." This is manifesting itself in a pre-concerted and determined effort by our enemies to attack us on a number of points. The opposition to the seating of Senator Smoot is being engineered with zealous effort, and we may expect the movement to grow in force and malignity whatever the results may be. Another phase of this concerted movement against us is found in the effort to prevent our missionaries preaching the word. At the instigation of some of our ministerial friends, Mayor Low of New York has, we are informed, withdrawn all permits from our Elders to preach in the streets of that city. The banishment of our brethren from Germany is another phase of this same widespread effort; while at home and abroad scurrilous, lying tracts and pamphlets are being distributed far and wide in the effort to create a public opinion actively hostile to the Church and its teachings.

We (Presidents Smith and Lund) returned a short time ago from a very pleasant trip to St. Louis, where we attended the dedication ceremonies of the site of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition. Mr. Bancroft, of the Oregon Short Line, tendered ourselves and party his private car. In St. Louis we were treated with the great consideration by the Meyer Brothers and others, who did everything in their power to make our visit the most pleasant. We had the pleasure of meeting President Roosevelt and shaking hands with him. On the way home we spent one day at Independence, visiting the places of interest to our people there. Altogether we had a most enjoyable time.

Much building is going on in the city. The Deseret News Annex is nearly completed. Already one whole floor is occupied by the railroad, in addition to the three floors they previously held in the original building. The improvements in Z.C.M.I. are completed, but there is not yet enough room. The clothing department is still calling for more space. In fact, the institution has become a large "department store," and we may confidently tell you the report of the officers of its condition and business are eminently satisfactory. Among the new public and other structures now going up may be named the Federal building, the Eighteenth Ward School building, by far the costliest of the common school group, the new city prison, almost joining the old City Hall on the south, and numerous large apartment houses. The paving of South Temple streets from Oregon Short Line depot to the Eagle Gate is just about completed; a couple of weeks more will finish the job. The prominent property owners east of the Eagle gate are making a strenuous effort to induce the City Council and the abutters to pave and park the avenue to Tenth East street. The old City Hall corner has been sold by the city to a newly-organized telephone company, of which Governor Wells is the local head, for the sum of $48,000. It is said that the local Young Men's Christian association will build on the corner, and the telephone corporation join their building on the south.

Reservoirs are contemplated in City Creek and in Parley's canyons for impounding water for city uses. No doubt before long Utah lake and possibly Bear lake will be converted into immense reservoirs in the interest of irrigation, the general government to furnish the funds.

A promising sugar factory has been organized by Utah capitalists to build and operate a plant near Idaho Falls, and another, also by Utah capitalists, is under serious consideration for Rexburg, Idaho. The people of Bingham and Fremont counties are very anxious to have these industries established in their midst.

The "Moffat" railroad, now well under way at the Denver end, to form a junction with other roads at this city, is being pushed by the projectors. It is said that the work will very soon assume practical shape at this end and be building eastward, possibly via Emigration canyon, as fast as money can construct it. The San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad company has bought all the right, title, interest and goodwill in the Oregon Short Line roads south of this city. The closing of the gap (nearly four hundred miles) is to be pushed with all possible speed. One thousand tons of steel are now passing south for this line. The builders of the "Lucin cut-off" from Ogden across the lake are meeting with considerable bad luck, caused by the track sinking in places while loaded trains of supplies and ballast are passing over it and thus precipitating the train into the lake. The engineers say that all such obstacles will be overcome before long.

Our spring has been a cold and backward one as a general thing vegetation is five or six weeks behind. We have had but very few warm days, and but little of the snow stored in the mountains has melted. The outlook for abundant crops is very bright; nor has the fruit, so far, been materially injured by the frosts which, up to date have been very light.

There will be no intoxicants sold at Saltair. The Salt Lake is slowly rising, but is dry from the mainland to Church Island, and can be driven over dry shod.

Arrangements are being perfected to hold memorial services on the birthday-June 1st-of President Brigham Young. The gathering will take place at Saltair.

Among the Saints with whom you are well acquainted, who have recently laid down the burdens of life, in addition to President Brigham Young, are Elder Theodore Curtis, Dr. W. F. Anderson, Sister Elizabeth Goddard, and Elder George Bourne, ripe in years and good works. Our own health and that of the people generally is good.

The amount of tithing paid by the Saints continues satisfactory, and the Church, we are happy to say, continues to reduce its indebtedness. The Church schools still continue to need large appropriations from our general funds. For the school year 1902-3 they received nearly $95,000; for the coming year (1903-4) more than $108,000 has been appropriated. This increase in funds required is largely due to the increase in the attendance. Nearly every Church school showed an increase last year over the previous one, the total increase of attendants being 1,800. The work done has, as a general thing, been satisfactory. The number of young brethren attending the missionary classes has, during the last year, been considerably in excess of previous ones.

A few days since we were shocked by receiving a telegram from Elder W. T. Harris, secretary of the Southern States mission, containing the sad news that President Ephraim H. Nye of that mission died of heart disease at Columbia, South Carolina, at one o'clock that morning. As Brother Nye only left this city, accompanied by his wife, for his field of labor about ten days previously, the news of his sudden death was most unexpected. His body is now on its way home in charge of Elder Zundel, and is expected to reach this city on Friday. His widow accompanies the remains.

The death, a short time ago, of Elder James R. Miller left a vacancy in the presidency of the Granite stake. Elder Frank Y. Taylor has chosen Elder John M. Cannon to fill the vacancy.

With love, your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
