James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Selection of patriarchs, June 29, 1903

1903-June 29-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

This letter, evidently sent to all Stake Presidents, called for greater care in selecting men for recommendation to be ordained patriarchs.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, June 29th, 1903 Prest. Joseph Morrell, Logan.

DEAR BROTHER:

We have reason to believe that sufficient discriminating judgment is not being exercised in the selection of men ordained patriarchs, and that as a consequence it sometimes happens that some brethren are recommended to represent this high and important office in the holy priesthood who are not in every respect suitable to do so; and we have therefore concluded to request that all stake presidencies submit to us the names of the men recommended by them to be ordained patriarchs in order that we may satisfy ourselves as far as possible of their fitness for the patriarchal office. Please take note of this and adopt it as a rule for your guidance hereafter. Of course it will occur to you that the parties thus recommended should not be spoken to about it until your recommendations have been approved.

We have reason to believe also that some stake presidents recommend to this office as a reward of faithfulness, and that the idea obtains to some extent at least that men released from presiding offices on account of age or infirmity, or both, ought to be ordained patriarchs; and the consequence is that a great many of our patriarchs are men of extreme age and waning powers.

In calling your attention to this matter, we take it for granted that you will agree with us in the view that because a man has filled with credit a presiding office and has attained a good age, is no reason why he should or should not make a good patriarch; and it is the peculiar fitness of the men you may recommend to fill this office that we desire you hereafter to especially consider. And your selections, we suggest, should be men who have developed within them the spirit of the patriarchs; in fact, this should be their leading characteristic, and they should be men of wisdom, possessed of the gift and spirit of blessing as well.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
