James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Kindergarten teacher-training, August 5, 1903

1903-August 5-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The L.D.S. Church which earlier had maintained its own elementary schools had now moved out of the elementary field and was concentrating on secondary education in its Church schools. However, the need was still felt by the First Presidency to have an indirect influence in the education of Latter-day Saint children in public elementary schools. When the State Legislature passed the New Kindergarten Law in 1903, the First Presidency instructed Stake Presidents and Stake Boards of Education to see to it that Mormon teachers and prospective teachers for the public schools took advantage of the new Kindergarten training.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, Aug. 5, 1903. Prest. Joseph Morrell, Logan, Utah.

Dear Brother:—

We enclose herewith a copy of a law passed by the last State Legislature. It will be seen that at the time specified in this law there will be a very large demand for Kindergarten teachers. Unless an effort in your stake is made to supply this demand, it will be necessary for you to import teachers from abroad. We think it wisdom on the part of our people to supply as far as they possibly can this demand, and unless each stake takes some special action looking to the supply of its own Kindergarten teachers, school boards may have to send East for them.

Enough young ladies should be induced to take the Kindergarten course to make up for those who may prepare but who from one circumstance or another, when they are required, will find themselves unable to teach. The law as you see relates to cities of 2,000 inhabitants and upwards. The Kindergarten includes children from 4 to 6 years of age. You will, therefore, be able to estimate the number of teachers required in your stake of Zion.

In some stakes there may be no Stake Board of Education organized. If not, the Presidency of the Stake are respectfully invited to organize such a Board at their earliest opportunity. It is desirable that the Stake Presidency be members of this Board, and that they appoint four men interested in educational work to constitute the other members of the Board. There is also enclosed herewith some of the duties which such a Board may in the interests of our people perform.

There are Kindergarten courses established in the B. Y. Academy at Provo, the L.D.S. University at Salt Lake City, and at the State University; and there may, perhaps, be other such schools established before long.

If these matters are given your earnest attention at an early date and in an unostentatious manner, in a manner not calculated to create agitation among those who would like to see our children under an influence of those too often hostile to our religious views, you will realize the benefits in an educational way which it is the duty of Stake Boards of Education to confer upon the people of the stake with whose educational interests they are charged.

Where there is a Church school in a stake, its Board should perform the duties belonging to a Stake Board of Education.

In behalf of the Church Board of Education, we are

Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH President.

P.S. If there are any sisters in your stake whose qualifications recommend themselves to your judgment, we suggest that two of the four members appointed be ladies.

New Kindergarten Law

Session Laws 1903.

All school districts of a population of 2000 and upwards, shall hereafter establish and maintain, one or more kindergartens, in said school district; open to children resident therein, between the ages of four and six years. Said kindergartens must be established within four years after the passage of this act.

Qualifications of Kindergarten Teachers

Rev. Stat. 1898, Sec. 1966.

Teachers of said schools, unless holding a certificate of efficiency in kindergarten work granted by the State Normal School, shall be required to sustain a special examination relating to the principles and practice of the kindergarten, such examinations to be conducted under the direction of the State board of education.

Efforts will be made to induce the State board of education to fix qualifications and make announcements of them.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, August 5, 1903
