James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Duties of Stake Boards of Education, August 5, 1903

SOME OF THE DUTIES WHICH STAKE BOARDS OF EDUCATION MAY INTELLIGENTLY AND DISCREETLY PERFORM.

1-The educational condition of every stake should be a matter of special concern to the authorities thereof. In some stakes there are large numbers of young people wholly indifferent to education that such a Board might reach.

2-The necessity of calling missionaries to prepare themselves in our Church schools is an educational question.

3-There is a considerable number of teachers who constitute a floating population in different stakes of Zion where they go to teach for six or nine months, and then return to their homes. Special efforts might be made by an Educational Board in their behalf.

4-The Religion Class movement has become so important that Bishops are beginning to feel the special advantage of having teachers in the schools of our own faith, and of active faith, but in many instances the trustees oppose the wishes of the Bishop in these matters. There is room for great improvement among our people in the matter of selecting trustees.

5-In many places the character and excess of amusements are very harmful to our educational interests. In many stakes it would be a great help to the students if the amusements could be properly regulated. A celebrated writer has said: "The man that can control the amusements of the people has their morals in his keeping."

6-In all stakes, perhaps, there are young people of genius who give special promise of future usefulness. Such a Stake Board of Education might give their attention to these gifted children of God and devise means of aiding them. Some of the most useful and talented of our young men owe their education to the help of friends.

7-In many towns of the stake, the people are indifferent to the question of their schools. The architecture of the school buildings, in some instances, is shocking, and in some places the schools are still held in buildings wholly unfit for use. In the priesthood meetings, Bishops might be called upon to report the educational conditions of their wards.

8-Next to the spiritual and moral education of our young in the stakes of Zion, the economic value of their training is something that might be taken into special consideration. Such a Stake Board of Education might encourage manual training and the learning of trades. We are not now supplying our own artisans, but are importing trades people in large numbers. Especially is this true in the more populous places. The Board might find out and report the number of apprentices in their several stakes.

9-A Stake Board might also devote some attention to training in agriculture, horticulture, and animal industry so that every stake might have in time specially trained men for the development of the leading industries of our people.

10-The more students that attend our Church schools, the greater the supply will be of young men and women fitted for the various duties of teaching in the different organizations of the stake; and the Stake Board of Education may be helpful in securing a proper representation of students in our Church schools.

11-Some of the stakes do not furnish as many teachers for the public schools as are required and must, therefore, rely on other stakes to supply teachers. It is highly important that every stake, especially the older and wealthier ones, have a large representation in the Normal classes of our Church schools.
