James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Conditions of Church-Reed Smoot hearing, August 21, 1903

1903-August 21-MS 65: 580-582, September 10, 1903.

This letter to Francis M. Lyman in addition to detailing conditions in Utah and in the Church, makes reference to Reverend J. L. Lelich who filed a statement with the Senate Committee claiming that Reed Smoot was indeed a polygamist. Reverend Lelich at the time of his protest was the superintendent of missions in Utah for the Methodist Episcopal Church. This letter notes that he had subsequently been relieved of his post.

LETTER FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

The following letter, dated August 21, 1903, Salt Lake City, Utah, has just been received:

PRESIDENT FRANCIS M. LYMAN,

Dear Brother,

It was with more than ordinary interest that we perused your favors of July 29th and August 2nd. From what they contain, from the letters of President A. L. Skanchy, as well as from that which appears in the columns of our European periodicals, we are fully satisfied that you were greatly blessed in your visit to Scandinavia, and that much good resulted and will result therefrom. We trust also that you have found conditions in Russia for the introduction of the Gospel into that vast empire more favorable than is generally supposed. The late persecutions of the Jews and the labor agitations now so prevalent in that land have not impressed us with the idea that the present was the most favorable time for the introduction of the truth. Such conditions always make the inferior officials suspicious and over-exacting. We shall, however, await your report with much interest, being fully assured that having been over the ground you will better understand the true conditions than we possibly can at this distance, and with so little beyond what appears in the public prints to guide our opinions.

We are having a long continued heated term. Indeed, this is one of the warmest Augusts that we have ever experienced in these valleys. The continuance of this hot spell is having an injurious effect on vegetation and on the general health, though, as yet, we are thankful to say, to no marked extent. We have many strangers within our gates, visitors from all quarters. Many of them, so far as we can judge from their behavior and conversation, from America's best people. The Bureau of Information is doing excellent work-the temple block is almost every day crowded from morning until evening, and a vast amount of literature on our question is being distributed. We find it necessary to erect a larger building on the Temple block for the use of the Bureau workers. The foundation is already laid; it will contain four times as much room as the present structure and is situated immediately to the right of the south entrance to the block. A branch of the Bureau has also been opened at Saltair. Expressions of pleasure without number are heard every day from the visitors at our kind attentions; they are so used to being "fleeced" that it is difficult for them to understand why we do so much and go to so great trouble for their pleasure, and absolutely refuse to accept any pay. It is so different, so opposite to what they are accustomed to meet that it produces a wonderfully good impression on their minds.

We received your "cable" regarding the death of Elder Gottlieb Knutti at Zurich. As we know nothing of Brother Knutti's sickness nor the circumstances that resulted in his demise we trust that further particulars are on the way, to appease the distress of his family. The day previous to the death of Brother Knutti, Elder Elmer Hooks died of typhoid fever in the city of Mexico. He was an instructor in the Spanish language at the Brigham Young Academy and was engaged in an educational mission in the far south.

Presidents Smith and Lund, and Elders Taylor, Cowley and Woodruff of the Apostles, expect to leave next week to visit our rapidly growing settlements in Alberta and the Big Horn Basin, returning by way of Yellowstone Park. We fully expect to have a very pleasant and profitable time.

But few missionaries will leave for the European mission during the present and coming month; in October those will be a marked increase, not only to your field but to those in the United States and on the Islands.

Among the lately deceased brethren, more or less prominent in Church and other matters, with all of whom you were well acquainted, may be named Patriarchs Warren Foote, of Glendale, Utah; George Harmon, of Orderville; H. O. Magleby, of Monroe; Rosel Hyde, of Kaysville; and Elders Thomas C. Griggs, C. Y. Taggart (the blind piano tuner); and Philip Pugsley.

Grasshoppers have done considerable damage to the crops in portions of the State, but the people are learning how to effectually destroy them. Some 76,773 pounds were entrapped in Sanpete county this season, which were paid for by the county and state at one cent per pound.

The local Methodists have just gone through another of their characteristic conferences in this city, at which they had to unload the usual quantity of anti-Mormon venom. The Rev. Mr. Lielich, who filed the statement with the Congressional committee that Senator Smoot was a polygamist, has been relieved of his Utah charge and relegated to the Scranton, Pa., district.

During the past six months of the current year seven hundred and eight marriage licenses have been issued and one hundred and eighteen divorce complaints filed in the Salt Lake courts. We are happy to know that the divorce complaints were, with very few exceptions, filed by non-Mormons.

The erection of the Latter-day Saints' hospital in this city is progressing favorably, so too are the federal building, the Catholic cathedral, the Presbyterian church and other public and many private buildings which will add greatly to the beauty of our intermountain metropolis.

At a reunion of the family of Bishop Robert Gardner, Pine Valley, not long ago, two hundred and twenty-seven souls were represented. It will be remembered that a few months ago it was learned that President Lorin Farr's family, living and deceased, numbered three hundred and twenty-six souls.

The Home Telephone company, Governor Heber M. Wells president, is hard at work on its new building, which is going up on the old City Hall corner. They are also busy putting up poles along the streets.

The Trans-Mississippi Congress has just closed a very interesting session at Seattle, Washington. Elder John Henry Smith and a number of other well-known brethren were present. The Irrigation Congress will be held at Ogden on the 15th, 16th and 17th prox. It is expected that there will be a very large representation from all parts of the Union, Mexico, etc.

A petition for a franchise or right of way through this city from south to north for an electrical railway to be operated between Springville, Utah county, and Ogden, has been presented to our City Council. It is reported that Senator Smoot and other capitalists are the prime movers in the enterprize. The San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake railroad is being resolutely pushed from both ends toward completing the three hundred mile gap as early as possible. Lively work is also being done on the Denver and Salt Lake or Moffat road by the projector from Denver this way, while the engineers, it is said, are busily engaged in locating this end of the road. It is also claimed that the Western Pacific company, organized in San Francisco, has a number of surveyors out all along the tentative line to locate a railway route which will enter this city, skirting the south end of Salt Lake.

We have just received a telegram from President J. G. Duffin, that Elder Richard E. Johnson of Monroe, died unexpectedly to-day (24th) at Hot Springs, Arkansas.

With kindest regards, your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
