James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Conditions of Church, September 23, 1903

1903-September 23-MS 65:652-653 (October 8, 1903).

Reference was made to missionary work in Russia by President Smith in his article "Last Days of President Snow" on November 15, 1901. The Quorum of Twelve Apostles on October 3, 1901, had discussed this subject but had been unable to reach a conclusion. Here the First Presidency indicate that a mission to Russia was being considered in 1903 but that no decision had been reached.

The letter also makes reference to the National Irrigation Congress in which the Church had long been interested and active.

LETTER FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

The following letter, dated September 23rd, 1903, Salt Lake City, Utah, has just come:

PRESIDENT FRANCIS M. LYMAN,

Dear Brother,

We have received your favor of the 7th inst., and perused its contents with much pleasure.

We consider the appointment of missionaries to Russia a matter requiring more careful consideration than we have yet been able to give it, and will therefore defer speaking definitely in relation thereto until we again write you. We are much gratified at the opening being made by Brother Cooper in Hindostan, and the encouraging prospects before the brethren who have gone to South Africa. We have notified twenty-five brethren for Great Britain, fifteen for Scandinavia, seven for Germany, and one each for Iceland, Switzerland and the Netherlands to leave here during the next six weeks.

Among the deaths which have occurred since our last letter may be noted two faithful patriarchs: Charles Richins, of Diaz, Mexico, formerly bishop of Henefer, and John Ellison, of Kaysville, at one time assistant superintendent of the Sunday schools in Davis stake; also Elder William C. F. Grimsdell, for years an employee of the Deseret News, whose family entertained Elders Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow during their early missionary labors in London; Sister Melissa Coray Kimball, the last woman survivor of the famous Mormon Battalion, and sister of Bishop Robert T. Burton, has just died.

On the 27th of last month, we (Presidents Smith and Lund) with other brethren started north on a visit to the Saints in Canada and Wyoming. While in Canada the rapidly growing Alberta stake was divided and the eastern portion formed into a new one which was named the Taylor stake. We found the people greatly blessed of the Lord, very prosperous and progressive in all good works.

The National Irrigation Congress convened at Ogden on the 15th inst., and closed its very interesting and useful session on the 18th. Secretary Wilson of the Department of Agriculture, was present, also a number of the governors of the surrounding states and territories, all of whom in their speeches strongly favored congressional legislation to aid in the execution of extensive irrigation projects for impounding the surplus waters of the states in the arid and semi-arid region, for the dual purpose of increasing the area of irrigation and for the greater protection of the millions of acres of land annually flooded by spring freshets, cloud bursts, etc. There were present also several hundred interested representatives from Mexico, Canada, France, etc.

A great many tourists are visiting Zion, among them a goodly percentage of eastern editors, most of whom, it is believed, take with them good impressions of her people. All seem surprised at the development and progress made and exhibited in this intermountain region.

Elder Heber J. Grant will probably reach home next week. He expected when he embarked to land on American soil on or about the 25th inst. The general semi-annual conference of the Church will commence on Sunday, October 4th.

The management of the coming State Fair promise, through the press, a finer exposition than any of its predecessors. The Fair will open October 1st and continue until the 7th.

Very large sums of money are to be expended in the near future by the Oregon Short Line, Rio Grande Western and other local railroads in building depots, viaducts, machine shops, etc., in this city, to meet the rapidly increasing public demand for such improvements.

The Federal building on South Main street is growing apace. When finished it will be an imposing structure.

The schools are again in session, and are well patronized. This applies with equal force to the Church and to the public schools of the city and state.

The early part of this month was abnormally warm, indeed it is said to have been the hottest weather in September ever recorded by the weather bureau in this city. Then a sudden change came, and in a few days we had the coldest weather ever experienced at that exact period. But the thermometer has again gradually crawled up, and now the temperature is slightly above the normal, and we are enjoying a delightful Indian summer.

We are all enjoying exceedingly good health and, with the exception of the prevalence of typhoid fever in this city, the health of the people generally is good. One thing is very noticeable, how many of those that pass away from our midst to the great beyond are among those considered "very aged."

We are pleased to learn that Sister Eckersley has so rapidly recovered since the return of her husband, that, though still weak, she is now ministering for her dead in the Salt Lake Temple.

With love and greetings from all to yourself and associates, we are, as ever, Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
