James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Release of Francis M. Lyman, European mission, October 7, 1903

1903-October 7-MS 65:683, (October 22, 1903).

This letter constituted notice to Francis M. Lyman in Europe that he had been released as President of the European Mission, and sustained as President of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles in absentia.

PRESIDENT LYMAN RELEASED The following letter dated Salt Lake City, October 7, 1903, to President Lyman explains itself:

Dear Brother,

Your favor of the 22nd ult., with its encouraging items of news from the missions in Europe came to hand in the midst of the sessions of a very enjoyable general conference, wherein much valuable instruction was given and a very sweet spirit prevailed. On Sunday, the opening day, there was probably the largest attendance ever gathered at a conference in this dispensation. The regular and two overflow meetings were held in the afternoon, at which it is estimated fourteen thousand persons were present.

Yesterday, 6th inst., several matters were considered which will be of special interest to you. You were presented and sustained as the president of the Council of the Twelve Apostles; you were released from the presidency of the European mission to return home and Elder Heber J. Grant was appointed to succeed you in the duties of that responsible and honorable position. We cannot at this writing tell you the exact date that Brother Heber will leave here for Liverpool, but it is his intention to do so as early as his circumstances will permit. With regard to these details we expect to write you more fully in the immediate future.

The vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve, caused by demise of President Brigham Young was also filled, Elder George A. Smith being chosen and unanimously sustained to fill that position. We are satisfied you will rejoice with us in the choice of the Lord in this selection, and that, if present, you would have heartily joined your vote and voice with ours in sustaining him.

The teachings of the brethren who spoke at conference were, as is often the case, divided between the practical and the doctrinal. The necessity of the Saints keeping out of debt was again enforced, the tendency at the present time of the various Christian denominations to adopt divers principles of the Gospel as portions of their respective creeds was talked of at considerable length, the Saints were encouraged to develop the natural resources of the regions they already inhabit and, the roving, restless disposition shown by some to wander off into far distant parts was discouraged. Everything passed off very delightfully, with the exception of the weather, which was chilly and showery, but it did not seem to dampen the enthusiasm or much affect the attendance of the Saints.

So far as general news is concerned, nothing of special moment has occurred since last we wrote. The brethren of the Twelve are in good health, with the exception of Elder Marriner W. Merrill, who, much to our regret, did not feel well enough to attend the conference. Brother Winder is suffering from a slight cold, otherwise we ourselves are enjoying excellent health.

With the expectation of soon giving you a warm greeting at home, and with constant prayers for your welfare, we are, as ever,

Your brethren and fellow laborers, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND.
