James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual Instructions, December 1, 1903

1903-December 1-Original pamphlet or circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As indicated by the heading, this pamphlet is the first of a series of annual instructions issued to the missions of the Church. It is reproduced in full. Instructions were that in foreign countries Tithing receipts should omit the word "Tithing and substitute the phrase "Voluntary Donation" or its equivalent in the language of the country concerned; the receipts to be issued in the appropriate foreign language.

ANNUAL INSTRUCTIONS (No. 1)

December 1st, 1903. To PRESIDENTS OF MISSIONS, PRESIDENTS OF CONFERENCES, PRESIDENTS OF BRANCHES, CLERKS AND ELDERS FROM ZION.

DEAR BRETHREN:

In order that the Revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, contained in section 119 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, known as the Law of Tithing, may be carried out according to Its spirit and meaning and a record compiled and preserved of those who observe this law, we direct your attention to this important subject.

Section 119 Doctrine and Covenants

Excerpt of revelation given through Joseph the Prophet, at Far West, Missouri, July 8, 1838, in answer to the question: "O Lord, show unto thy servants how much thou requirest of the properties of the people for a tithing?"

"5. Verily I say unto you, it shall come to pass that all those who gather unto the land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you.

"6. And I say unto you, if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me, that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you.

"7. And this shall be an ensample unto all the Stakes of Zion. Even so. Amen."

It is our desire that as much as practicable of the system in operation in Zion be carried out in the several missions.

Suitable forms have been prepared and distributed for making the annual settlement and a report of the tithes received and disbursed for the year 1903; and we trust this subject will have the careful consideration of those to whom this communication is addressed.

Branches and Conferences

The President of the Mission is responsible for the proper receiving, disbursing and accounting for the tithes, which should be done under his direction and in accordance with the instructions contained in this communication.

In Conferences where there are no headquarters and where the Saints live in scattered localities, they may send their tithing direct to the President of the Mission, who will send them a receipt for the amount paid. Each month the President of the Mission will send the names of the donors and the amount received to the President of the Conference in which such scattered Saints live.

Where there are organized Branches, the tithes of its members should be paid to the President of the Branch, who will make a monthly report to the President of the Conference, remitting the balance on hand at the close of the month.

The President of the Conference will make a monthly report to the President of the Mission, retaining the vouchers (representing the Branch and Conference disbursements) until the close of the year, when they should be forwarded to the Mission Office with the annual reports.

All disbursements from the tithes of the Branches should be made under the direction of the President of the Conferences, and disbursements of the Conference under the direction of the President of the Mission.

Tithing Receipts Where the laws of the country will permit, receipts (drawn up in the language of the country, and following the general Church form) should be issued, and a stub of such receipt preserved for reference, carefully omitting the word "Tithing" and using instead "Voluntary Donation." An entry should be made on the Branch and Conference Record for each receipt issued. The President of each Branch should be provided with a suitable tithing record, receipt book and vouchers, so that a careful account can be kept and preserved in the Branch, providing it is in harmony with the laws of the country where the Branch is located.

Vouchers

Where the laws of the country will permit, vouchers or receipts should be taken for each payment from the tithing funds, which should be signed by the person who receives same and at the time the payment is made. If receipts are taken instead of vouchers, they should be pasted to a voucher form, but the party to whom payment is made need not sign the voucher also, as the receipt will be sufficient. Where small purchases are made, a receipt need not be obtained, but the President of the Conference will certify that the amount has been paid, which will be accepted by the Presiding Bishopric, when approved by the President of the Missions.

Authorized Disbursements

The following are proper payments from the tithes when made under the direction of the President of the Mission; fares of returning missionaries, hall and house rent, taxes, traveling expenses, mission-house maintenance, donations to the worthy poor, books and tracts for distribution by Elders and others, (when necessary) and expenses in receiving the tithes, if any. No other disbursements than those specified can be allowed unless permission, in writing is obtained from the First Presidency.

Deposits and Loans

All funds deposited at Mission Headquarters by Elders or others should be reserved subject to payment on demand, and under no circumstances should the President of the Mission use these funds for any other purpose.

Emigration or Saving Funds should be reported monthly to the President of the Mission, together with names and amounts, and the deposits remitted to the Mission Headquarters. In future, these deposits must be separate and apart from any other funds, subject to withdrawal on demand.

Diligent efforts should be made to collect all outstanding accounts on the books of the several missions, and hereafter the tithes or other funds of the Mission, should not be loaned to any person on the promise to pay at some future date, nor should accounts of individuals be carried on the books of the mission, unless permission in writing is obtained from the First Presidency.

The President of each mission will furnish with the annual accounts, on special forms sent for that purpose, a statement of each personal account now carried on the books of the Conferences and Missions, and the object for which the debt was incurred. Steps will be taken to either collect or cancel such accounts according to circumstances, and the President of the Mission notified of the action taken thereon.

Branch, Conference and Mission Transfers

Commencing with the year 1904, the President of each Mission will see that, whenever the President of a Conference or Branch is released, he makes a final settlement of the tithing funds placed in his charge, which should be made to the satisfaction of the President of the Mission; that he transfers to his successor the tithing accounts and other property. Upon release of the President of the Mission, he will make a similar transfer to his successor. A report of each transfer of this kind should be forwarded to the Presiding Bishop's Office for preservation, and a copy retained at the Mission Headquarters.

Tithing Settlement

In all organized Branches of the Church a day should be set apart for the Annual Tithing Settlement (providing the laws of the country will permit) which should be held at some convenient date towards the latter part of December. Every person, claiming membership in the Branch, should be invited to attend the settlement, and special attention should be given to the young members to encourage them to pay their tithes, even though the amount be small. Immediately after this settlement an annual report of each Branch should be rendered to the President of the Conference, from which he will compile an Annual Conference report and submit it to the President of the Mission, on or before January 20th, 1904. It is not necessary that missionaries should pay tithing on the funds they receive from their friends in Zion, unless they wish to set an example to the Saints where they are laboring. Where Elders hire halls for the purpose of preaching the Gospel and pay the expense out of their personal funds, it should be reported as a donation to the Mission, but not as "Tithing."

All missionaries should be entered on the Tithing Record, whether they pay tithing or not, and a notation made in the "Remarks" Column that the person is a missionary.

Accounts and Statistics

Each Conference should be provided with a Tithing Record, upon which should be enrolled at the close of the year the name of each tithepayer, with the amount and kind paid. All members of the Church who had paid tithing in the Conference or at Mission Headquarters should have a separate account and entry, whether the amount be large or small, and from this record should be compiled the Annual Conference Record to be sent to the Presiding Bishop's Office. The Annual Church Statistics will also be required with the tithing reports, and we trust that the President of Missions, Conferences and Branches will interest themselves in this important subject so that the Statistics of the Church will be as accurate as the local conditions of the Mission will permit.

Mission Maintenance Contingent Fund

At the commencement of each quarter the President of the Mission will obtain from each Conference an estimate of the amount required from the tithes for its maintenance during the following three months. These estimates should be made on suitable forms, which should be provided by the Mission Office, and as far as practicable they should conform to those used for similar purposes at the Presiding Bishop's Office.

The estimate should be carefully considered by the President of the Mission, and additions or reductions made where, in his judgment, it is necessary. From these reports he will make application to the First Presidency for an appropriation, payable from the tithes of the Mission, for its maintenance for each three months, mailing a copy of the application to the Presiding Bishopric. If it is approved, proper authorization will be sent, and no payment from the tithes will be allowed in excess of the amount authorized by such orders, unless consent is obtained, in writing, from the President of the Church.

It should be the aim of the Presiding Officers to make the Branches, Conferences and Missions self sustaining, that is, all the expenses connected with the Mission should not exceed the revenue derived from the tithes and other sources. If the tithes and other revenues are not sufficient to pay the ordinary expenses economically administered, the President of the Mission should address a communication to the First Presidency explaining the situation.

The Presiding Bishop's office will require a report of the tithes received and disbursed, covering the period from January 1st to June 30th, inclusive, and from July 1st to December 31st. Suitable forms will be mailed at the proper time for making up these reports.

Tracts for Missionaries

Hereafter we desire that tracts and books be sold to missionaries at the actual cost of printing and mailing; and where the financial condition of any missionary is such that he is not able to purchase the necessary tracts to continue his labors, they should be donated to him and the disbursement reported on the Annual Financial Accounts.

Titles

The Presiding Bishop's Office will take charge of all title matters connected with Mission property throughout the Church; and the President of the Mission will please report at the earliest convenient date if there is any real estate in the Mission belonging to the Church, and how the title is now held; also obtain from some competent person, information, in writing, as to how the title to property belonging to a religious denomination may be held in the country where it is located.

Fast Offerings

A fast meeting should be held on the first Sunday of each month in all organized Branches of the Church, at which time the Saints should remember the poor and donate for their benefit. The funds so collected should be used exclusively for the purpose of assisting the worthy poor as circumstances may render it necessary. The President of each Branch or Conference should keep a record of all such donations.

Duties of the Presidents of Missions

The President of each Mission will see that the instructions contained in this circular are carried out in accordance with the spirit and meaning. He will examine the tithing books and accounts in his visits to the several Branches and Conferences, and satisfy himself that they are being properly kept.

Whenever convenient, the President or the clerk of the Mission should visit the conferences during the year and render the Presidents of Conferences and Branches such assistance as may be necessary to properly keep the tithing accounts.

It is expected that the President of each Mission will closely examine all the Annual Tithing Accounts before signing same, and satisfy himself as to their correctness. In signing the Annual Reports, he assumes a moral responsibility for their correctness.

Annual Reports

When the Conference and Mission reports have been completed, found correct, approved by the President of the Mission, and a copy made for preservation at the Mission office, the President of the Mission will forward to the Presiding Bishop's office, on or about February 1st, 1904, one copy of each Conference Tithing Record and Financial and Statistical Report; one copy of the Mission Tithing Record and two copies of the Mission Financial and Statistical Report, with vouchers for all disbursements made from the tithing funds during the year 1903. All vouchers of each Conference should be enclosed in a special envelope provided for that purpose.

Conclusion

We are pleased to notice the improvement that has taken place during the past few years in the method of handling and accounting for the tithes in the several Missions, and we desire to impress upon all those to whom this communication is addressed, the importance of laboring continuously until every Latter-day Saint, who should pay tithing is on the Tithing Record. Not only should the Law of Tithing be taught during tithing settlement, but it should be a constant feature in the teachings of the Elders in their labors among the Saints.

Ever praying the blessing of the Lord to rest upon you in your ministry, and with kind regards we remain,

Your Brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
