James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Testimony for the Reed Smoot U.S. Senate hearings, April 15, 1904

1904-April 15-Smoot Hearings 1:1057-1058 (1906).

Chairman Burrows of the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections had pressured President Joseph F. Smith to exercise his authority as President of the Church to have John W. Taylor and Mathias Cowley, members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, appear on the witness stand in Washington, D.C., in the Smoot hearings. His stand in this letter to Chairman Burroughs is consistent with his testimony on the witness stand in the Smoot hearings regarding the free agency of members and officials of the L.D.S. Church.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, April 15, 1904

Hon. Julius C. Burrows,

Chairman, Committee on Privileges and Elections, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.

Sir: It is with regret that I inform you of my inability to procure the attendance of Messrs. John Henry Smith, George Teasdale, Marriner W. Merrill, John W. Taylor, and Mathias F. Cowley before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections.

Hon. John Henry Smith is still quite ill, but has signified his willingness to appear before the committee, if desired, as soon as his health will permit.

I am informed that Mr. Marriner W. Merrill is still in such poor health that he is unable to leave his home.

My latest reports from Mr. Teasdale are to the effect that his health is still poor, but improving.

In accordance with the suggestions of Mr. Robert W. Taylor, I communicated to Messers. John W. Taylor and M. F. Cowley my earnest desire that they should appear and testify before the committee, and am in receipt of letters from them stating, in substance, that they are unwilling, voluntarily, to testify in the Smoot investigation. As this is a political matter, and not a religious duty devolving upon them or me, I am powerless to exert more than moral suasion in the premises.

With reference to the others named the facts are as above stated.

Again expressing my sincere regret that I am unable to procure the attendance of these gentlemen, I am, Very respectfully, JOSEPH F. SMITH
