James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Missionary course in Church schools, August 5, 1904

1904-August 4-Original letter. Church Historian's Library.

Instructions on missionary training classes in Church schools are again repeated.

SALT LAKE CITY, August 5th, 1904.

To the President of Stakes and Bishops throughout Zion:

DEAR BRETHREN: It has been decided by the First Presidency that the missionary classes in the Church schools already designated to give such courses of instruction shall continue during the coming school year. Of late years we have received numerous calls for experienced Elders in the missionary fields, and the reports received from the Presidents of missions indicate that the young brethren who have taken these theological studies have proven the most efficient workers.

It is suggested that greater care be taken in selecting the young men. Only men who are mentally and physically sound should be recommended; for such are the hardships incident to missionary labors that only men of good health and strong physical constitutions can endure them. Equal, if not even greater care should be exercised with reference to the moral and spiritual standing of those recommended for the missionary course. Instructed by past experience, we urge that those who are charged with the duty of recommending these students make stricter inquiry into their moral and spiritual standing. Where young men have sinned and heartily repented and forsaken the evil, they may be favorably considered for the missionary course; but certainly men who are unrepentant of past sinful conduct, or who are otherwise unworthy of the fellowship of the Saints, should not be called to the work of crying repentance to others. We do not wish to be justly subject to the reproach that we send our missionaries to the world to reform them. Let the work of reform be done at home. You should assure yourself by private, personal inquiry of each person whom you suggest, that he is worthy of your recommendation.

Due regard should be paid to the ability of those recommended for the missionary course to meet the necessary expenses connected with it. No one's name should be suggested who is not personally able to bear this expense, or whose parents or friends are not willing to meet it. Many can bear the expenses of a mission to whom the added cost of attending a preliminary missionary course would be a hardship.

It should be understood by the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops that they go no further in this matter than to recommend the names of young men for the missionary course. In each case after the names recommended have been considered, they must be called by the President of the Church; and the President's letter calling a young man to take the course should be presented by him at the college or academy to which he goes as his credentials of admittance. The persons called should be instructed that they are not at liberty to leave the school to which they are sent at their own pleasure; they can only be honorably released by the authority which called them.

The missionary course is intended to be preliminary to a mission, but it does not necessarily follow that a call to a mission will come in each case immediately after the course is finished; generally speaking, however, it should be understood that a mission will soon follow attendance upon the course of instruction.

Young men now attending, or who have attended the regular course of study at our Church schools should not be recommended for the missionary course, as the regular college course is calculated to fit them for missionary work. Neither should returned missionaries be recommended. The missionary courses are intended for those whose education has been neglected, and to whom the teachings therein given will be educationally advantageous as well as sources of spiritual strength.

We urge you to take up this question at once in order that the classes to be organized this fall may be well attended in all the respective institutions.

Each Bishop should endeavor to have at least one representative of his ward take the day missionary course.

In some of the Church schools evening classes will be conducted for the benefit of young people engaged during the day.

Praying that the blessings of the Lord may be with you in this as in all your labors, we are, Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND'.
