James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual instructions on Tithing, December 1, 1904

1904-December 1-Original circular. Church Historian's Library.

Annual instructions to Stake Presidents (No. 6) on the care of tithes. We have reproduced only the last page or "inclusion" of this pamphlet since much of the material in the pamphlet is identical with previous annual instructions heretofore reproduced. It was felt, as previously noted in this volume that a certain amount of editing could be done on certain annual instructions which were duplications.

ANNUAL INSTRUCTIONS No. 6

PRESIDING BISHOP'S OFFICE, SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, December 1, 1904.

TO PRESIDENTS OF STAKES AND COUNSELORS, HIGH COUNCILORS, BISHOPS AND COUNSELORS, AND STAKE TITHING CLERKS IN ZION.

Dear Brethren: . . .

CONCLUSION

. . . We are deeply gratified with the marked improvement that has taken place during the past few years in the method of accounting for the tithes. Never since the Church was organized have the tithing records been in the condition they are today. If the instructions contained in this communication are carried out by the Bishops and Presidents of Stakes in their spirit and meaning, every member of the Church who pays tithing will be correctly recorded, and the records preserved. We desire to impress upon all those to whom this communication is addressed the importance of laboring continuously until every person, who should pay tithing, is on the tithing record, and the list of non-tithepayers eliminated. We also trust that with the specific instructions given, the Presidents of Stakes, Stake Tithing Clerks, Bishops and others will be able to act in harmony in their various duties.

Not only should the "Law of Tithing" be taught during the Annual Tithing Settlement, but it should be a constant feature of the teachings of the Presiding Officers of Wards and Stakes, Quorums of the Priesthood and all Auxiliary Organizations.

Ever praying the blessings of the Lord to rest upon you in your ministry among the Saints, and with kind regards, we remain, Your Brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
