James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Temple marriage records private, December 8, 1904

1904-December 8-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

Those conducting the Smoot hearing sought to have the L.D.S. Church produce temple records and even records of the temple ceremonies. Here John Nicholson, Temple recorder, is permitted to take the records of temple marriage with him to Washington, but with instructions to produce them only if failure to do so would place him in contempt before the Senate Committee. The letter points out that all temple marriages are also legal civil marriages, records for which exist in the county offices issuing the licenses and that therefore the temple records are private records, not to be surrendered or placed in evidence, except perhaps under contempt charges.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, December 8th, 1904.

Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Senator:

We desire to call your attention to the physical and mental condition of our beloved brother, John Nicholson, who, with others, left on the noon train today for Washington to appear as a witness in your case.

It is very apparent to us that he has greatly failed of late, and it is difficult to tell what the effect of the strain of appearing before a senatorial committee may have upon him by the time he reaches Washington. If therefore, after you and your counsel shall have conferred with him, it shall appear that his condition is such that he can consistently be excused from testifying on the strength of a physician's certificate, we think it would be well for you to take advantage of any relief that can be procured for him in this way.

It should be understood that Brother Nicholson is not now, nor never has been, custodian of temple records. He is merely the chief clerk, or recorder, as he is called, and is not supposed to know anything at all about any records other than those which he, with his assistants, has worked on; and the record which he takes with him, known as the marriage record, covers the whole extent of his work and knowledge as temple recorder, which record dates from the opening of the temple to the present time, and contains a faithfully kept record of every marriage performed in the temple from that time till now. And as this is a private record, containing nothing but legally performed marriages, solemnized on the authority of licenses issued by State authority, it has occurred to us that the book being private property ought to be its own protection; and if for this or any other reason your counsel can see their way clear to prevent it from going before the committee and thus, as we understand it, become lost to us, we would like them to maintain the strongest ground possible in this direction; and for the further reason, that it is not original authority as to the marriages it records, that authority being in the county offices issuing the licenses. We have permitted Bro. Nicholson to take this record with him with the understanding that it be not produced unless after discussion the committee shall rule him in contempt for failure to produce it.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON N. LUND, First Presidency.
