James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Reed Smoot case the case of the Church, December 9, 1904

1904-December 9-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

This letter of the First Presidency to Senator Reed Smoot makes it crystal clear that they considered the Smoot hearing as a defense of the Church. Reed Smoot's seat as a U.S. Senator and his career alone were not involved, but the reputation and standing of the Church before the nation and the world. The First Presidency had evidently appointed Dr. James E. Talmage to work with Senator Smoot and his lawyers to see that the interests of the Church were fully protected, and represented properly. From the correspondence in the Reed Smoot collection there is no doubt that Senator Smoot welcomed and appreciated this support and assistance from the First Presidency.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, December 9th, 1904 Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Senator:

When the time comes for the presentation of your side of the hearing now pending before the senatorial committee, we trust you will not fail to keep thoroughly in mind the double relationship in which you stand to the question. The first, of course, is your own personal interest, that of retaining your seat. The second, is the interest of the Church in this, to see that it is set right in the record of the case on all points wherein questions have arisen, or may arise involving doctrinal points, or in anywise affecting its honor, which may need explaining, amplifying or correcting.

The witnesses who are to testify in your behalf, and in behalf of the Church as well, can be helped very materially by your counsel; in fact they will have to depend almost entirely on the nature of the questions put to them by your counsel in order to afford them opportunity of correcting, bringing out and developing such things in a way in which they ought to appear in the record. We would like you to impress your attorneys with your anxiety to have the record as complete as possible in this respect; and it will not be necessary for us to remind you that the stronger and more complete the evidence for the Church is made, the stronger must be your prospects for retaining your seat. This phase of your case ought, in justice to the Church, to receive your own personal attention as much as possible, seeing that only one of your counsel is acquainted, even in a general way with our doctrines. We do not wish you to understand by this that we expect you yourself to go through the record, and note its defects and prepare the way, through your counsel, for proper corrections, as that will be done here; what we do desire is that you will do all you can yourself by way of seeing that this is done, and impressing your counsel with the importance of it. Brother Talmage will confer with you in regard to this matter, and your counsel also, and will be prepared to post them regarding it.

Hoping this will find you in good health and spirits, we are, with kindest regards,

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
