James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 17, 1904

1904-December 17-Deseret News; also MS 67:1-5 (January 5, 1905).

This annual "Christmas Greeting" of the First Presidency is in reality a "pastoral epistle" outlining the conditions of the Church in 1904.

GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY From the Christmas Edition of the "Deseret News."

We extend a hearty greeting to the Latter-day Saints throughout the world at this season of general festivity and rejoicing. We celebrate an anniversary of the birth of the world's Redeemer and Who, we believe, will be its Lord and King. His entrance into the world was the signal for the songs of angels and the rejoicings of the heavenly host. He descended below all things that He might rise above all things, and in that experience comprehend and obtain power over all things. As members of His Church-the body of Christ-we recognize Him as the Head and not only as the Great Teacher but as the veritable Son of God. We look to Him for guidance, we desire to render obedience to Him, and we aim to carry out His purposes and designs for the salvation of the human race and the establishment of divine government in the world. For this we are His servants and the servants of His people, who are united in the bonds of the everlasting covenant, having been baptized unto Him and having received His spirit.

We congratulate the Church on the progress that has been made since its organization on April 6, 1830. Notwithstanding the opposition that has always been raised against it, the work of the Lord has moved forward with wonderful strength and rapidity, and is still extending its influence throughout the world. Ever since the Gospel was revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, whose birthday occurred on December 23, 1805, and may, therefore, be properly celebrated also at this season of the year, the Church has moved steadily forward in the accomplishment of the purposes held in view from its inception. The principles revealed by our Savior in this great and last dispensation have been promulgated among all the leading nations of the earth. They have been carried into heathen lands. Many thousands of honest people have yielded obedience to them and hosts of others, not courageous enough to face the anger of a frowning world, have received those truths in their hearts, and the effects are marked in the changes for the better that have taken place among the creeds of modern Christendom. Thus, the leaven introduced by the Savior in the nineteenth century is working its way and will eventually "leaven the whole lump."

We have cause for abundant rejoicing in contemplating the prosperity of a material character which has attended the Latter-day Saints during the year now nearing its end. Throughout these mountain vales the blessings of heaven have rested upon the earth. Crops of all kinds have been prolific, and a rich harvest has rewarded the labors of the husbandman. Thus food has been plentifully provided for the inhabitants of these regions, and a good surplus has been exported to distant places. In addition to the cereals that have been raised, and the increase that has attended the flocks and herds that have roamed upon the hills or fattened upon the rich products of the lowlands, the great crops of sugar beets that have been gathered, have been a source of wealth to the community. The establishment of sugar factories in Utah and Idaho has been made possible because of this abundant product. With advanced experience in the cultivation of the beet, and in the manufacture therefrom of first-class sugar, we have promise of a full supply of the saccharine article for home consumption and to supply our neighbors in surrounding states and territories. All this will greatly promote development of the resources and augment the wealth of this intermountain region.

The action taken by the government towards developing and controlling the streams and waters that can be used for the irrigation of our agricultural lands, gives hope and courage to the farmers, and these are made stronger by the experiments of the Agricultural college of the state of Utah, which give evidence that by scientific farming abundant crops can be raised here with the use of much less water than has been customary. With these double advantages-first the promise of more water, then the evidence that what we already have can accomplish much more than was previously supposed, we can reasonably look for a vastly greater and more compact population in this arid region than that which it at present supports. With a fertile soil, pure air, and control of abundance of water, the intermountain farmer will be master of the situation.

This year has been specially characterized by the erection and purchase of new mission headquarters and meeting-houses in various fields. No previous year has equalled 1904 in this respect. Most conspicuous of these is the elegant and substantial building belonging to the Church in Stockholm, the capital city of Sweden, which was dedicated in October. The meeting-house at Aarhus, Denmark, is also an admirable addition to the outside property of the Church. Commodious new mission headquarters have been established in Liverpool, England, which is the shipping point, usually, for emigrating Saints, and the central station of the entire European mission. The old place became unsuited for the advanced requirements of the Church in that part of the world, and it is very gratifying to note that such convenient and suitable quarters have been secured for the purposes required. In various parts of the British mission improvements in these particulars have been effected, which cannot fail to be beneficial to the work in those lands.

The purchase of a commodious chapel and vicarage in Chicago gives stability to the Church there, and supplies the Northern States mission with comfortable headquarters. The acquisition of the property at Chattanooga, which was, for so long, the headquarters of the Southern States mission, and our reoccupancy thereof, as our own, has given unbounded satisfaction to the Elders and Saints in that mission. A valuable piece of property with a church building thereon has also been acquired in Boise, Idaho, where a prosperous and increasing branch of the Northwestern States mission is being built up. At Brisbane, New South Wales, property has been purchased, and a meeting house built in a central and very desirable portion of that city.

In Samoa arrangements have been completed for the purchase of some valuable tracts of land where the Saints on those islands can be gathered, as are those of the Hawaiian Saints, at the Church plantation at Laie. Meeting-houses of improved style and of greater capacity are being erected both in American and German Samoa. In the Society Islands a land purchase is being made near Papeete, Tahiti, on which will be built headquarters of that mission, including a meeting-house.

Not only has the passing year been a building era in the foreign missions of the Church, but at home great activity has been shown in the erection, enlargement and improvement of our places of worship; so much so that we have had to caution some of our communities that economy and thrift are as essential to real progress in public matters as in private concerns. Indeed, owing to the fact that the church is still burdened with a heavy, bonded debt, (a condition we are thankful to say, that is gradually and rapidly lightening, a still further reduction being at hand) we have very reluctantly been compelled to withhold the assistance of the Church in the erection of some public buildings, school houses, assembly halls, etc., which had our financial condition been more favorable, we should have taken the utmost pleasure to extend. In this relation we wish again to emphasize our previous suggestions to the Saints regarding the desirability of using their unslackening energies to get out of debt. We know how strong is the temptation to the ordinary man when times are good and money easy to obtain, to make unnecessary expenditures, often on borrowed capital, which, in too many instances, means the mortgaging of the home, and too frequently ends in its loss. Could our voices be heard throughout the regions where the Latter-day Saints most largely dwell, they would be raised in protest against this practice of endangering our hold on the roof that covers those who rightly look to us for care and protection-our wives and children. We can conceive of but few conditions where such would be permissible, much less commendable. In flush times like the present, our advice is: Get out of debt, and then keep out.

One of the most pleasing additions to our public buildings at home is the handsome structure erected for the Dr. Groves' Latter-day Saints' Hospital in Salt Lake City. It is in all respects a splendid establishment. It is as nearly perfect for the purpose designed as is possible in the present stage of progress in such institutions. It is modeled after the very best plans obtainable. It is fitted with all the modern improvements for surgical and medical aid to the afflicted. It has been pronounced by experts who have traveled the world over, the very best of the kind they have ever seen in either hemisphere. It would do credit to any city in the republic. With the skill and talent available here and the opportunities the hospital affords for the alleviation of pain and the cure of disease, this institution cannot fail to prove of immense benefit to the unfortunates who need such aid as it will assuredly impart.

Another subject which lies near to our hearts is that of mutual help among the people of God. Our motto is not simply, "Live and let live," but "Live and help to live." We should help to make the lives of others happy and progressive. The kindly word fitly spoken should be followed by timely actions. There is a season when tokens of affection and esteem are offered in Christmas gifts. This is a pleasing and commendable custom, but the mere present bestowed is not so much worth as is the loving look and kindly words that should accompany them. Costly gifts beyond the means of the giver are unwise, and wisdom and discretion should be exercised concerning them. It is not prudent to vie with one another in rich and costly presents involving liabilities difficult to meet, for, after all, it is the loving remembrance and the spirit in which gifts are made that commend them to the recipients, and it should be kept in mind that the mere annual gift or birthday present will not fill the void that may have been caused by careless neglect or thoughtless inattention during the other parts of the year. The poor should be remembered particularly at this festive season. No one should be left without the comforts of life while we are rejoicing over the advent into the world of Him who taught love and charity and peace to be extended even to our enemies. The poor ought always to receive our aid and at Christmas time especially they should be supplied with comforts suitable to the occasion.

Our educational affairs are in splendid form, and steadily advancing. Separate and distinct entirely from the public schools and university, and receiving no aid from the state or the nation, they are yet institutions of which the Latter-day Saints may well be proud. The Brigham Young University at Provo, the L.D.S. University in Salt Lake City, the Brigham Young college at Logan, are among the chief educational institutions of the Church, while the various stake academies and high schools in different parts of Utah and the regions surrounding, are all admirable establishments and performing a grand work in higher education among our people. They receive such aid from Church funds as is possible to extend with the means available.

The chief additions to Church literature during the year have been the publication of the second volume of the History of the Church, of a vest pocket edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, and a complete concordance to the Book of Mormon. This sacred record has also during the year been published in the Tahitian tongue, and a new edition in the Hawaiian is passing through the press. Of Church works at present in active preparation are the third volume of the History of the Church; a Church history, adapted in style and conciseness for the use of our youth, and a concordance of the book of Doctrine and Covenants. A number of excellent publications, explanatory of the doctrine and discipline of the Church, have been issued by their respective authors, who are personally responsible for their contents, and whose efforts are to be highly commended. The standard works of the Church, however, recognized and adopted as such by the Latter-day Saints, remain, as formerly, the Bible (King James translation), the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. The periodicals which have the largest circulation among the Saints, are the Deseret News, daily and semi-weekly, the Improvement Era, the Juvenile Instructor. Other publications are too numerous to mention, which are each commendable in their respective spheres. The promotion of literary talent and the encouragement of all branches of art and science mark the progress of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

We are highly gratified at the increase of faith, hope and charity among the Latter-day Saints. The Spirit that prevails among them, especially in those localities where they constitute the great body of the inhabitants, is that of kindness, love and unity. Health abounds; peace reigns, and the song of praise, and the sound of prayer ascend morning and evening to the Great Father of us all from the homes of His people, while the Sabbath day is regularly celebrated in public worship and in sacramental commemoration of the atonement wrought out by Him whose birth into the world we now celebrate.

In all these circumstances and events we find cause for rejoicing and encouragement. We congratulate the Saints on the advancement that is being made, and the prospects that are opening before them. Notwithstanding the skepticism, doubt and division existing in the world concerning divine things, the light of the Gospel revealed anew in these latter days is penetrating the darkness of this world. Prejudice is being overcome; the fair minded and honorable of the earth are becoming better acquainted with the work in which we are engaged, and with the people who have wrought marvels in this once desert waste. The truth is going onward to victory. It will most certainly triumph. The fight may be protracted and vigorous, but the Lord is with His people. In His might we shall conquer. He whose birthday we celebrate will come in due time, and take possession of the kingdom. He will reign over all the earth. The kingdoms of this world will be His. He who was the babe in the manger of Bethlehem will be the acknowledged monarch of all the earth. Until He comes whose right it is to reign, the Saints, as commanded, will be "subject unto the powers that be." They will support good government, they will be obedient to righteous law. They will serve the Savior and their Redeemer, and will look for His coming as their sovereign and their Lord. In His name we bless the Saints and wish them and all mankind a happy and joyful Christmas. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND.
