James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Polygamy in New Mexico, February 15, 1905

1905-February 15-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

The Smoot hearing had first of all concentrated attention on the practice of polygamy in Utah. This letter is evidence that Chairman Burrows was extending the investigation to Mormon practice in other states such as New Mexico. This again illustrates that the main issue in the Smoot hearing was not simply the seating of the Senator from Utah.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, February 15th, 1905 Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Senator:

Your favors of the 7th and 9th inst. have been read with much interest.

We had already learned of your stomach trouble and regretted it very much, as we feared the great strain upon your nervous system might perhaps prove more than you could bear. We congratulate you however on having passed through what we hope and believe to be the worst part of a very unpleasant ordeal, and sincerely hope that your health will now steadily improve.

It is very apparent to us that Senator Burrows must feel somewhat chagrined at his failure so far to establish his case against you, and that he is now resorting to bluff tactics as a means of keeping up the fight. The telegram of Colonel George S. Pritchard, solicitor general of New Mexico, to Senator Burrows, challenging the truth of his statement on the floor of the Senate on the 7th inst. to the effect that polygamy exists in New Mexico, and that that territory is the breeding ground of polygamy, &c., was timely and good, and very refreshing to us.

We sent for and conferred with President Walter C. Lyman in regard to Senator Burrows' statement. He told us, after reflecting on the subject, that to his best knowledge and belief there could not possibly be more than six polygamous families in New Mexico, and in fact he did not know personally of that many, and they were all marriages contracted before President Woodruff's manifesto; and by way of corroborating Col. Pritchard we got Bro. Lyman to telegraph you a statement to that effect, which telegram was sent to you yesterday, and will be noticed in the News today.

The fact that Senator Burrows is insincere in his warfare against you will, no doubt, lead him to resort to the most extreme measures as a means of winning his case, and this apparently is an evidence of it. But we feel that all such tactics will not only result in failure, but will prove helpful to you.

Your letter of the 10th inst. is just received. While we are pleased to learn of the kind personal feeling manifested towards you by Senator McComas, we feel quite disappointed in his lack of ability to see us in our true light, and must express the hope that the Senator, as well as all others who are now blindly prejudiced, may yet know us better and appreciate conditions here, and the struggle we have had and are still having to maintain our political existence, and the considerations due the first settlers of the State.

We would say in reference to Brother Kimball's discourse at the Cache conference, that the reporter (Mr. Cleminson) intentionally misrepresented him in some respects, and greatly exaggerated him in other respects; and we have learned since that the reporter himself has acknowledged quite freely that he injected the word "polygamy" into the report of Brother Kimball's remarks. And that part of the report in which Brother Kimball is said to have shown defiance to the government and disregard for its authority was the reporter's idea of Brother Kimball's attitude against the women who are taking a stand against large families, and who would regulate by legislation the size thereof.

We note the suggestions contained in a former letter, and are doing everything we can to insure the peace and safety of our community against their enemies.

Referring to President Walter C. Lyman's telegram to you, we would say that in April, 1902, we canvassed all the stakes in United States for the purpose of learning the number of polygamists there were in the Church in this country at that time, and by May the 1st of that year we received returns from all the Stake Presidents. Referring to the report from the San Juan Stake we see that there were at that time twelve polygamists reported. San Juan Stake is composed of six settlements, two of which only are in New Mexico, and they, with Ramah, a very small settlement in the St. Johns Stake, are the only settlements of our people in New Mexico. We feel perfectly satisfied therefore that Col. Pritchard is safe in making the offer he did to Senator Burrows, and that President Lyman is right when he says that there are not to exceed six Mormon polygamists in New Mexico, and we, as well as he, are of the opinion that there are less than that number. And they are all prior to the Manifesto.

All well at home, and all the brethren desire to be kindly remembered to you. With love, we are,

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
