James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Salt Lake Tabernacle Sunday services, February 16, 1905

1905-February 16-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

At the time of the writing of this letter of instructions to the Presidency of the Salt Lake Stake, regular Sunday services were held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in addition to the Sunday services held in the various L.D.S. Wards in the city. The letter calls for greater support of these Tabernacle services by the priesthood officers of the Stake.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, February 16, 1905. Prest. Nephi L. Morris and Counselors, Salt Lake Stake.

Dear Brethren:

We note with regret the falling off in attendance at the tabernacle services on the Sabbath day since the division of the Salt Lake Stake. The absence of the presiding authorities of the four stakes in this city is becoming especially noticeable. The seats on the stand, set apart for the stake officers, were occupied last Sunday by one Stake President and two Counselors, one Patriarch and one Presiding Bishop. The seats on the south of the stand, for the High Councilors, were occupied by only five from all the four stakes; one President of High Priests' Quorum and one of his counselors also occupied these seats. The Bishops' seats were occupied by not more than six members of the Bishoprics. There was a fair congregation and a well filled choir, making the empty space, which should have been filled by the presiding priesthood, very marked indeed.

It is our desire that these meetings should be well attended, and unless the presiding officers of the stakes and wards get the spirit of this duty, it can hardly be expected that the people will do so. No stake or ward meeting should be held so as to interfere with attendance at these services, and the people should be encouraged as much as possible to be present at them.

Trusting this matter will have your earnest attention, we remain, Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
