James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Religion classes and Public school buildings, February, 1905

1905-February-Improvement Era 8:302-304 (February, 1905).

This letter of announcement to the L.D.S. Church members indicates that since a ruling of the Attorney General of Utah and the State Superintendent of Public Instruction had made the use of public school buildings for religious instruction classes unconstitutional, officers and members of the Church having charge of such religious education programs were to comply with the law. A separation of Church and State in education is here again confirmed by the First Presidency.

RELIGION CLASSES AND SCHOOL BUILDINGS

To the Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards and Superintendents of Religion Classes:

In answer to inquiries that have been made relative to our attitude in relation to the holding of religion classes in the public school buildings, we deem it proper to put forth the following statement:

To begin with, we wish it distinctly understood that we are not in favor of, but are emphatically opposed to, denominational teachings in our public schools. We are proud of that splendid system of schools, and do not desire that they should be interfered with in any way whatever. For religious and devotional training, other institutions are provided, by our Church as well as by other churches, and we cannot too strongly urge that the two systems continue to be kept entirely separate and apart.

The religion classes instituted by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are designed as auxiliaries of our Church schools, in which, along with the usual branches of learning, the principles of the gospel are inculcated; the object being to add to, not take from, the education received in secular institutions; moral, devotional and faith-promoting training that cannot, and must not, be included in the curriculum of the public schools; but which the Saints desire their children to receive.

In a number of settlements these classes have been held in public schoolhouses, especially where the population is largely Latter-day Saints, but there has been no intention to introduce religious teachings in the public schools, nor has it been so introduced. The use of the school buildings was merely for the sake of convenience, and to facilitate the assembling of the classes, many of whose numbers were students in the schools. The question involved was submitted to the State Superintendent of Schools, also to the Attorney-General, and they were requested to give their opinions upon the matter of holding these classes in the school buildings after the schools were dismissed. Those officials were of the opinion that the statutes gave trustees the right to let the schoolhouses for other than school purposes when it would not interfere with the regular school work. Our instructions to those in charge of the religion classes have always been to allow sufficient time to intervene between the dismissal of the schools and the opening of the classes, so as to avoid any infringement upon the regular school work, and give all a chance to withdraw who did not desire to attend the classes.

The State Superintendent of Schools has since expressed the view that the statute on the subject of letting school buildings for other than school work is unconstitutional, and many of our fellow citizens, it seems, have become alarmed lest the public schools should be endangered by the religion classes. While we regard this fear as groundless, and are not conscious of having done anything by instructions previously given, or otherwise, to imperil in the least the independence of the schools, we do not wish to cause our fellow citizens any uneasiness upon this score, and we desire, as ever, to be in harmony with the statutes of our state and nation. We therefore advise the workers in the religion classes to withdraw from the public school buildings, wherever they are being used by them, and hold such classes in other places that may be available.

We sincerely hope that this will not retard or hinder the work being done in these classes. We desire to encourage the religion class workers to continue their praiseworthy efforts to teach our children the saving principles of the gospel of Christ and likewise how to "pray and walk uprightly before the Lord." The bishops should use their best endeavors to provide suitable places wherein these classes can meet and to make them more than ever an aid to the spiritual and moral education of the children of the Latter-day Saints. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
