James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Proper accounting for Church funds, April 7, 1905

1905-April 7-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

For a number of years the First Presidency had been issuing annual instructions on the care of Tithing and Tithing funds.

This letter of instructions to Stake Presidents called for stricter care in the expenditure and accounting for all Church funds, as much to protect the individual officer and the interests of the people of the Church as to protect the Church and its funds.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, April 7th, 1905 Prest. Nephi L. Morris, Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

Dear Brother:

Our attention has been recently called to a remissness said to be existing more or less among some of the quorums of priesthood and auxiliary organizations throughout the Church in making proper accountings of the monies collected and expended under the direction of their presiding officers.

We feel that wherever a remissness of this character exists among the quorums or auxiliary organizations, that steps should be taken at once to correct it; and we suggest that you and your bishops take this matter up with the several organizations of your stake with a view to correcting anything of this nature that may exist among them.

And we desire to say further that if any carelessness exists on the part of any of your bishops to see that proper reports are made to the people of the funds collected and expended under their direction for the benefit of their wards, it will be in order for you to call the bishop's attention to such carelessness with a view to remedying the same.

And we invite you to impress upon your Bishops, Presidents of Quorums, and Superintendents of auxiliary organizations the propriety and importance of making detailed reports of the funds passing through their hands. It is due to the people of the wards, and the members of quorums and auxiliary organizations that this be done; and it is due also to the brethren themselves entrusted with the handling of public funds that this be done; and in all cases where considerable means is involved, it is advisable that the accounts he competently audited before presented to the people for approval.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
