James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Tabernacle Choir chief choral organization, April 20, 1905

1905-April 20-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

On February 11, 1895, the First Presidency, consisting of Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith issued a memorandum "To Conductor Evan Stephens and Members of the Tabernacle Choir (see Messages 3:267-268) commending them for services and stating that the Choir "is and should be a great auxiliary to the cause of Zion." This letter again calls for support of the Choir and its great mission for the Church and for the building of Zion. It reiterates the statement of the previous First Presidency that membership in the Tabernacle Choir is a first-ranking call of the Church which should have highest priority.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, April 20th, 1905. Prest. Nephi Morris, Salt Lake Stake.

Dear Brother:

Especially in the interest of our chief choral organization, the Tabernacle Choir, and incidentally, we trust, the interest of choirs in each ward and stake in this city, we desire that the stake choristers of each of the four city stakes be appointed aids to the conductor of the Tabernacle Choir, that they may in every way possible help him in securing as regularly attending members, the best available singers from these four stakes, also by their own personal attendance and that of the various ward and organization choir leaders throughout the city reach a closer harmony of action for the uplifting of all together.

Brethren, we realize the difficulty of getting sufficient workers in each line of duty devolving upon Church members, yet we do feel that those specially gifted with voices for singing, should be enabled to not only more fully develop this gift-a valuable one in the Church-but that their other duties should be so arranged as not to conflict with that of properly preparing for his one, and the attendance especially of needed rehearsals and services. We feel sure that the Tabernacle Choir will amply reward you and the ward authorities for whatever sacrifice you make to spare it singers in the service those same singers will be to you in a more local capacity, while following this united policy of action. Also their places in many other lines of duty may be filled with great benefit to the individuals by people, now, perhaps, inactive, who are not so prominently musical.

We would like to see all of our young people receiving as much musical training as possible, but especially desirable is it that our Tabernacle Choir should be full to over-flowing with the brightest, most talented young singers our community affords, and while we feel that it is the duty of the leader and trainer of that choir with his aids to select and train those to the highest artistic point possible, we feel that it remains for you and the local ward officers under you to so arrange the duties of these that there need be no conflict of duties standing in their way to receive this training. The leader and trainer is engaged and ready to labor with the material and it is to the interest of all that this material be furnished freely and in abundance from our much blessed and talented community. We ask you for action upon this matter without delay so that the Choir may at once proceed upon its labor of improvement.

Again we especially request that holding of stake or ward musical entertainments be avoided on choir rehearsal night, Thursday.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
