James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Division of Scandinavian Mission, May 11, 1905

1905-May 11-Original letter. Joseph F. Smith Letterbook, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; also Nordstjornan 29: No. 13, pp. 201-202 (July 1, 1905).

This is the call of Elder Peter Matson of Mt. Pleasant, Utah, to be the President of the newly organized Swedish Mission. The mission was organized by a division of the Scandinavian Mission. The new mission included Sweden, Finland and Russia. President Matson was instructed to "seize any new opportunities" to introduce the gospel into new areas. Missionary work in Russia had had previous attention from the First Presidency (see note for Message of September 23, 1903 earlier in this volume).

May 11th, 1905 Elder Peter Matson, Mt. Pleasant.

Dear Brother:

It having been deemed wise by us to divide in two the present Scandinavian Mission, you are hereby appointed to preside over that part of it which includes Sweden, Finland and Russia, and which will hereafter be known as the Swedish Mission.

It will be your duty to see that the gospel is preached, as far as possible, throughout the lands where the elders now labor, and, as the Lord shall open the way, to seize any new opportunities which may present themselves for the introduction of the gospel to parts where it has not yet been preached. In short, we desire you to go forth as a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, fully equipped for the discharge of every duty connected with your calling, and to preside with dignity over all the affairs of the Church in that land, with full power to regulate everything connected therewith and make such changes, releases and appointments as may in your judgment, under the direction of the spirit of the Lord, be necessary for the welfare, spread and prosperity of the work of the Lord and the warning of the people where you labor, and over whom you are appointed to preside.

And that you may be fully sustained and qualified for these high and responsible labors, we beseech God our Eternal Father to endow you with power from on high, and to fill you with His Holy Spirit, and all the gifts that pertain to your office and calling, that you may be a blessing and a savior to the children of men in your ministry and carry with you an influence and power that shall be felt for good by all with whom you are brought in contact. It is our most earnest desire that you should be an example in humility, in patience, in long suffering, and in all the gifts and graces of the gospel to all men, that your words may be the words of the Lord to the people whom you address, and that you may feel that there is a power and spirit accompanying you that is not of man.

We shall be glad to hear from you concerning your labors and the situation of affairs in your field of labor as often as it shall be convenient for you to write, and shall esteem it a pleasure ourselves to communicate frequently with you.

Praying God the Eternal Father to bless you and qualify you for this work to which you are now called, and asking him to preserve you and yours from the hands of all your enemies, and to bring you home in purity, peace and love, we remain,

Your fellow servants in the Lord, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.

1905-July 31-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Previous instructions had been issued by the First Presidency on August 10, 1903, (see earlier in this volume) on "Missionary Classes in Church Schools." This letter continued the program for another year. The two sets of instruction are essentially identical.
