James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual Christmas pastoral epistle, December 16, 1905

1905-December 16-Deseret News, December 16, 1905; also Improvement Era 9:246-248 (January, 1906).

The annual Christmas or "pastoral" epistle of the First Presidency.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY From the Christmas Deseret News

We hail with pleasure the advent of another Christmas day, celebrated throughout Christendom as the anniversary of the birth into this life of the world's Redeemer. We regard and venerate him as the Christ, the veritable Son of the Eternal Father. To the Latter-day Saints we extend cordial greeting at this festive season, and congratulate them on the condition of the Church and its pleasing prospects. In temporal things, our people in these valleys of the mountains have been greatly blessed. Bountiful harvests have been reaped on field and farm, in orchard and garden and vineyard, The flocks and herds upon the hills and the ranges have been multiplied; most of the industries that have been established have flourished; comfortable homes greet the eye in every direction, and want and penury are little known among the Saints. For these favors of divine providence we ought to be truly grateful; but in addition to these good things which are material, there has been an increase of spiritual life and unity, resulting from an increased faith in God and confidence in his servants. It is delightful to behold the peace and joy and contentment to be found throughout Zion, and the determination exhibited to hold fast to the truths which our heavenly Father has revealed in the latter days, and to the spiritual kingdom he has set up "to be thrown down no more forever."

In all the quorums of the holy priesthood and in the auxiliary organizations there is a marked increase of interest, intelligent inquiry and intense satisfaction. The efficiency displayed by the presiding officers among them is evident to all observers. The influence of education is also apparent; the Church academies, colleges and universities show marked improvement, being aided far more liberally than ever before from Church funds; musical culture is progressing; order is maintained in public gatherings, and advancement is seen on both intellectual and spiritual lines.

One striking evidence of the faith of the Saints is their fidelity in the payment of tithes, and the offerings for the poor, in the erection of substantial and elegant houses of worship, in the maintenance of missions, and the support given generally to all measures for the spread of the work of the Lord. Our people are gradually following the advice given to "get out of debt." It is confidently hoped that the Church itself will, before long, be free from the bonded indebtedness which has been a burden upon it for some time. It will be glad tidings to us all, if by the next Christmas day we can declare truthfully that "we owe no man anything, but to love one another."

The Church abroad is strengthening its hold upon the thinking portion of mankind, prejudice is being removed from the minds of good people. Substantial meeting houses have been erected at several points, and the way is opening up for the promulgation of the gospel in many lands, some of which have been barred against our elders. There are openings for our missionaries too numerous to fill at present. The cry is repeated, as of old, "The harvest is great, but the laborers are few."

The unveiling of the monument to the Prophet Joseph Smith, at Sharon, Windsor county, Vermont, on December 23-the one hundredth anniversary of his birth-is a cause of great congratulation to all who believe in his divine mission. Slander, false witness and the shafts of malice are arrayed against the Church and its authorities, as may be expected until Satan is bound and falsehood is concerned by divine truth. It is our duty to bear such things with patience, and not permit ourselves to be aroused to anger or retaliation. We should stand up for the right, and as far as possible ignore the wrong-doers. The knowledge that God is with us, and that his work will prevail, should buoy us up under every difficulty and every trial, having the conviction that the Lord will cause even "the wrath of man to praise him." The very efforts of the enemies of his Church to hedge up its way will be overruled by him to accelerate its advancement.

We advise the Saints to enjoy as far as is possible and consistent the pleasures of Christmas time, with that temperance and regard for others which should be observed at this sacred anniversary. Bless the children; provide for the poor; comfort the distressed; visit the widow and the fatherless; forgive those who may be regarded as enemies; be filled with the spirit of blessing; have charity for all; promote peace and good will, and spread abroad the light and intelligence which flow down from heaven in the gospel of the Son of God; recognize his divine hand in all that is good and useful and that promotes the welfare of humanity. All truth, from whatever source it seems to emanate, in science, in art, in philosophy, in theology, in discovery or invention, which promotes happiness and elevates mankind, is from the Father of light who sent his Son Jesus Christ of Nazareth, into the world to uplift his sons and daughters and bring them out of darkness, ignorance and sin into communion with him and obedience to his laws. Glory and praise be unto him for this great and crowning mercy! Let all nations join in the glad refrain which was sung by the angels at the Savior's birth.

We extend greeting and blessing and earnest desire for the favor of heaven to rest upon all the human family, with the fervent hope that the time is not far distant when they will bow the knee to King Immanuel and sing with united voice, Glory to God and the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
