James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Senator Dubois and the Reed Smoot case, January 30, 1906

1906-January 30-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

As indicated in the Introduction to this volume, the Reed Smoot case lasted before the United States Senate for four years from 1904 to 1907. As fast as Reed Smoot and the L.D.S. Church answered one charge, another was raised. The following two letters deal with the charge that the L.D.S. Church was still practising polygamy in New Mexico and Arizona, if not in Utah. Unfortunately the reports and documents referred to in these two letters as enclosures were not present in the Smoot file at B.Y.U.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, Jan. 30, 1906. Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Brother:

We send you herewith enclosed clipping from the Deseret News of Dec. 20, 1905, containing an account of unlawful cohabitation cases, a result of the visit of Senator Dubois into Arizona last Summer. There has not been a single case of polygamy in Arizona or New Mexico since Prest. Woodruff's manifesto.

Answering the charge of Senator Burrows in the senate on the 7th of Feb, 1905, Prest. Walter C. Lyman wrote you as follows: "To best of my knowledge and belief there are not to exceed six Mormon polygamists residing in New Mexico, all of whom contracted polygamous marriages before Prest. Woodruff's manifesto, and are aged people."

Referring to the Greenwood woman mentioned in your telegram of to-day, we learn that C. M. Owen approached Noble Warrum some time before the last hearing, telling him that he had heard that Warrum had knowledge of Smoot's plural wife in Mexico, and that her name was Greenwood; and we learn that it was on the strength of this rumor that Leilach swore out a complaint against you. Mr. Warrum denied to Owen any knowledge whatever of such a thing; and after talking with him to-day he made the enclosed affidavit on the subject.

We also enclose a list of the population of our people in New Mexico and Arizona; also a list of Mormon polygamists in Arizona on the 1st of May, 1902; and as they were then nearly all aged men, there are naturally fewer there now, their ranks having been depleted by death.

You will also find herewith enclosed a list of number of sugar stocks owned by the Church in the different factories in Utah and Idaho, as requested.

Respectfully yours, JOSEPH F. SMITH
