James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Minority report in Smoot case-Statehood for Arizona and New Mexico, June 25, 1906

1906-June 25-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

The report of the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections made on June 11, 1906, and signed by Senator J. C. Burrows, chairman, was adverse to Reed Smoot being seated as "a senator of the United States from the State of Utah." However, a minority of the Senate Committee filed a dissenting report in favor of the seating of Senator Smoot. This report was signed by Senators Foraker, Beveridge, Dillingham, Hopkins and Knox. It is this minority report in 50,000 copies which is the subject of this letter of the First Presidency. The last paragraph of the letter illustrates the interest of the Church and of the First Presidency in civil affairs including the anticipated admission of Arizona and New Mexico into statehood. They were admitted separately six years later, in 1912.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, June 25, 1906. Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Brother:

We have just sent you the following telegram: "Secure fifty thousand for newspapers and missions. Letter received. David K. Udall in favor of and Jesse N. Smith was in favor of jointure."

Out of the fifty thousand copies of the Minority Report to be sent to the various newspapers of the country, there will remain quite a number which may be used to advantage and profit in our various missions in the United States. As soon as we learn the number of copies left after supplying the newspapers, we will communicate with you as to their distribution.

When President Udall and President Jesse N. Smith were last in the city we learned that both of them favored joint statehood for Arizona and New Mexico, and this for geographical reasons. With this information it occurred to us that you yourself can better decide as to which or how many of the Stake Presidents you would like to meet, and you yourself arrange the proposed appointment. Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.

1906-December 1-Original pamphlet. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Annual instructions on the care of Tithes. The document is virtually the same as previous annual instructions and will not be reprinted here.
