James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 15, 1906

1906-December 15-Improvement Era 10:225-231 (January, 1907); also Deseret News, December 15, 1906.

As was the custom with the First Presidency during this period, this "Christmas Greeting" was a little more than that; it was a review of the highlights of L.D.S. Church history for the past year.

THE FIRST PRESIDENCY'S CHRISTMAS GREETING Greeting to the Latter-day Saints: The happy Christmas-tide is again at our doors. Another year has gone since we sent you our last Christmas greeting. How many events have occurred during this time for the weal or woe of mankind! Only a few of these happenings will ever be known to other than those immediately concerned. Events of national importance become known almost universally the same day they take place, through the marvelous means of communication of the twentieth century.

The passing year has been pregnant with terrestrial convulsions, and nineteen six bids fair to be long remembered for its volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tidal waves, and numerous other alarming phenomena which impress upon men's minds the unstability of all earthly things, even of the very earth itself; and human governments and society seem to partake of the disquietude and unrest. Thrones are tottering and men's hearts are failing them for fear. The bitter struggle between the Reactionary party and Liberals in Russia presents a spectacle that enlists our sympathy for the downtrodden masses of that vast empire.

The Jews have suffered persecution in its most dreadful form in many of the Russian provinces. Without any given cause great numbers have been massacred by their neighbors under the influence of religious hatred and bigotry. The Polish people feel as keenly today the loss of their independence, as they did when the infamous division was made of their land by their greedy neighbors. The Poles were deeply wronged, they love liberty and independence, and to obtain it they often plunge into an unequal struggle that only fastens the yoke still firmer upon their necks.

The dissolution of the union between Sweden and Norway without bloodshed is a unique event in history. Much credit is due to the wise king of Sweden for the happy solution of this knotty question. The Norwegians are to be commended for the sensible choice they made in choosing King Haakon the VII. Being the son of the Danish king, a grandson of King Charles XV of Sweden, a relative of the present king, and a son-in-law of King Edward of England, he is closely connected with the neighboring dynasties. If relationship counts in politics, he sits securely on the throne of the rock-ribbed land of the sturdy descendants of the Vikings. The Danish nation is industriously developing its agricultural resources, and forcing itself to the front in dairying, poultry-raising and other branches of mixed farming. The emperor of Germany has but one aim, that of making his beloved country great, both on the sea and on the land. To create a navy and maintain his superb army makes the burden of his subjects almost unbearable. The undaunted Hollanders continue their fight against the devouring waves of the North Sea. To keep up and strengthen the dykes requires much thought and enormous sums of money. If the dykes were neglected, much of that thrifty kingdom would become an enlarged Zuyder Zee. Densely populated Belgium keeps her looms and factories busy. Austria-an empire of several nations and races, speaking different languages-has a difficult problem to solve, that of bringing a mass of incongruous elements into a state of homogeneity. Many of the sons of Italy cross the ocean to seek work in our land, but they never forget their sunny homes in their own beautiful fatherland. Spain is recovering from her terrible defeat in the war with the United States. Contrary to the expectations of statesmen, France is building the republic on a solid basis. The government has ventured to separate church and state, making the clergy look to their parishioners for support instead of the state. This will not be accomplished without a hard struggle. England is still the proud mistress of the sea. Canada is rapidly settling up her immense domain, thereby extending the area of food-producing land on the globe. Our own country stands in the foremost ranks of nations. The Executive of the nation has written his name to remain on the pages of history for fearlessness, honesty of purpose and wise statesmanship. General prosperity reigns in the land. Great enterprises have been undertaken. The Panama canal will be the most stupendous of useful works commenced by man. None of the "seven wonders of the world" compare with it. It may take years to accomplish it, but American enterprise is behind it and will make it a success.

The Latter-day Saints have much to be thankful for in contemplating the past year. Abundant crops reward the labors of the husbandman. While in some parts the unusual amount of moisture destroyed the wheat by rust and caused great loss, yet other cereals were grown successfully. Never before in the history of beet raising have such crops been produced. This industry has brought large sums of money into the hands of the farmers, which would not have been realized in the cultivation of other crops. The sheep industry also has been very profitable, wool having demanded a high price, as also has the mutton. We regret that no more has been done in the line of manufactures. Home industries should be encouraged.. We approve of the aims of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing society, and the Merchants' and Manufacturers' association. Much can be done in that line that would help to give the unemployed work and keep our young people at home.

While we are thankful for the general prosperity our people are enjoying in temporalities, we rejoice still more in the spiritual progress that is manifest among the Saints, and this in spite of the bitter and unrelenting opposition which they have met both at home and abroad. Some of those who are weak in the faith may have been affected somewhat by the scurrilous attacks made upon the leaders of the Church, but the majority of the Saints have thereby been more closely knitted together, and have become more determined to honor the covenants they have made with the Lord. They see in the persecution they meet an illustration of the words of the Savior: "If ye were of the world, the world would love its own." They feel a comfort in knowing that in that sense they are not of the world, and they are willing to bear the indignities heaped upon them, knowing that He whom they serve will preserve them and overrule for good what their enemies devise for their overthrow.

The love of the Saints for their religion is shown by their great activity in building houses of worship. The settling of this country has been done under many difficulties. The people were poor and had to produce their all from the soil. They could not build elaborate edifices, hence the log schoolhouse was the first public building in the new settlement, and this had to serve many purposes. Besides being a temple of learning, it was used on the Sunday for public worship, and during the week for amusements, etc. As the people grew in wealth they changed the small log house for the elegant and commodious school buildings that we now see dotting our state. We are proud of what the people have done in that direction, and we doubt whether another state can be found where the same number of people have done as much for the education of their children without state help or endowment as has Utah. The meetinghouses were not forgotten, and in nearly every town and hamlet are found substantial houses of worship. During the past year many church edifices have been finished and a number are now under construction, of which some are very costly. This activity has not been confined to Zion alone, but in the missions abroad, the elders and the Saints have felt the need of having houses of worship belonging to the Church. In Tahiti our people have just dedicated a fine building for meetings, and also a commodious house for the headquarters of that mission. In Aalborg, Denmark, a suitable meetinghouse will shortly be finished. The headquarters for the European mission will soon be located in an excellent building facing Edge Lane Park, Liverpool. A feature of building meetinghouses abroad should not be forgotten, namely, the fact that our elders, in connection with their missionary labors, have been willing to take hold of the trowel, the saw and the paint brush. This has endeared them to the Saints and gained them the respect of outsiders who were acquainted with the fact that they were doing this work without compensation and at the same time meeting their own expenses. The buildings in Tahiti were constructed entirely by our missionaries, and are considered among the best in Papeete. The American consul expressed the wish to have them build a new consulate. One of the elders drew the plans for such a building which were accepted by the government.

During the past year the efficiency of our Church schools has been greatly increased, and the Church has made much larger appropriations toward this end than at any time since the Church school system was established. The aim of these schools is to give our young people a thorough knowledge of the principles of the gospel and implant in their hearts a love for truth, virtue and righteousness, and in addition to this to give a thorough high school course in all of them, and in some few of the schools a college course, preparing our young people to take higher studies at our State University or the universities abroad, if the students desire to qualify themselves in some of the professions. We think that many who go east to study might receive instruction as good, if not better, in our home institutions of learning. We feel much gratified with the good work done in our Church schools and the patronage given them.

Our missionaries have labored zealously for the spread of the truth. The presidents of the different missions are watching over the work of the elders and directing their labors in a systematic way that no place shall be left unvisited, but that all people may have an opportunity of hearing the glorious principles of salvation. The elders are untiring in their endeavors to fill their callings to the acceptance of their Heavenly Father. The results of their labors have been very encouraging, and a great number of baptisms is reported. The number of tracts and books distributed exceeds that of any previous year. An edition of the Book of Mormon in Turkish has been published, and is being distributed among the Sultan's subjects. A translation of the Book of Mormon into Japanese is nearing its completion. Periodicals are being published in several of the missions, and are having a large circulation. Some of the missions desire to have a mission paper printed, to take the place of the tracts, and as this would be published regularly, it would keep before the people new issues arising and the experiences of the elders, as well as explaining the doctrines of the Church. We think such a plan feasible, and that it will be productive of much good.

We feel to commend the Saints for the pronounced union and fidelity manifested by them during the past year. The increase in tithing shows an expanding love for the gospel. The great numbers flocking to the temples bear testimony to the growing faith of the members of the Church in the revealed principles of truth.

The many eruptions, earthquakes and tidal waves which have occurred during the past year are signs which the Savior declared should foreshadow his second coming, although he said his advent should be as a thief in the night, still he gave certain signs which would indicate as surely his coming as the budding trees the coming of summer. The wise and prudent will heed the warning and prepare themselves that they be not taken unawares. Not the least of the signs of the times is this, that the gospel is being preached unto the poor, as a witness unto all nations.

In relation to internal affairs in the various stakes, a healthy, progressive spirit has been manifested in almost every part of Zion. A number of new wards and branches have been organized during the year, among which we may mention the Twenty-fourth ward of the Salt Lake Stake; Turner ward, Bannock Stake; Murray Second ward, Granite Stake; Lost River ward, Idaho; a branch at Tombstone, Arizona, and the division of Smithfield, Cache Stake into two wards.

During the year a number of prominent brethren and sisters have left us to join the great majority on the other side. Amongst them may be mentioned Elder M. W. Merrill, of the Council of the Apostles, President Jesse N. Smith, of the Snowflake Stake, Joseph Morrel of Cache, Charles O. Card, of Alberta, and Counselor Samuel Francis, of the Morgan Stake. As well known pioneers, we may speak of Elders Robert Gardner, of Pine Valley, William Farrer, of Provo, and Moses T. Farnsworth, of the Manti Temple; also Joseph G. Fones and Ebenezer Beesley, pioneer musicians, and Homer Duncan, one of the oldest members of the Church. Amongst our sisters who have passed away, are Mary H. Snow, widow of President Lorenzo Snow; Sarah D. Woodruff, widow of President Woodruff, and Hannah M. L. Smith, the widow of President George A. Smith; and Sister Emily H. Woodmansee, the poetess, and many others worthy of mention, omitted for lack of space.

In conclusion, we sincerely pray that the coming year may be a prosperous one, and that the Latter-day Saints may be abundantly blessed both temporally and spiritually, and that in their prosperity they will ever remember the beneficent Giver of all they receive.

We wish our people a joyful Christmas and a happy New Year.

Your brethren in the gospel of Christ, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND. DESERET NEWS
