James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Establishment of the Liahona, April 5, 1907

1907-April 5-The Liahona 1:6 (April 6, 1907)

According to Andrew Jenson, assistant Church Historian, Benjamin F. Cummings, the publisher of The Liahona, was called "by the Church authorities" to edit this paper published by the Central States Mission "in the interest of all the missions in the United States, Canada and Mexico."

After 11 numbers (weekly) had been published it was considered wise on the part of Church authorities to amalgamate the 'Liahona' with the "Elders Journal, a periodical published in the interest of the Southern States Mission." See Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History, pp. 431-432.

WORDS OF GREETING

In this, the first number of The Liahona, we take pleasure in sending our greeting to all its readers. We hope this paper may be to them what the Liahona was to the little band of God-fearing men and women who left Jerusalem six hundred years before Christ, under the leadership of the Prophet Lehi. It was a true guide to them through the unknown wilderness. When they put their whole trust in the Lord, the Liahona pointed out the direction in which He wished them to travel. This paper has a like mission. Men are pilgrims, and their goal the glorious mansions prepared by Him who gave His life for them. The endeavors of the writers in the Liahona will be to point out the way that leads to these blessed abodes.

Were it not for the many self-constituted guides who confuse the mind of the wanderer and tempt him to leave the true road to walk in and by forbidden paths, it would not be so difficult to find the heavenward way, for this has been shown to men by our Redeemer, and the prophet of old declares that it is so plain that "wayfaring men, though fools, need not err therein." Those who publish the Liahona are not self-constituted guides; they have not taken unto themselves the honor of being priests, but have been called, like Aaron was. Their aim is to present the saving truths of the Gospel in a plain and lucid manner. They will warn the world against error and false doctrines, but will do this in a meek and brotherly spirit, and with no intention of tearing down the religion of others. We bespeak for the Liahona the good will of its readers, and earnestly ask them to read it without prejudice. It will teach nothing inconsistent, or contrary to the Holy Scriptures, but it will throw much light on passages that have hitherto been obscure to the understanding of men.

The Latter-day Saints have a very important message to bear to the world. They declare that God has revealed Himself to the prophet Joseph Smith, and that He has again bestowed authority upon men to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel. This authority has not been upon the earth since the early era of Christianity. The "falling away" predicted by Paul in his letter to the Thessalonians has taken place, and "the man of sin" has been revealed, and hence the great need of the ushering in of another dispensation of the Gospel. That God in His mercy has done this is the glad tidings which the Latter-day Saints in all sincerity proclaim to their fellowmen.

The religion of the Latter-day Saints stands for the rights of all men, whatever their standing may be in society. It teaches tolerance to those of all other religions or no religion. It inculcates obedience and subjection to presidents, kings and rulers; its adherents look upon the constitution of our land as an inspired document, and they teach their children to uphold and revere it. The ethics of Mormonism are expressed thus, in one of the Articles of Faith: "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men," and they endeavor to carry this out in their everyday lives, for with James they hold that "faith without works is dead."

At their own expense and without earthly compensation the Elders of our Church are traveling in all parts of the earth. They testify to the truth of the message entrusted to them, not from belief alone, but from a sure conviction, and so assured do they feel that they are engaged in the Lord's work that they do not hesitate to promise their hearers that if they will obey the principles of the Gospel in sincerity they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and shall know for themselves that this work is of God. They are willing that the doctrines they advocate shall be subjected to the same test as proposed by the Savior to the people in His day, when He says: "If any man will do His will he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself." Thousands have heard the Elders make this promise. They have subjected it to the above test, and are living witnesses of its fulfillment.

The doctrines taught by the Latter-day Saints are not a mere imitation of the teachings of the Apostles as contained in the New Testament. It is the same Gospel preached by them and possesses the same sanctifying, life-giving power, and the same spiritual gifts and powers have followed the believers in our day as anciently.

Wishing the Liahona abundant success in its noble mission and the blessings of the Lord upon its readers, we are as ever, for the truth. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND.
