James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

New movement among the Seventies, June 12, 1907

1907-June 12-Improvement Era 10:927-928

The following three items: the instructions to the First Council of Seventy of June 12, 1907; the letter of the First Presidency to the same Council of October 26, 1907; and the letter to the First Presidency to Presidents of Stakes and counselors of November 6, 1907, are all part of a pattern for improving Church procedures in handling ordinations to the various priesthood offices. All three are largely self-explanatory.

New Movement Among the Seventies.-The following circular was issued June 12, 1907, by the First Presidency of the Church:

To the First Council of the Seventy-Dear Brethren:-We have felt for some time the necessity of increasing the efficiency of our missionaries whom we send into the world to preach the gospel and represent the Church in the several countries where openings can be found for the proclamation of God's message to the people. As the body of the Priesthood over which the First Council immediately preside, the quorums of the Seventies, constitute more especially the missionary force of the Church, we have deemed it proper that they should have improved opportunities for meeting in a quorum capacity to pursue those studies necessary to equip them for the special work of their ministry. At present your quorums are meeting in a very irregular manner, some monthly, some semi-monthly, others once in three months, others weekly, but only part of the year; and under these circumstances your quorums have not been able to follow any uniform plan of studies or any line of work that would give them the kind of training that would effectually prepare them for their ministry. In view of all this, we now direct that you inform the Seventies through communication with the respective councils of the quorums that they are at liberty to hold their quorum meetings on Sunday mornings, at such hours as they may determine upon as most convenient for them, say between 9 a.m. and 12 noon, and at such places as they may be able to secure without interfering with any other organizations of the Church.

We are aware, of course, that this change will affect the relations of some of the Seventies with Sunday School work, but where that is the case, you are at liberty to inform the members of your quorums that they can be relieved of attendance upon and service in the Sunday Schools, except where engaged as superintendents or heads of departments where their places cannot be immediately filled by the selection of others; in such cases it may be necessary to release them as Seventies, have them ordained High Priests, and devote themselves to Sunday School work, unless they, or any of them, prefer to remain Seventies, in which event, they should be excused from attending the quorum classes, a thing which might be done without in any way interfering with the spirit and progress of this work, as the brethren occupying those positions are supposed to be capable men along theological lines. But as the Sunday Schools will have the High Priests, Elders, all the lesser priesthood, and all the sisters in the Church to draw upon for their work, we believe the cases will be very few where it will be necessary to release Seventies from their quorums. In carrying out these directions you will caution your local presidents not to intrude upon the Sunday Schools or their work. All arrangements as to place for holding quorum meetings must be made without disturbing any of their departments or classes. We also suggest that you except out of your Seventies' meetings all those Sabbath days on which quarterly conferences and ward conferences of the respective stakes and wards where the respective quorums meet, in order that the Seventies in common with the rest of the Priesthood may attend these general appointments of the Church; but as these excepted Sundays will not exceed more than ten, the arrangements herein suggested will give the Seventies an opportunity to follow a practical, uninterrupted course of study.

We also suggest that you solicit the co-operation and assistance of the local authorities in bringing to pass these changes, that all may be done in harmony and good feeling. In order to further aid you in affecting these changes, we have written a letter to the Presidents of the Stakes apprising them of these matters, and have asked them to cooperate with you therein.

We further suggest that in connection with securing these improved opportunities for holding your quorum meetings that the First Council outline a course of study that shall have special reference to qualifying men for labor in the mission work of the Church.

Praying God to bless you in your efforts to make more efficient the great body of the Priesthood over which you preside, we are,

Your brethren, Jos. F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund, First Presidency.*

*NOTE-President Seymour B. Young, in behalf of the First Council of Seventy issued a circular to the Presidents of Seventies' quorums, under date of July 12, calling attention to this communication of the First Presidency, ordering such changes in conformity therewith as will place the Seventies upon a studying basis during the coming season. The first meeting under the new arrangements will be held on the first Sunday in November, 1907, at which time a manual for the first year's work is promised, to consist of a course of forty-five lessons on the four authoritative books recognized by the Church as containing the doctrines of the Gospel, viz., the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. The key note of the coming year's work will be, "A workman should know his tools."
