James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Ordination to office of Seventy, October 26, 1907

1907-October 26-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

See note for previous document.

Salt Lake City, Utah, First Council of Seventy, Oct. 26th, 1907.

Dear Brethren:

In passing on the worthiness of candidates to be ordained Seventies, we have concluded, and so instructed the Stake Presidencies, that all recommendations for ordination to the office of Seventy must be made to or by them, whose duty it will be to present the same to the High Council to be passed on by that body; and afterwards to the stake priesthood meeting or other gathering of the Saints, for its sustaining vote. The same procedure to obtain in recommending the passing upon candidates to be ordained High Priests.

In selecting brethren to be ordained Seventies, it is understood that the Stake Presidencies will confer and co-operate with you, to the end that none but suitable men be chosen men most likely to develop ability as preachers of the Gospel, to the end also that the quorums may be filled up and replenished from time to time. And we suggest that now, just before commencing the intended course of study would be a good time to fill up the several quorums with available young men as far as it may be practicable to do so.

And in this connection it would be well to consider your faithful fellow servants who have passed the age limit of missionary service. Our idea is that they should be recommended to the High Priests' quorums as a recognition of faithfulness, where their services might be further utilized by the State Presidencies in the work needed to be done at home, and this that merit may not go unrewarded, and that all available material may be used to the best advantage and for the general welfare of the whole church.

With kindest regards, we are, Your brethren and fellow servants, (Signed,) JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.

P. S. A copy of our letter to the Stake Presidencies is herewith enclosed for your perusal.
