James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Worthiness for Melchizedek priesthood ordinations, November 6, 1907

1907-November 6-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

See note for document of June 12, 1907.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, Nov. 6th 1907. President Nephi L. Morris and Counselors, Salt Lake Stake.

Dear Brethren:

In passing on the worthiness of Elders and Seventies to be ordained High Priests, and Elders to be ordained Seventies, we suggest that recommendations for ordination to these offices in the Priesthood be made to you, or by you, and passed on by the High Council, and afterwards submitted to the Stake Priesthood Meeting for its sustaining vote. Where it may not be convenient to submit such recommendations to the Stake Priesthood Meeting, in that event they might be submitted to a conference or other gathering of the Saints. And we suggest also that all ordinations, as far as practicable be attended to at the quorum meetings.

It is desirous that uniformity obtain in all of the Stakes with respect to recommending and passing on the worthiness of candidates to be ordained Elders. In Stakes therefore where the following method is not in vogue, we suggest that it be adopted:

All recommendations for ordination to the office of Elder to be made by Bishoprics to Stake Presidencies after having submitted the same to and received the sustaining vote of the Priesthood or Saints of the ward at their respective meetings. And after receiving the approval of the Stake Presidencies, the same then to be submitted to the Stake Priesthood Meeting for its sustaining vote; or where it may not be convenient to present such recommendations to the Stake Priesthood Meeting, then to a conference or other public gathering of the Saints.

We have this day directed a communication to the First Council of Seventy informing them that so far as selecting brethren to be ordained Seventies is concerned, it is understood that you will confer with them, and they with you, and that you and they will cooperate for the best interests of the Church at home and abroad in all that pertains to this matter.

We have suggested also that now, just before the course of study in theology to be taken up by the Seventies, would be a good time to fill up the quorums of Seventy as far as practicable, and that in doing so, also in replenishing the quorums from time to time, a studious effort should be made to select brethren likely to develop ability as preachers of the Gospel, and none others, as to do so might in time be the means of embarrassing the quorums with material that could not be utilized in the mission field. The manner of selecting Elders is left with you; but in the absence of a personal knowledge of their intelligence and speaking ability, it would be very proper for you to confer with your Bishops and Elders' Quorum Presidents about it.

And we have suggested also the advisability of recommending faithful Seventies, who have passed the age-limit of missionary service, to be recommended to the High Priests' Quorum as a reward of faithfulness, where their services might be utilized by you in other ways, and this that merit may not go unrewarded, and that all available material might be used to the best advantage, and for the general welfare of the whole Church.

Where quorums of Seventy contain members who, in consequence of age, are unfitted for missionary service and at the same time unworthy of being ordained High Priests, the question arises, what should be done with them?

By way of partially answering the question this must be borne in mind, that such men must not be recommended to the High Priests' Quorum, neither must any body else be so recommended excepting on the score of worthiness; and it will therefore be for the quorums of Seventy who may be burdened with this class of material to purge themselves of it the best they can, a thing they should be encouraged and urged to do, and which may be done in a proper and legitimate way, that is, by the quorums themselves withdrawing fellowship from all such men, after laboring with them without avail, and reporting the action to their Bishops or High Council.

We feel to add that a great deal of labor needs to be done by way of improving the general status of the quorums of Priesthood, both Melchizedek and Aaronic; and that as presiding officers in the Church, we must not permit, in any instance, unworthiness to exist among them; neither should negligence be permitted to go on without special efforts being made to stimulate negligent brethren into a state of life and activity.

And inasmuch as the Seventies are now about to take-up the work of greatly improving the condition of their own quorums by pursuing a regular course of theological study, we suggest that the present would be a most opportune time for you to look into the methods of conducting meetings in vogue among the other quorums, with a view to improving the same wherever thought advisable by you to do so, to the end that interest may characterize the meetings and profitable instruction be deprived from them.

We are, with kindest regards, Your brethren and fellow servants, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND. First Presidency.

P. S. Non-tithe payers may be consistently dealt with in the way indicated, that is, men who assign unbelief in the law of tithing as their reason for not paying tithing, as unbelief in this law clearly renders a man incompetent to bear the priesthood.
