James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas greeting to Saints in the Netherlands, December 14, 1907

1907-December 14-Original Letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See: De Ster, Vol. 13, No. 1, Jan. 1908, pp. 3-6.

A Christmas greeting to members of the Church in The Netherlands.

This letter contains the interesting statement that "The policy of the Church is not to entice or encourage people to leave their native lands; but to remain faithful and true in their allegiance to their governments, and to be good citizens." Whether this is the first announcement of the policy of the Church reversing the "gathering" to America of European Saints has not been determined by the compiler of these messages. References to this same concept, however, appear in the Journal History for January 19, 1899, and the April, 1899, conference reports.

GREETINGS OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

To The Saints in the Netherlands Mission.

We desire to extend to the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and all kind friends and honest seekers after truth in the Netherlands, our blessing and kindly greetings, at this holiday season which is celebrated throughout the Christian world in commemoration of the birth of the Redeemer who through His matchless kindness and mercy, took upon Himself our transgressions and redeemed us, suffering the sins of all men if they will but repent and obey Him. We congratulate you who have paid heed to the testimonies of the Elders who have been sent to you in this dispensation of the fulness of times, clothed with authority and power from on high, to preach the restored Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof. We trust that you will continue to prove faithful and be obedient under any and all circumstances to the call which you have received, that you may enter into His rest and be crowned with the faithful in our Father's Kingdom. For great is the reward of those who receive and faithfully obey the Gospel. How great it shall be has not been revealed to the world, for the Scriptures say: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him. But God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God." (I Cor. 2:9-11).

So great is the love of our Heavenly Father for His children, that He not only gave His only begotten Son that "whoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life," but has given to us the promise that if we will in all humility receive the commandments of His Son, and believe on Him, that we shall become God's sons and be crowned with authority in His kingdom. Paul tells us in Romans 8:14-16 that "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God; for ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs: heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified together."

If the Savior has suffered the pain of all men that all might repent and come unto Him (Doc. & Gov. 18:11) and not be called to suffer as He suffered if obedient to Him (Doc. & Gov. 19:17), then how grateful we should be and with what rejoicing we should praise Him for his loving kindness. And how diligent we should be to teach others that they might also rejoice with us in the truth! The Lord says in the Doctrine and Covenants section 6 and verse 13: "If thou wilt do good, yea and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the Kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation." And in the 18th section: "You are called to cry repentance unto this people: And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people and bring save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with Him in the Kingdom of my Father. And now, if your joy shall be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!"

We feel that we can say of the Saints in the Netherlands, that we esteem them as among the very best citizens. They can be nothing else and be true to their faith, for that teaches them to be loyal to their government wherever they may dwell. A doctrine that is most emphatically enjoined upon the Saints is that "We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law." Moreover "we believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men." Our mission is one of peace and good will; and through obedience to the doctrine of Christ the Saints are of necessity honest, chaste, industrious, frugal, peaceful and law-abiding citizens. Live so that you may have fellowship with God; keep the commandments of your Redeemer and teach others to walk after your example, and you will have the respect and favor of honest, unprejudiced men.

The policy of the Church is not to entice or encourage people to leave their native lands; but to remain faithful and true in their allegiance to their governments, and to be good citizens. We desire that the members of the Church should continue diligent in learning the truth and their duties in the Church toward God and man, and in increasing their faith in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Our Elders should carefully avoid holding out to the Saints temporal advantages or worldly gain, admonishing them that our object is not to hold out temporal advantages or inducements, but above all other things to hold out to them their spiritual and temporal welfare, leaving them to receive such other admonitions and promptings as the Spirit of the Lord may impress upon their minds.

The Dutch people who gather to Zion have invariably been treated with great kindness and consideration by the people of this country and especially by the Latter-day Saints, and have been shown every courtesy due to all worthy people whether native or foreign born; and in many instances have been elevated to positions of honor and responsibility in the communities to which they belong, and we bespeak for the Elders of the Church in the Netherlands and elsewhere and those who embrace the truth and adhere to their counsel, the same kind treatment and fair consideration that we so cheerfully give to people who sojourn with us.

And we desire also to express our gratitude to an abiding love for the people of the Netherlands for the measure of religious freedom that prevails throughout their land, and to thank them for their fair and hospitable treatment of the Elders of the Church who labor without worldly gain for their good and the Saints who dwell among them. We hold the people of the Netherlands in the highest esteem for their many deeds of kindness. We feel sure that the seed of Israel abounds among them and know they have descended from a noble race of men.

In the struggle for religious freedom and untrammeled thought during the "Reformation," no people suffered severer hardships or more cruel persecution or even manifested greater valor and enduring perseverance in behalf of the cause of freedom and justice than the noble people of the Netherlands. And of the great men whom God raised up among the nations of the earth, during that mighty struggle for religious independence, there were none greater, or nobler than the faithful William, Prince of Orange, who sacrificed even his life itself, for his country and cause of liberty, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends."

May the peace and blessing of our Heavenly Father be with the Saints of the Netherlands and throughout the world, and faithfulness to the truth He has revealed abide in their hearts throughout all the vicissitudes of time.

We are, with kind love, Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
