James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Latter-day Saints and secret societies, December 16, 1907

1907-December 16-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The question of Latter-day Saints joining secret societies had been raised with the First Presidency during the administration of each of the three Presidents of the Church preceding President Joseph F. Smith. Presidents John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow had all answered the question to the effect that Latter-day Saints should not join these secret societies and had given reasons for their answers. See Messages of the First Presidency 3:29-30, 278-279, 340-341.

The present letter below, addressed to a Stake Presidency not named, raised the question of members of the L.D.S. Church joining the Modern Woodmen of America Lodge.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Dear Brethren:

Sister Lillian Larsen of Market Lake has written to us under date of 29th ult. asking the following questions:

"Am I right in saying that the Church is not in favor of its members belonging to the Modern Woodmen of America, or lodges of any kind, especially referring to the first mentioned at this instance, as quite a few of our brethren belong to this lodge, and for this reason others think they have a right to join."

Instead of answering Sister Larsen direct we thought it better to write to you, so that you may know the position taken by the First Presidency of the Church on this question, and therefore be able to explain it to her, as well as to all others who may desire to be informed on the subject.

President Woodruff, not long before his death, instructed the presiding priesthood in conference assembled that members of the Church allying themselves with secret societies after having been informed of the counsel of the Church against its members making such alliances, disqualified themselves from entering the temples of the Lord to receive blessings therein, and that therefore all such should not be recommended for temple ordinances.

In taking this position President Woodruff voiced the mind of the First Presidency from the beginning of the organization of the Church, whose counsel has always been against its members joining secret societies; and where our brethren have allied themselves with such organizations without knowing it to be against the counsel of the Church, the advice of the First Presidency, under such circumstances, has been to withdraw fellowship and membership from such organizations just as soon as it could be done consistently and honorably.

We desire you, and all others concerned or interested in this question, to know that, in taking this position the First Presidency have not for a moment considered the merits or demerits of the various secret orders, that it is entirely immaterial to us as to whether their ceremonials are based on biblical stories or otherwise, and that therefore as far as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is concerned they must stand or fall solely on their own merits without a word of criticism for or against them by us.

By way of explanation we will here state that officers of secret societies in their endeavors to get our Church members to join their organizations have held out the plea that no harm could possibly come to them from joining because the ceremonials of their societies were based on biblical stories.

By way of answering such argument it is sufficient for us to say that all secret societies are man-made, and therefore of the world worldly, suitable only for the class of people that belong to them and who uphold and sustain them. In saying this we do not for a moment impugn the motives of those who created the various secret societies, neither do we utter a word of criticism against such organizations. On the same principle we may say that we do not for a moment impugn the motives of those who originated the various systems of religion, neither do we utter a word of criticism against those who honestly believe in them. What we desire the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to know is this: that they can no more ally themselves with any of the various secret societies (after having been counseled against it) without dividing their allegiance with something not instituted of the Lord for the building up of His Zion on the earth, than they can join any one of the various religious denominations and consistently expect to be in harmony with the Church and people of God and enjoy their fellowship.

In this connection we desire to add by way of collateral testimony in favor of the position taken by the Presidency of the Church on this question, that brethren who have belonged to organizations of this character and afterwards withdrawn from them, unhesitatingly say that the effect upon themselves, and indirectly upon their families, was to draw away from the Church, a thing, by the way, which all Latter-day Saints ought to know for themselves without having to learn it by experience.

In order to popularize themselves, and to add to their social character, some of these organizations make it a point to have social gatherings to which the wives and daughters of the members are invited. It is plain to be seen that members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints belonging to organizations of this character not only risk their own standing in the Church by having their own feelings alienated from it, but they jeopardize the faith of their families as well; and to continue in such relations for a length of time means simply this, that by and by they and their families will become like other men and people, that the light which once distinguished them from the world of mankind will gradually, leave them, and just as soon as they become bereft of this light, lo and behold they are then of the world, to be fellowshipped and loved of the world, and at last claimed as its own, and nothing but sincere and genuine repentance, involving much humiliation, can restore them to the fellowship of the Saints of God.

To emphasize this we feel justified in saying that the time has been in our experience as a Church and is now, we very much regret to say, when certain secret societies have used, and are using their influence against us; and we have no assurance whatever that the time will never come when they will not combine their influence against us, and thereby bring home, and make plain that most significant saying of our Lord and Master, He who is not for us, is against us; for without doubt the time will ultimately come when every man-made institution will be arrayed against the Church and Kingdom of God-the only institution of divine origin on the earth, and the only institution that will stand and remain unmoved, while all others will fall, disintegrate and decay.

It is the duty of the First Presidency to guard the interests of the Church as a whole, and it is the duty of your Bishops to guard the interests of the members of their wards, and it is our common duty to counsel our people to shun everything calculated to alienate their feelings from the Church and at last destroy their faith.

It should not be necessary for us to say that every man possessing a knowledge of the Gospel and enjoying the spirit thereof, ought to know without being told or reminded of the fact, that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints must of necessity stand independent and alone, entirely free from alliances with man-made institutions, and as the Church is made up of its members, it follows as a sequence that they in like manner must themselves partake of the same spirit and also be free. And it must be borne in mind that nothing but implicit obedience to the requirements of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ can make us free, and enable us to continue to live in harmony with its spirit and teachings; and it goes without saying, that Elders in Israel, men holding the Priesthood of the Son of God, imbued with its spirit, will have no desire whatever to affiliate with secret societies, no matter what the inducements may be offered to join them.

In closing we repeat, we have no word of criticism to offer against secret societies as such; that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is no more antagonistic to them than it is to the various sectarian Churches; that in fact it is without antagonism of any name or nature; that, on the contrary, it is the rightful bearer of the olive branch, whose mission is that of peace and good will to all men; but at the same time declaring to all men that they must repent and yield obedience to its requirements in order to be saved. And to its members it declares that, in order to remain faithful and true and endure to the end, they must love the Lord their God with all their hearts, and with all their souls, keeping themselves pure and unspotted from the world. And they must know with every fibre of their souls that within the Church and kingdom of God is everything necessary for their salvation, both temporal and spiritual, that within its pale alone is life and salvation, and that without is nothing but ultimate death and destruction.

In the light of these things members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are not justified in allaying themselves with secret societies, as by doing so they Jeopardize their own faith and the faith of those depending upon them, and render themselves ineligible to receive the blessings of the House of the Lord.

Please make the contents of this letter known to Sister Larsen and those referred to by her residing at Market Lake, also to the members of your Stake generally; and please consider this communication as part of your official papers to be turned over to your successors in office to be referred to by them if need be; for it must be understood now and always that to us there is but one brotherhood, one sisterhood, and there can be none other; and that brotherhood, that sisterhood is now as it has been from the beginning and always will be, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and the watchword of its members is now as it always has been, The Kingdom of God or nothing for me.

To all to whom this communication may apply, we say from the depths of our hearts, receive these things as coming from your friends and brethren who have naught but your interest, and the interest of the Saints of God generally at heart, as well as that of all of our Father's family everywhere. And that God may bless you, and enlighten you so that you may receive these things in the spirit in which they are written and be guided by them, we are, Your Brethren and fellow-servants, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.

P. S. We understand there is no organization at Market Lake. Please inform us how many members of the Church reside there.
