James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Order of the Priesthood, April, 1908

1908-April-Improvement Era 11:465-466 (April, 1908).

This is an especially significant statement by President Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church and editor of the Improvement Era because it answers the question of the circumstances under which a loss of priesthood can occur as contrasted to a suspension of the right to exercise the priesthood. Loss of priesthood can only come through excommunication from the Church; right to exercise the priesthood held depends on the bestowal or withdrawal of the right or keys to so exercise. Persons whose right to exercise the priesthood is withdrawn retain the same office formerly held when that right is restored. Persons excommunicated from the Church do not retain their former office or standing in the priesthood.

ORDER OF THE PRIESTHOOD

An officer in the Church in one of the stakes of Zion asks whether a man's Priesthood may be taken from him in any other way than by excommunication. In other words, can a man's ordination to the Priesthood be made null and void, and he still be permitted to retain his membership in the Church; or must he be excommunicated before the Priesthood can be taken from him? The reply must be that only by excommunication in the appointed way can the Priesthood be taken from a person. We know of no other means provided by which a man who has had the Priesthood conferred upon him can be deprived of it. The constituted authorities of the Church may, however, after proper authorized hearing, decide that a man has forfeited his right to act in the Priesthood, and for this cause, he may be silenced, and his certificate of ordination be taken from him, and thus have his right suspended to officiate in the ordinances of the gospel, or to exercise the Priesthood which has been conferred upon him. Then, if he persists in exercising his Priesthood and former calling, he may be taken to account for insubordination and excommunicated.

Several examples have occurred in the history of the Church where men through transgression, duly proved and decided upon by the constituted authorities, have been stopped from acting in the Priesthood, which is just as effectual as taking away their Priesthood would be, if it were possible; but this has taken no ordination from them, and if in such cases the transgressors should repent and make complete and satisfactory restitution, they would still hold the same Priesthood which they held before they were silenced, or stopped from acting. A person once ordained a bishop, an elder, or high priest, continues to hold those offices. A bishop is still a bishop though he may remove to another ward, or for other reason temporarily lose his calling. But in case he is wanted to act in a new office, or place, and the proper authorities call him to act, it is not necessary to re-ordain him a bishop; he would only need to be set apart for his new calling. So with other officers in the Priesthood, once having received the Priesthood, it cannot be taken from them, except by transgression so serious that they must forfeit their standing in the Church. But, as stated, their right to officiate, may be suspended or stopped. The Lord can take away the power and efficacy of their ordinations, and will do so if they transgress. No endowments or blessings in the House of the Lord, no patriarchal blessings, no ordination to the Priesthood, can be taken away, once given. To prevent a person for cause from exercising the rights and privileges of acting in the offices of the Priesthood, may be and has been done, and the person so silenced still remain a member of the Church, but this does not take away from him any Priesthood that he held. JOSEPH F. SMITH.
