James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Authority to perform civil marriages, July 14, 1908

1908-July 14-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This seems to be a case where the need to comply with civil law in the case of civil marriages led to the establishment of a general rule for the Church in which officers of the Church were authorized to perform such marriages. The ruling which arose out of the specifics of the case of Idaho law is, by the last paragraph of this letter, made universal throughout the Church.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, July 14th, 1908.

The following letter was addressed to each of the stake presidents of the Church:

Dear Brother:

The late legislature of the State of Idaho enacted a law requiring all who perform the marriage ceremony in that State to keep a register of time, place, and other particulars of such marriages, and file quarterly with the County Recorder a certified copy of their registers; and in connection with the operation of this new law, the following question was asked us by one of our Stake Presidents of Idaho:

"How many of the officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are recognized by the First Presidency as having authority to perform the marriage ceremony as ministers under the law, and are thereby entitled to registers?"

This question was duly considered by us, and we concluded, and so instructed, in the interest of Church discipline, also in order that all doubt and uncertainty might be removed, that this authority is vested in Bishops and Stake Presidents, the former to act in this capacity within the jurisdiction of their own wards, and the latter within the jurisdiction of the Stakes over which they preside.

This applies also to the State of Utah, and in fact, to every State or Country wherein a Bishop's Ward or Stake exists. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
