James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Religious services at Utah State Prison, September 23, 1908

1908-September 23-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Instructions calling for the rotation among the Salt Lake City Stake of the responsibility for religious services at the Utah State Prison and prescribing general rules for such services.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, September 23rd, 1908. President Nephi L. Morris, Salt Lake Stake.

Dear Brother:

In common with other churches of the city we have been conducting religious services once a month for some time past at the State Prison, the last six months services there having been conducted under the direction of the Presidency of Ensign Stake and we would like you to see that they are continued for the six months commencing the first Sunday in October.

The rules of the Prison prescribe the hour and length of the service, namely, two o'clock in the afternoon, and one hour's duration.

It has been reported to us that usually the prisoners are not seated in the chapel until ten minutes after two o'clock, thus leaving but fifty minutes for the service, and one speaker therefore would be sufficient, who should not aim to occupy more than twenty or twenty five minutes, the balance devoted to a short opening and closing prayer and singing.

As the singing is regarded by the prisoners as the principal feature of the service, it is suggested, as well as desired by them, that you send a quartet of your best singers to accompany the speaker, and among them an accompanist.

At the expiration of the six months, please report to us, making any recommendations you may think proper to offer, at which time we will request the Presidency of one of the other city stakes to take charge of these monthly services for another six months.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
