James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Games of chance-gambling, November 14, 1908

1908-November 14-Improvement Era 12:143-145 (December, 1908).

These instructions state clearly the ruling of the Church on all forms of gambling including raffles, offering prizes to winners in guessing contests, etc. The instructions are given here that it would be better to let Relief Society quilts, for example, rot on the shelves rather than dispose of them by games of chance including raffling. The good intention or the good purpose or cause does not justify questionable means of raising Church revenue. Good ends do not justify questionable means.

GAMES OF CHANCE*

To whom it may concern:-Among the vices of the present age gambling is very generally condemned, Gambling under its true name is forbidden by law, and is discountenanced by the self-respecting elements of society. Nevertheless, in numerous guises the demon of chance is welcomed in the home, in fashionable clubs, and at entertainments for worthy charities, even within the precincts of sacred edifices. Devices for raising money by appealing to the gambling instinct are common accessories at church sociables, ward fairs, and the like.

Whatever may be the condition elsewhere, this custom is not to be sanctioned within this Church; and any organization allowing such is in opposition to the counsel and instruction of the general authorities of the Church.

Without attempting to specify or particularize the many objectionable forms given to this evil practice amongst us, we say again to the people that no kind of chance game, guessing-contest, or raffling device, can be approved in any entertainment under the auspices of our Church organizations.

The desire to get something of value for little or nothing is pernicious; and any proceeding that strengthens that desire is an effective aid to the gambling spirit, which has proved a veritable demon of destruction to thousands. Risking a dime in the hope of winning a dollar in any game of chance is a species of gambling.

Let it not be thought that raffling articles of value, offering prizes to the winners in guessing-contests, the use of machines of chance, or any other device of the kind is to be allowed or excused because the money so obtained is to be used for a good purpose. The Church is not to be supported in any degree by means obtained through gambling.

*In volume six of the ERA, pp. 308-9, in reply to a question, it is clearly shown that all games of chance are disapproved by the Church authorities. Presidents Brigham Young, Lorenzo Snow, and Joseph F. Smith are quoted as strongly opposed to all games of this class. Raffling for the benefit of missionaries is included as not sanctioned by the moral law nor approved by the Church authorities. But the practice in places seems to still continue, and the First Presidency have thought it necessary to issue under date of November 14, 1908, the following statement on the subject, which the officers of our M.I.A. organizations as well as the Priesthood are specifically instructed to heed.

Let the attention of stake and ward officers, and those in charge of the auxiliary organizations of the Church be directed to what has been written on this subject and to this present reminder. An article over the signature of the President of the Church was published in the Juvenile Instructor, October 1, 1902 (volume 37, page 592) in which were given citations from earlier instruction and advice to the people on this subject. For convenience, part of that article is repeated here. In reply to a question as to whether raffling and games of chance are justifiable when the purposes to be accomplished are good, this was said: "We say emphatically, No. Raffle is only a modified name of

President Young once said to Sister Eliza R. Snow: "Tell the sisters not to raffle. If the mothers raffle, the children will gamble. Raffling is gambling." Then it is added: "Some say 'What shall we do? We have quilts on hand,-we cannot sell them, and we need means to supply our treasury, which we can obtain by raffling, for the benefit of the poor.' Rather let the quilts rot on the shelves than adopt the old adage, 'The end will sanctify the means.' As Latter-day Saints, we cannot afford to sacrifice moral principle to financial gain."

As was further stated in the article cited, the General Board of the Deseret Sunday School Union has passed resolutions expressing its unqualified disapproval of raffling and of all games of chance, for the purpose of raising funds for the aid of the Sunday School. And the general authorities of the Church have said, as they now say, to the people: Let no raffling, guessing-contests, or other means of raising money, by appealing to the spirit of winning by chance, be tolerated in any organization of the Church. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
