James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual Christmas pastoral epistle, December 19, 1908

1908-December 19-MS 71:1-6 (January 7, 1909); also Deseret News, December 19, 1908.

The annual Christmas message of the First Presidency for 1908. It reviews the work of the Church in the missions and stakes of the Church as well as conveys a Christmas message.

AN ADDRESS TO THE CHURCH BY THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

As another year is drawing towards its close, agreeable to the custom that has prevailed for a number of years we desire once more to say a few words to the Latter-day Saints by way of our usual Christmas greetings. We shall not attempt to enter into a discussion of the doctrines of the Church, or the principles of the gospel, which have been so abundantly given to the people by the apostles and elders of the Church throughout Zion and the world. We see on every hand unmistakable evidences of the hand-dealings of the Lord with His people comprising the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and with all the people composing the great nation of which we are a part. Not only the people of Utah and adjoining states and territories, but the whole people of our country at large, have been remarkably blessed with a multitude of blessings throughout the year. Prosperity has prevailed in every part of the land, notwithstanding the financial flurry which for a time threatened serious consequences to the business of the country. The seasons have been propitious and the honest laborer has generally reaped abundant returns for his intelligent labors. The world at large has been free from the devastating effects of war, although it has not been altogether free from strife, and the smiles and approbation of the Lord have been shed abroad upon the face of the earth in a remarkable degree, and, we think, especially so in all parts of the world where effort is being made by His servants to lay the foundations of His work and spread the knowledge of truth and of the coming and glory of His kingdom to the children of men. The tendency of the nations to submit their disputes and differences to boards of arbitration instead of deadly conflict on the battlefield, and the peace conferences that have been held in the past with more or less success, and will be continued in the future, are indeed very gratifying signs of the permanent establishment of peace and the cessation of war. We believe this hoped for condition among the nations is sure to come, that righteousness will prevail in every land and the word of the Lord will be proclaimed without fear or hindrance among all nations, tongues and peoples.

THE LABORS OF THE ELDERS

The elders of the Church have labored zealously and faithfully to proclaim the message of life and salvation, both of a temporal and spiritual nature, in all of their mission fields, and have done much towards the establishment of truth and brotherly love; for the spirit of peace, justice, mercy and righteousness emanates from the elders and spreads abroad upon the people among whom they labor. Their mission is one of well-doing and love for their fellow-men. They carry unto the people the gospel of Christ, which through obedience to its precepts will save and exalt them in His kingdom, that will eventually be established and have universal sway throughout the earth as the ancient prophets have foretold.

The demand for efficient laborers in the various mission fields has for a long time been far greater than we have been able to supply. However, it has been our aim to keep sufficient elders in the various nations where we have missions established to carry on the work of the Lord intelligently and successfully, that there may be no unnecessary delay in the spread of the gospel among the people, for we realize that it is to be preached in power among all nations in this dispensation. We have at present elders laboring in Europe, Asia, Africa, and many of the islands of the sea, as well as throughout the American hemisphere. Considering the great number of elders that are kept constantly in the mission fields, exceedingly few of them have proved themselves unworthy of the glorious mission to which they have been called, and a few have laid down their lives while thus laboring in the Master's cause. And while our hearts go out in sympathy to the bereaved kindred and families of those faithful elders thus called home, we cannot but be thankful in the knowledge that there is awaiting them honor and reward akin to that of the martyrs for the cause of truth in all ages of the world. We rejoice in the precious assurance given in the gospel that they and their kindred who remain faithful to the truth will come up together in the morning of the resurrection crowned with glory, immortality and everlasting life. The efficiency, capability, earnestness and devotion to duty of those who have been called to the responsible positions of presiding over the various missions of the world have given us great joy. Not one of these has ever shrunk from any duty or failed to meet any requirement made of him in the faithful discharge of the duties of his presidency. The progress of the work of the Lord under their direction has been exceedingly gratifying and satisfactory.

TREATMENT OF THE ELDERS IN THE WORLD

We are also happy to say upon reliable information that the elders are receiving much more respectful treatment and consideration from the better and more enlightened classes of people. Prejudice is giving way before the spread of correct knowledge of the true character of the great latter-day work through the consistent and persistent efforts of the servants of the Lord; and such opposition as is now met with is generally from the ignorant and misguided classes of men who are blinded by the bigotry and hatred awakened in their hearts by those devoted to priestcraft and political chicanery. And while a determined effort has been made on the part of some bigoted and malicious souls to injure the cause of Zion and retard the spread of the message of truth among the honest-minded people of the world, we are pleased to say that their determination to do injury has been overruled by Divine Providence and has resulted in good, and their influence to-day is comparatively impotent and their attacks are without the results that followed such attacks in days that are past.

HEADQUARTERS OF MISSIONS

This year the Church has expended considerable means in securing and fitting up permanent headquarters in the missions and conferences of the Church abroad. Some of these are fine structures and well suited for the purposes of meetings and homes for the elders. We find that our possessing meeting halls and headquarters gives us greater respect among our outside friends and encourages our saints to make greater exertion to bring their friends to our meetings. It gives them confidence in the solidity of the work and makes it easier for them to follow the instructions given them by the elders not to be in a hurry to emigrate, but for the saints to remain and help strengthen the branches where they live and they themselves become more strongly grounded in the gospel.

USE OF THE BOOK OF MORMON IN MISSION FIELDS

Many thousands of copies of the Book of Mormon have been published in the United States and have been widely distributed by the elders among the people. The result has been an awakening of a lively interest in the doctrines of the gospel and in the divine mission of Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon has been placed on sale in some of the largest and most reliable publishing and business houses in the United States, and it has been listed in their catalogues. The use of the Book of Mormon as a means of spreading the gospel has proved to be very successful. We feel to commend the elders for their efforts in this direction and pray that this work may be continued by them in the future both at home and in foreign fields with equal diligence and good results. The general use of the Book of Mormon by the elders as a means of spreading a knowledge of the gospel and in converting men to the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith is certain to be followed with gratifying results. The book contains a promise to all honest investigators that they shall know of its truth if they will study it with prayerful hearts. Hundreds testify to the fulfilment of this promise. This use of the Book of Mormon is merely a return to conditions that prevailed in the early days of the Church when the elders went forth with the Book of Mormon and many believed and were baptized. Some of the first and staunchest members were converted through reading the Book of Mormon. Among these might be mentioned Presidents Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt, George A. Smith and other members of the Prophet's household, and many others that space will not permit us to mention.

The elders of the Church are the witnesses for Christ in the world that He has again established His gospel, and the world will be judged by their testimonies. The Book of Mormon is a witness of the dealings of God with the ancient inhabitants of this land, which is the land of Zion. It contains the gospel of Jesus Christ and has been translated by the gift and power of God as a means for the salvation and redemption of His children.

THE WORK IN THE STAKES OF ZION

What we have said of the integrity and devotion to the cause by those who have been called to preside in the missions, we can say with equal force and truth of those who have been called to preside in the several stakes of Zion. They are generally laboring with power and zeal among the saints, uniting their hearts with a love unfeigned. The integrity of the saints to the cause of Zion; their fidelity to the principles of the gospel; their knowledge of the latter-day work; their fellowship for one another and for the presiding authorities of the Church, and the marked unity pervading all their assemblies, are highly commendable. Their observance of the principle of tithing which was revealed and established by our Heavenly Father to provide for the temporal needs of the Church, and their improvement in the observance of the Word of Wisdom and the principles of temperance and sobriety, mark their growth and advancement in the knowledge and love of the principles of their religion. Incidents of the recent past have proved the willingness of the Latter-day Saints, who are in full fellowship with the Church, to forego their personal desires and yield their individual preferences on their own volition for the public good, and mark distinctively their individual growth and broadening in the scale of intelligence as well as their integrity to the best interests of the whole.

THE CHURCH SCHOOLS

Our Church schools throughout Zion, which now number twenty-seven and have an enrollment of about ten thousand students, have continued to prosper. Some new and elegant buildings have been erected and others are in course of construction to make room for the increasing attendance. We only regret that the means necessary to meet all the requirements are not equal to the growth and demands of the schools. We feel it incumbent upon us, and a duty that is paramount to all other duties in our schools to teach the youth of Zion love for truth, virtue, honor and purity of life, veneration for the name of Deity, the Church and all sacred things, proper respect for the Priesthood, not forgetting anything essential to a thorough moral and intellectual education. We are impressed that in comparison with these principles and an abiding faith in the gospel all other things count but little in the education of the youth. Let these things be stamped upon the minds of the youth until they sink deep into their souls and become a portion of their very being. We have endeavored to establish our schools on a firm basis, and to have them equipped with the most thorough instructors and supplied with all necessary apparatus for imparting knowledge. They have been raised to a high standard of efficiency in all elementary branches and in some of them the higher branches of education are taught. We commend our Church schools to the Latter-day Saints and desire that they will continue to give them their hearty and well-deserved support, that they may continue to prosper and maintain their efficiency.

THE TEMPLE WORK

Great activity has been manifest during the year 1908 on the part of the saints in their temple work. The spirit to work for the redemption of the dead is resting upon them, and an increased interest has been shown in this work of divine love. This work is, the Prophet Joseph tells us, "essential to our salvation, as Paul says concerning the fathers, 'that they without us cannot be made perfect, neither can we without our dead be made perfect.' " The command of God is for the saints to labor with their might for the redemption of their dead, for, as the Prophet says: "It is the greatest responsibility that God has laid upon us, to seek after our dead." Many of the saints have taken advantage of the opportunities afforded them by the Church in providing a genealogical society where assistance can be given them in this important work. Records are being gathered and information of a genealogical nature is being accumulated for the use of the saints. The Spirit which moves the saints to work for the redemption of the dead is the planting in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers. This same spirit seems to be moving upon the hearts of honorable men of the earth who are spending their time and means in collecting and compiling genealogical records. In Great Britain, and portions of the United States, societies have been organized for the gathering and preservation of genealogies. Vital records and parish registers that have been inaccessible are now being sought for and published in great numbers. It is desirable to obtain as many of these as possible and have them filed away. The saints should take advantage of every opportunity to obtain the records as far as possible of their ancestors, that their redemption through the ordinances of the House of God might be obtained. We commend the saints for their diligence in this most important and essential work.

We wish the saints a pleasant Christmas and that the New Year may bring them much joy and happiness. We pray that the work of God may prosper at home and abroad, that the saints may grow in the knowledge and grace of God, and that the good and honest-hearted people everywhere may hear and understand the gospel of Jesus Christ. JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
