James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual instructions, 1909, January 1, 1909

1909-January 1-Original pamphlet or circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

When these Annual Circulars of Instruction were first issued there was a separate Circular for the Stakes and Wards and one for the Missions of the Church. By 1909, at least, the Circular had been made to include Stakes and Wards and Missions and in this 1909 introduction to the Circular by the First Presidency the statement is made that "The year 1908 has been characterized by an increase of executive and administrative ability in the organizations of the Church."

ANNUAL INSTRUCTIONS, 1909 Circular No. 10

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 1, 1909.

To Presidents of Stakes and Counselors, Presidents of Missions, Bishops and Counselors, Stake, Mission and Ward Clerks, and All Church Authorities.

Dear Brethren:

In order that the presiding authorities of the stakes, wards and missions might be uniformly instructed regarding the details of their administrative duties, "Annual Circular No. 10" is issued.

We desire to commend the brethren in authority for their steadfast devotion to the cause of Zion. They have been unfaltering in their zeal to promote the good work at home and abroad. The interests of the Church and the needs of her members have been faithfully looked after by those holding stewardships unto the Lord. The year 1908 has been characterized by an increase of executive and administrative ability in the organizations of the Church. We feel confident that the year now opening will be marked by achievements and successes somewhat in advance of the year just closed.

We heartily commend the most excellent services rendered by the bishops and the brethren who so loyally supported them in the recent house-to-house visiting of the Saints. No one can estimate the amount of good this splendid movement has already accomplished. It opens to our view the vast field there is for the activities of our teachers among whom should always be found the most capable men among us.

Cottage meetings should be held in every home at least once a year, at which prayer, song, instruction and earnest exhortation should be conducted; and a blessing should be left with every family.

The distribution of slips and envelopes by the lesser priesthood among the Saints at their homes is having a stimulating effect in regard to the regular payment of tithes and offerings and contributions to the ward, and we recommend this practice to all the presiding officers in wards and branches of the Church. And in this connection we desire to encourage the regular and prompt payment of tithes and offerings, that is, where a person's income is weekly or monthly tithing should be paid at those intervals. It will be found to be the most satisfactory method of tithepaying in every respect.

Special attention is called to the weekly meetings of the priesthood quorums in all the wards. We believe this movement will not only increase the proficiency of the priesthood by reason of its educative features, but by bringing all the brethren together once a week they will acquire the habit of regular activity as servants of the Lord. It has the additional advantage of putting the bishop in communication with every home once a week. We like the idea of these weekly reunions of the fathers of the ward with their sons and associates.

We direct careful attention to all the instructions of the Annual Circular, and especially to those parts dealing with bishops' duties, ward clerks' duties, organization of new wards, statistics, titles to property, hospital training for nurses, church historians' records, and other matters of special importance.

In concluding, we congratulate the presiding authorities to whom this circular is addressed, upon their diligence and faithfulness, for we know that great blessings are flowing to the cause of Zion as a result thereof. We feel that the Lord is pleased with their service, and bid them God-speed as they commence another year's labors, so full of promise of reward and success for their continuance in patient and persistent well-doing.

Zion is growing. May our Heavenly Father's tender care be over her every interest, and may He make His servants 'mighty in her defense of advancement. Your Brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
