James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Temperance movement and church-state relations, February 16, 1909

1909-February 16-Copy of original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University Library, Archives. Provo, Utah.

Written on the letterhead of the First Presidency, this reply to the charge that the Church was engaging in politics is signed by President Smith alone. However, the statements made in it follow closely the official pronouncement of the First Presidency made in 1907 on the subject of Church and State relationships. The letter states the intention of the "leading council" of the Church to remain free from taking sides on the question of prohibition. It does restate the position taken in the October, 1908, General Conference on the subject of temperance, thus drawing the distinction between the two.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, Feb. 16, 1909.

Hons. E. H. Callister, James H. Anderson, Thomas Hull. CITY.

My Dear Friends:

Your letter of the 15th inst. came to hand last evening. I have read it carefully and deeply regret the bitterness and injustice and hot words of which you complain. I trust that you know my heart and my loyalty to my friends and the people of our State. My fixed desire for the welfare of all our people has undergone no change; every day of my life I feel thankful for the results of the efforts of my brethren, which have brought success to the State and defeat to her enemies. But for me to enter into a discussion of the subjects referred to, or to align myself, publicly or otherwise, with either party to the contention now agitating the minds of the people, would from my point of view be exceedingly unwise.

I am surprised at the bitterness that has been engendered the minds of many over the question of temperance, and it is extremely unfortunate that any person should drag the Church, or seek to involve her leading council into the question of prohibition either pro or con. It is, of course, universally known that the Church stands for temperance, and therefore the disposition of both parties to drag her into the fight. It seems impossible to segregate the movement of individuals holding a membership in the Church from the Church itself, although from the beginning of this movement I have strenuously endeavored to keep myself absolutely apart and aloof from the participation on either side, and I am determined to remain so.

Let me say that in all controversies he who keeps himself cool, controls his passion and his words, endures insult, without retaliation or recrimination, is the true philosopher and will come out of the contest unscathed although he may be defeated. Speaking to my friends, as a friend, possess yourselves in patience."

With kindest regards, believe me, Sincerely yours, (Signed) JOSEPH F. SMITH
