James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Annual instructions, 1910, January 1, 1910

1910-January 1-Original pamphlet or circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

There seems to have been an evolution (1910) taking place with regard to these Annual Instructions. Whereas previously the instructions concerned themselves almost exclusively with tithes and financial records the annual instruction began to become more of a handbook of church procedure and instructions. Such items as instructions on weekly ward meetings of the priesthood quorums, annual house to house canvass of Bishops and counselors of homes in their wards, the Presiding Bishop's Office as clearing house for all Church memberships now began to come into focus.

ANNUAL INSTRUCTIONS, 1910 [Circular No. 11]

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 1, 1910. To Presidents of Stakes and Counselors, Presidents of Missions, Bishops and Counselors, Stake, Mission and Ward Clerks and All Church Authorities.

Dear Brethren:

The beginning of another year affords a timely and welcome opportunity to communicate once more with presiding authorities of stakes, wards, and missions concerning certain details of their administrative duties. The accompanying instructions, set forth in the briefest and plainest manner, are believed to cover the essential points, and as such they are worthy of careful study. A thorough knowledge of and prompt compliance with the suggestions here given will go far toward effecting that uniformity in method and operation which is so desirable and necessary. With this purpose these pages have been prepared, and it is hoped they will accomplish the end sought.

The year just closed has been one of notable progress and prosperity in all that pertains to the growth and welfare of Zion. A true regard for the obligations resting upon them, and a worthy zeal in discharging every duty, have characterized the labors of the Priesthood generally and the efforts of the local presiding brethren in particular. These watchmen upon the towers have been vigilant and energetic, and as a consequence, security and peace have prevailed within. Almost without exception there has been everywhere manifested a lively sense of responsibility and a commendable spirit of activity, the fruits of which are increased vigor and healthfulness throughout the entire body of the Church. Nor is it enough to note merely these gratifying evidences of spiritual welfare; it is a pleasure to state that there has also been a marked increase of executive and administrative ability. In that which may be defined as the temporal phase of their official labor-in ministering to the needy and afflicted, in the care of the Church property, the collection of statistics, the keeping of records, the preparation of reports, etc., etc.-the work for the year just closed has been done with a thoroughness and an excellence alike creditable to them and acceptable to us.

It will be seen that a material reduction in the amount of clerical work heretofore called for has been effected in the reports required for 1910. Without enumerating here in detail these reductions, it may be broadly stated that for the present year this work for wards is about one-third less, and for stakes about one-fourth less, than last year. We are sure these changes will meet with grateful approval.

Attention is also specially directed to the new instructions regarding recommends of members of the Church who move their residence from one ward or stake to another. Earnest efforts have been put forth in recent years to purge and correct ward records, and to trace transient members, perhaps long lost sight of. In the course of this work it was found that through neglect, or thoughtlessness, or carelessness, a surprisingly large number of members have failed to identify themselves with wards into which they have moved; and by the lapse of time, as well as from various other causes, they would seem to have lost all evidence of their membership in the Church. It is hoped this deplorable condition will be corrected for the future by the system referred to elsewhere in this circular. According to this plan the Presiding Bishop's Office becomes, as it were, a clearing-house for recommends; and if authorities of wards from which members move, and authorities of wards to which they come, will comply promptly with the instructions now given, it is believed that much of the difficulty and embarrassment of the past will be avoided.

A single year's experience with the weekly ward meetings of the Priesthood quorums has sufficed to confirm abundantly the high hopes entertained for this plan as an agency in increasing the efficiency of the Priesthood. Every excellent result which was looked forward to has been shown to be within reach-every doubt or objection has been swept away. Where regularity of attendance at meetings and intelligent study of the "Outlines" have prevailed, the anticipated benefits have invariably been attained. The ward authorities have been brought into close and frequent touch with the male members of their wards, by means of which they have acquired accurate personal knowledge as to the status of those under their watch care. The social aspect of the meetings is altogether valuable, while their educational and faith-promoting character can be exactly what the members and instructors choose to make it. We applaud the good work already done in this direction, and commend the matter further to you as worthy of your best attention.

The system of an annual house-to-house canvass of their wards by bishops and their counselors has again yielded splendid results. It is most heartily recommended as an ideal means of (1) affording encouragement to acting ward teachers; (2) establishing a bond of brotherhood and affection between shepherd and flock; and (3) detecting lukewarmness, indifference, or even iniquity-should such exist-while there is yet time to apply a remedy. In this connection, previous counsel as to the importance and value of cottage meetings is renewed and emphasized. The Saints are stimulated to further good works by that interest in their welfare which is shown by a personal visit with them. Surely in no other surroundings can the true feelings and condition of a family be so well observed as when mingling with them at their own fireside.

Our convictions have undergone no change, and our counsel requires no modification, as to the matter of tithe-paying "in the time and season thereof." By precept and by example the Saints should be encouraged to comply with this great law promptly, regularly and honestly, in order that they may have claim on the blessings which are predicated upon it.

The innovation introduced a year ago, in connection with what is known as the ward maintenance fund, has proved under practical operation to be eminently satisfactory. Explanations and instructions concerning it will be found on a later page, and attention is again invited to them.

In conclusion, we congratulate our brethren upon the loyalty and faithfulness manifested by them in their labors of the past year. They themselves serving the Lord with diligence, and leading others to the paths of righteousness, they are laying up great treasures.

May His protection and blessing continue to attend the Cause of Truth, and be bestowed richly upon its advocates and defenders.

Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, JOHN R. WINDER, ANTHON H. LUND, First Presidency.
