James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Death of President John R. Winder, March 28, 1910

1910-March 28-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 7:670 (April 9, 1910).

John R. Winder was born December 11, 1821, at Biddenden, England. He was sustained October 17, 1901, as first counselor in the First Presidency at the age of 80 and died March 27, 1910, at the age of 89.

DEATH OF PREST. WINDER, March 28th, 1910.

To the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Beloved Brethren and Sisters:

It is with feelings of sadness and regret that we are called upon to announce to you the death of President John R. Winder, our fellow-servant and associate in the Quorum of First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which took place at his residence, No. 49 North West Temple Street, this city, at seven twenty o'clock last evening.

As you know, President Winder was taken with pneumonia some nine weeks ago, during part of which time we were encouraged in the hope that he was going to get over his sickness and we be favored with his association again. But Providence having decreed otherwise, it remains now for us to bow to the will of the Lord, and acknowledge His hand in this as in all other things.

In the death of President John R. Winder we are not only deprived of the association of a friend and brother, not only of an associate and fellow-servant in the cause of God our Heavenly Father, but we sustain a personal loss as well, a loss which we deeply feel and which none, outside of his immediate family, can so fully appreciate and sense, for he truly was an advisor and counselor eminently worthy of his high calling.

While we mourn with the family and friends of President Winder we also rejoice with them because of the peaceful change and well-earned rest which has now come to our beloved brother, and the glorious reward awaiting him; and we part with him in the fond hope of a joyful reunion in the society of those whom we all love, and who, too, have labored and gone before.

That God our Heavenly Father may comfort the bereaved family and bless His saints throughout the earth, is the desire and prayer of

Your Brethren and fellow-servants, JOS. F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND.
