James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Encouragement to missionaries, December 27, 1910

1910-December 27-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 8:434 (December 27, 1910).

A letter of encouragement to missionaries.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

December, 1910 Editor Liahona the Elders Journal:

We send greetings to Liahona the Elders' Journal, to the Mission Presidents, the Missionary Elders and Sisters and to the Saints represented by it. We desire, in our hearts, to commend the workers in the cause of truth, one and all, for their diligent and faithful labors during the year now closing. We congratulate all concerned on what has been accomplished, also for the bright prospects ahead, of accomplishing still more and greater good.

We sincerely hope and pray that every Missionary will be able to enter upon the duties of the New Year, in the spirit of renewed determination, to labor still more diligently, and that too, without harboring the least feeling of doubt, or discouragement, ever bearing in mind that it is for us to labor and for God to give the increase. Bearing in mind also, that while men must be susceptible to truth in order to receive truth, the missionaries must likewise be susceptible to the operations of the Holy Spirit and render themselves capable of being directed and guided in the ways of the honest in heart. To be thus qualified they must labor devotedly, with an eye single to the honor and glory of God.

Our constant prayer is: that our fellow laborers, the missionaries, may ever be found faithful and true, and in the line of their duties; preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom to all people and nations, to whom they are sent, at the same time keeping themselves pure and unspotted from the sins of the world. We pray that we at home may be equally diligent and devoted to the work of building up Zion and the redeeming of our dead; that through the power of unity, under the blessings of the Lord, we may succeed in accomplishing the work that has been given to us to do-that Zion may be prepared for the coming of the Lord.

JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, JOHN HENRY SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
