James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Important to the people of the British Isles, February 6, 1911

1911-February 6-MS 63:136-139 (March 2, 1911).

This article and the three which immediately follow it in this volume may be thought of as a unit illustrative of a development occurring in L.D.S. Church history in 1910-1911. There appeared, beginning in the later months of 1910, a nation-wide magazine campaign of slander against the Mormon Church and particularly against its President, Joseph F. Smith. This national campaign in the United States also attracted international attention. Not all newspapers, however, were unfavorable towards the Mormon cause. Illustrative of two prominent newspapers that were willing, in the midst of the magazine slanders being published, to open their columns to communications in answer from the First Presidency were the London Evening Times in England and the Oakland Tribune in California. The articles by the First Presidency appearing in these two newspapers are reproduced below together with the official statement of the First Presidency answering the magazine slanders which was read at the April, 1911, General Conference of the Church. It should be noted that this latter statement or address read April 9, 1911, "was adopted and endorsed by unanimous vote of the congregation, composed of representatives of the members of the Church in all the world."

The background for this anti-Church magazine crusade or assault is discussed by B. H. Roberts in some detail in CHC 6:413-417.

IMPORTANT TO THE PEOPLE OF THE BRITISH ISLES. Salt Lake City, Utah, February 6th, 1911.

Editor, The [London] Evening Times,

Dear Sir:-In response to your letter of enquiry, dated January 18th, we offer the following statement: "The scope of the operations of our creed in Great Britain and Ireland," and "the doctrines we wish laid before the public," may thus be summarized: The operations of the work in which we and our missionaries are engaged, consist of an earnest and persistent propaganda which is not confined to any particular class or area but is to "every nation and kindred and tongue and people;" as it is the preaching of the gospel of the kingdom "for a witness to all nations" that the second advent of the world's Redeemer is near at hand. That gospel has been greatly perverted during past centuries but restored in its fulness by the angel spoken of in the Apocalypse (Rev. 11:6, 7, corresponding with Matt. 24:14). It proclaims the opening of a new divine dispensation, that of "the fulness of times, spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began," (Eph. 1:9, 10). The "Creed" referred to is epitomized by the Prophet of the nineteenth century in

THE ARTICLES OF FAITH OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

The establishment of the latter-day Zion on the American continent occasions the gathering of the Saints from all nations. This is not compulsory, and particularly under present conditions, is not urged, because it is desirable that our people shall remain in their native lands and form congregations of a permanent character to aid in the work of proselyting. There are many, however, who have relatives in Utah or who see opportunities there to better their temporal condition and therefore cannot be dissuaded from emigration. These are organized into companies, under competent direction, to protect them from fraud and render their journey safe and economical. They travel chiefly in families. Sometimes single persons, male and female, go with them for company. The Church does not in any instance furnish the passage money of a ticket for sea or land transportation. The individuals either have their own money, or it is given or lent to them by relatives in Utah. Nor does the Church offer inducements for emigration. It has no land to give or sell for such purposes, as popularly supposed.

The notion that young girls are enticed to go to Utah is another popular error. They are advised not to emigrate unless accompanied by some relative or relatives. The records kept at our office in Liverpool-295 Edge Lane-are open to inspection by proper persons and show the name, age, sex, condition, destination, etc., of every person emigrating through that office, and prove that which is here set forth, the majority being males, only a small percentage being girls between sixteen and twenty-five years of age, and these are either members of families emigrating or have proper certificates from relatives or families to whom they are going. The White Star and Dominion lines of steamers convey our passengers to the United States or Canada, and their books will substantiate these statements. The sensational stories circulated periodically to the contrary have no foundation in fact.

Our position on the marriage question is one on which much misinformation is current. We believe in the eternity of the marital covenant and condition when it is solemnized according to former Divine commandment, revealed anew in the present generation, being for time and eternity instead of merely until death. The plural marriages of the ancient patriarchs we regard as sacred to them and approved of God. Modern laws being opposed to their present practice and our creed directing obedience to secular law, this Church does not authorize or permit such unions, but since October, 1890, has forbidden them, not because they were then viewed as sinful, but because they were pronounced illegal by the highest judicial tribunal. They were made Malum prohibitum, if they were not Malum in se, and so this Church supports the State on this important matter. At no time, however, was polygamy or plural marriage practiced or permitted in the British Isles, nor was it entered into, even previous to the time of its cessation, by any but a small percentage of the Latter-day Saints.

Further particulars concerning our doctrines, practices, organization, history, prospects, the resources of our community, with literature on doctrinal points, can be obtained on application to President Rudger Clawson at the headquarters of our European Mission, 295 Edge Lane, Liverpool, England. We have nothing to conceal, either as to our faith or our works, but are pleased to give correct information to all who desire to know the truth. We testify before Almighty God and all mankind that the Lord, through Joseph Smith the martyred Seer of the nineteenth century, has commenced the great work of the latter days and that he will bring it in due time to a glorious consummation; and we subscribe ourselves,

Yours very respectfully, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, JOHN HENRY SMITH. First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
