James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

To Ministers of the Gospel of all denominations and the public of Great Britain, May 1, 1911

1911-May 1-Deseret News, May 6, 1911; also London Times, May 1, 1911.

PRESIDENT SMITH'S DECLARATION

H. Perry Robinson, special correspondent of the London Times, on his arrival here, secured a statement from President Joseph F. Smith for publication in the London Times, which was cabled to the Times last Saturday night and appeared in the English journal the following Monday morning. The cablegram sent by Mr. Robinson follows:

Times, London:

The President of the Mormon Church has given me the following for publication in the Times.

To Ministers of the Gospel of all Denominations and to the Public of Great Britain:—

With a view to counteracting the misrepresentations now being made in England and in the hope to establish the truth, I declare that during the nine years of my presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints no man in the Church having one wife has been permitted to take to himself another, and no one in authority in the Church has been permitted to perform such a marriage under pain of being excommunicated from the Church. No person in any land is invited to become a member of the Church with the expectation of living in any other marriage state than that which obtains in all Christian countries; but all persons are invited only to join us as brothers in Jesus Christ and to share the fullness of grace vouchsafed to us as we believe in revelations. The Church enjoins on all its members obedience to the laws and to all properly constituted authority. Any statement to the contrary or which ascribes to the Church any willingness to countenance or encourage any form of immorality or loose living whatsoever is false and will bring condemnation on its authors. We ask you to unite with us in opposition to all appeals to passion or prejudice at this time and earnestly solicit the most searching investigation into the conduct of our members in every community of the Church. We pledge ourselves to do all in our power to assist in such investigation. May the blessing of God be with you always.

The above was also read and approved by Presidents Lund and John Henry Smith, who with President Joseph F. Smith, constitute what is called the first presidency of the Church. It is therefore official to the fullest extent. All unite in requesting me to impress through the Times on the English people the extreme desire of the leaders of the Church for an exhaustive and dispassionate investigation. ROBINSON.
