James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Secret orders, July 25, 1911

1911-July 25-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter to the Presidency of the North Weber See again gives instructions regarding the handling of cases where members of the L.D.S. Church had joined secret societies. It refers once more, as did the letter of the First Presidency on December 16, 1907, to the instructions of President Woodruff shortly before his death to a General Priesthood meeting of the Church. For more details on the various instructions issued by the First Presidency on the subject of secret or oath-bound societies or organizations see the note to the December 16, 1907, document earlier in this volume.

These particular instructions are signed by Anthon H. Lund, first counselor, "On behalf of the First Presidency."

SECRET ORDERS

The following letter was received from the First Presidency under date of July 25, 1911, in answer to the question from the Presidency of the North Weber Stake as to the issuance of Temple Recommends to members of the Church who belonged to Secret Societies:

"Dear Brethren:

"This is in answer to yours of the 21st inst.

"Sometime before the death of President Wilford Woodruff, he announced to the priesthood meeting, consisting of the general, stake and ward authorities and others, that members of the Church who would join secret societies debarred themselves from the Temple, and ever since that time this policy has been maintained.

"Should, however, there be any member or members of your stake who have joined secret societies without knowing that the policy of the Church forbid their doing so, special consideration might be given to their cases, but in that event even, they should be advised to withdraw from such organizations. Or if it be found that they have become financially involved to an extent that they can not well afford to lose what they may have paid by withdrawing from the society, they might be advised to retain their interest in the society without affiliating with it, the idea being that affiliation on the part of members of the Church with the secret organizations only tends to lessen their interest in the church of which they are members, which requires their undivided devotion and fealty.

"ANTHON H. LUND, "On Behalf of the First Presidency."
