James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 4 ( 1970)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 16, 1911

1911-December 16-MS 74:1-6 (January 4, 1912); also Deseret News, December 16, 1911.

Again this annual Christmas message is more than a message of the birth of Christ. It is a "pastoral" epistle on the condition of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for the year 1911.

John Henry Smith, second counselor in the First Presidency, died October 13, 1911. Charles W. Penrose was sustained as second counselor December 7, 1911.

CHRISTMAS MESSAGE FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY FROM THE "DESERET NEWS"

"Joy to the world, the Lord will come And earth receive her King, Let every heart prepare Him room And saints and angels sing."

This stanza from a favorite hymn among the Latter-day Saints heralds the second advent of the world's Redeemer, at whose first coming angels sang the famed refrain:

"Glory to God in the highest, And on earth peace, God will toward men."

The anniversary of that wondrous birth is held in all Christian countries on December 25th, and that day we gladly celebrate. Ancient prophecies foretold the Savior's birth as the Babe of Bethlehem, the Virgin's Son, and these are often repeated throughout Christendom: numerous predictions of His triumphant return as the King of Kings, the Lord of the whole earth, appear also in sacred writ, but they are not so often quoted, and when they are referred to are usually interpreted in a mere poetic and figurative sense. To the Latter-day Saints the language of the prophets is as literal in one case as in the other. We look for His coming and His Kingdom as certain verities, as much real as His nativity and His crucifixion. So, while we commemorate the past great event, we anticipate the future grand and glorious re-appearance of the Prince of Peace.

The preparation of the world for the consummation of the hopes and desires of poets, sages, philosophers and seers has been in gradual progress for many centuries. The very means employed by the enemies of the Christian faith to crush it have resulted in waking up the world to contemplation of its beauties and its benefits, and lifted it high above every other religious cult and creed. The change wrought has been a miracle. Jesus of Nazareth, born in obscurity, reared in lowliness in a little village of a small country under heathen bondage, cast out as an impostor by His own tribe and race, "despised and rejected of men," condemned as a malefactor, and to a most ignominious and horrible death, is now recognized among the foremost nations as the grandest personality that ever walked the earth. His character is lauded, His example is held up for emulation. His doctrines and precepts are cited, in theory at least, as divine, and His influence for good is recognized as an ever-increasing power upon mankind.

All this shows a mighty movement towards the crowning event of this world's-history the coming of the Christ to claim His own, even dominion over the world that He redeemed and bought with His own blood. But something more is evidently needed to bring into organized form and force the varied agencies extant, into a living, potent body with definite principles and powers in unison and concord, forming a nucleus for that government over which the Anointed One shall reign. That cannot be accomplished by mere human agency. Its origin, inception and conduct must be divine. The Kingdom of God, spiritual or temporal, must be set up by Deity or it will be but the work of man. It is the mission and pleasure of the Latter-day Saints to proclaim the establishment of the Church or spiritual Kingdom of Christ, anew, to be developed into His literal earthly Kingdom at His personal advent.

While commemorating the Redeemer's birth and hailing His anticipated coming and reign, we also rejoice in the birth of His servant and prophet the forerunner Joseph Smith, which occurred on December 23rd, 1805, to whom He appeared and upon whom He conferred authority to introduce the last dispensation and restore the fulness of His gospel with all its former doctrines, ordinances, gifts, priesthood, apostleship, orders, spirit and powers. This institution is set up. It is a living fact. It is making its way among men and nations. God is in it. Christ is its living, heavenly head, and at this Christmas time it is the chief cause of our jubilation. It is no mere dream or pleasant fancy but a veritable reality in which our lives and our labors are centered.

As the years march on we find at each Christmas celebration new cause for congratulation and satisfaction. The way is opening up for our work of gospel proclamation. Our devoted missionaries, numbering about two thousand, are gaining ground in the leading countries of the world and prejudice is giving way before the light of truth. In Great Britain, Holland, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, some agitation was excited during the past summer by designing persons against our missionaries in false reports which were echoed by many preachers and writers. The old canard was revived that young women in large numbers were being enticed to emigrate to Utah to become plural wives. The most monstrous stories of immoral conditions here were repeated from pulpit and press and a furor was aroused which threatened to drive our elders from those countries and did occasion much violence. In England appeals for stringent measures were made to the government by prelates and other prominent persons, who accepted the rumors without inquiry as to the facts, and these led to official investigation which demonstrated the falsity of the tales that were told and the folly of those who repeated them. It also established the good conduct and character of the "Mormon" missionaries, who, giving their time and talents without pay, were carrying the gospel of Christ to all nations, and proved that the Church they represented furnished no means for emigration purposes, or other inducements or persuasions to bring young or old, males or females to Utah. The rebound of public sentiment has helped the cause thus maliciously assailed and attention has been thus turned to the great latter-day work of the Redeemer. Similar results have followed the uprising in other nations, and while some temporary mischief has been wrought, the good that has followed it will be permanent.

Religious toleration is aiding our cause in parts of Switzerland and Germany where local influences had been unfavorable. In Hungary and Austria freedom has been granted to our churches. The work in France is spreading and Paris is now added to our open fields of labor. Holland and Belgium continue to yield good results. Japan presents no hostility to our faithful brethren, who still engage in conquering the obstacles of a difficult language and of customs and ways so foreign to those of the Caucasian race as to seem almost insurmountable, and the fruits of their toil are sufficient to give joyful encouragement. Among the Maories of New Zealand, the Samoans and the Hawaiians of the Pacific Islands, great success is achieved and the gift of language is a marked and wonderful sign of the working of the Holy Spirit in the direction.

In our own land the elders are received in every state with respect and attention, and where mobocracy once raged and personal violence was met, hospitality and courtesy greet them and investigation takes the place of derision. Yet there is much misunderstanding of our message and our intents, and many otherwise intelligent people are in dense ignorance of our doctrines and our character. This was glaringly exhibited in the objection raised against the silver service presented by the people of Utah, including thousands of Sunday school children, because one tray in the collection portrayed the monument erected in Salt Lake City to the pioneers of 1847, surmounted by a statue of their leader, President Brigham Young. The acceptance of the offering suppressed the hysteria excited by misinformation, and the launching of the magnificent vessel with the cognomen of Utah impressed the whole nation favorably towards this commonwealth.

The visit here of President Taft and his inspiring addresses were highly appreciated. His great speech in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Arbitration and Peace, thrilled his immense audience, and found a cordial response in the souls of a people devoted the cause of universal brotherhood and union. His presence and his keen observation of conditions here aided in bringing about that knowledge of our purposes and patriotic sentiments which desirable and must result in good to Utah. That which is good for the state is helpful to the cause that is dear to so many of its people, whose love of their country is part of their religion.

The tour of the Tabernacle Choir to New York and other cities of the East has opened the eyes of hundreds of thousands of our fellow citizens to the fact that the "Mormons" are not the ignorants uncultivated people supposed, but are an intelligent part of the great human family, with aims and desires and souls akin to those of the best. Our singers melted the frost and ice of disfavor that prejudice had formed, and their sweet music caused a flow of good feeling that turned sneers and scorn into ringing cheers of welcome and applause. The great charm of their presence and performances was the spirit that inspired their heartfelt harmony which reached the hearts as well as the ears of the listening throngs.

The erection of the Hotel Utah in this city, and other elegant and substantial structures is a standing mark of the utilitarian genius of the system that we seek to promote. Hosts of visitors are thereby impressed with the evidences afforded that the "Mormons" are not mere dreamers or religious zealots, but practical and progressive workers with business minds, ready to adopt all modern methods and developments for the general welfare. That splendid hostelry is the realization of a plan put forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the establishment of the Nauvoo House, as "a delightful habitation and a resting place for the weary traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion;" * * * "A good house worthy of all acceptation." It has already effected much good in the desired direction, and while its management and operation are not conducted by the Church, the property itself is a valuable asset and a credit to the Church to which many of the stockholders belong.

The great victory for the temperance cause in Utah, resulting in the abolition of the liquor traffic in all the "Mormon" towns and villages, and with but few exceptions elsewhere in the state, is one of the many causes of rejoicing during the present year, and augurs well for future advancement. The progress made in the cause of education, the additions to our district and high schools and university under state direction, coupled with the splendid growth and improvement in our Church academies, colleges, normal schools and other institutions of learning, on which large sums of money have been expended, give encouragement to gifted teachers and professors, as well as to the rising generation and their parents who are imbued with the spirit of scholastic training.

The bountiful crops this year, the success that has crowned our sugar industries, the extension of our commercial organizations, the coming together of enterprising people of differing faiths and parties for mutual benefit, the change inaugurated in our methods of civic government, the increasing sentiment against all forms of vice and for the suppression of disorder and crime, the upward movement in our amusements, substituting intellectual recreations for dancing, card-playing and similar diversions, are indications of improvement and progress, in which all lovers of the race may find cause for gladness and thanksgiving.

The work performed in our holy Temples for the living and for the dead has been continued during the year with but slight, yet necessary intermissions, and the interest shown by the Latter-day Saints in the sacred ordinances of salvation is truly pleasing, both to God and man. Genealogical information has been greatly increased, by which the saints have been able to trace their ancestry and join their family links so as to proceed on sure lines in the vicarious work for their departed progenitors, to the joy and satisfaction of all concerned.

While we have had many causes of congratulation since last Christmas, there have also been trials and sorrows to bear. The scythe of death has cut down many stalwart souls; several faithful laborers in foreign fields have laid their weary bodies down while absent from home and loved ones. When practicable their remains have been brought here and laid to rest in their family burial places. The bereaved have the sympathy of all their co-religionists. Prominently among the departed warriors in the army of the Lord are those faithful leaders in Israel, John Henry Smith, counselor in the First Presidency, and John Smith, the Presiding Patriarch. Their presence and influence are sadly missed, but the knowledge that they finished their earthly missions and are needed elsewhere, affords comfort and hope to those who remain in this mortal sphere. Others of the great and good brethren and sisters have joined the hosts on the other side of the veil, and while we feel the pangs of their loss, the multitudes of the good among whom they now mingle are joyful at their presence.

The erection, during the past year, of monuments to Oliver Cowdery, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, a sharer with the Prophet Joseph Smith in Divine ordinations and manifestations; to Christian D. Fjelsted, a great Scandinavian missionary; to Orson Pratt, the famous preacher, author, astronomer, philosopher and pioneer, and other mementoes to illustrate champions of eternal truth, are worthy of this special mention, and presage further memorials in token of our admiration for the virtues and heroic deeds of other departed worthies.

The opportunities that have been accorded by the press for the publication of historical facts and declarations of the truth concerning our faith and works, in refutation of false and libellous magazine and newspaper articles, have been frequent and potent in defense of the right, and are greatly appreciated by fair-minded readers of all persuasions. They are indications of the coming age of peace and good will and the overthrow of error, malice and misrepresentation. We desire to aid with all our powers the spread of true intelligence and the virtues that the Christ taught and exhibited in His life and character, and we gladly hail each Christmas celebration as helpful in the dissemination of the true Christian precepts and spirit.

Festivities on these occasions are timely and to be commended. But they should be tempered with moderation and never indulged in to excess. Let jubilation be rational and merriment be kept within proper bounds. Christmas gifts are suitable when such as the givers can reasonably bestow. The children should be made glad, the poor be remembered, families be united, faults be forgiven, charity extended and animosities be subdued. We offer benedictions to all mankind. God bless the Saints who are under covenant to serve Him always. May His favor go forth to all nations and peoples. May the tight of truth prevail against the darkness of this world, and joy and gladness chase the sorrows of troubled hearts and lift the souls of the downtrodden and the weary to heights of heavenly bliss. And may the glad refrain of the angelic host at the Savior's birth become a universal chorus, reverberating over the whole earth, and be materialized in the lives of mankind, paving the way to the coming of the great King to reign forever more! A merry Christmas to all, bringing forth a happy and prosperous New Year! JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
