Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Foreword

A Woman's Reach brings together some of the significant writings and addresses of Belle S. Spafford of the period from 1971-74, a particularly productive, significant era in an eventful, fruitful life of a great woman leader.

It has been my privilege to be present when some of the messages of this book were delivered as addresses by President Spafford. The responses from those who listened to her were always the same; women relate to her and seem to feel she is their "voice," for she speaks with understanding and knowledge of the world of women. She is familiar with their concerns and their feelings, and is aware of the challenging, ever-changing complexity of the society in which women live.

As president of the worldwide Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Sister Spafford has been an influential, respected leader of women; she has wielded influence for good also in national and international organizations. Her wise counsel and undeviating adherence to correct principles and sound social and moral values have been as a guiding light and a beacon to Latter-day Saint and non-Latter-day Saint women alike.

I recall being with Sister Spafford in a large Eastern city at a meeting of a national women's organization of which she was a member of the executive committee. The room was filled with distinguished women each of whom was a strong, articulate leader in her own right. A particularly thorny and difficult issue was being debated heatedly. Finally, the presiding officer turned to President Spafford and asked her to voice an opinion on the problem. In her thoughtful, measured way, Sister Spafford analyzed the matter, stating the issue fairly, without rancor or confrontation, and offering, at the same time, reasonable options that could be accepted by all present.

After a few moments' silence, one of those present rose and in a subdued voice said, "What Mrs. Spafford has just proposed calls to my mind our insignia [a lighted candle with the words "Lead Kindly Light" written in the smoke trail]. We have today been led by the 'kindly light' of Belle S. Spafford."

Sister Spafford is a woman's woman who understands the anxieties and frustrations of women in a changing world. The message of this book, however, is one of hope and encouragement.

"The primary concern of Latter-day Saint women," she says, "should not be with the impact of the changes that are taking place, except as we need to understand them to cope with them wisely. . . . Our primary concern . . . is that we shall firmly position ourselves in preserving the enduring spiritual values which time and the prophets have taught us are unchangeable and which are the guarantee of the stability of our homes and the eternal well-being of our children."

The title of this book, A Woman's Reach, is particularly significant, for it conceptualizes Sister Spafford's deep conviction that wisdom and "treasures of knowledge" are within the reach of women to help them meet their responsibilities and develop their individual capabilities. As a woman gains understanding, knowledge, and skills, her horizons expand, making her reach boundless. Her influence also becomes incalculable as she brings this knowledge and experience to her family.

It is a pleasure to introduce A Woman's Reach, a book that I feel sure will provide good reading, food for thought, reassurance, and wise counsel for women today.

Mayola R. Miltenberger

Relief Society General Secretary-Treasurer
