Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 2

Tribute to Mormon Women

My years of experience have taught me that the same set of values that brought the women of pioneer days through the shoals of life to peaceful and secure shores will also bring them safely through today. Experience has also taught me the advantage and blessing it is to be a Latter-day Saint in today's troubled world.

All too many people do not have the right concept of the place of women in the Church today. A short time ago I was interviewed in New York City by a news reporter. One of his first questions was "How do you feel about women in the Mormon Church having to be submissive to the men?" This question implied that he had the impression that Mormon women held a place in the Church inferior to that of men. This is not the first time I have encountered such an erroneous impression. This, no doubt, is prompted by the fact that women do not hold the priesthood.

Those of us who are Latter-day Saints know, however, that women hold a position of dignity and respect. Their talents and abilities are recognized and respected; endless opportunities are afforded them for the development and use of their capabilities. They stand side by side with the men in the home and in the work of the Church. The natural differences between men and women are recognized, of course, and each is assigned a division of labor in the home and in the Church in harmony with the respective nature and the divine mission of each as set forth in the scriptures.

Through the years high tribute has been paid to women in the Church by distinguished leaders. I cite a tribute from a book entitled Women of Mormondom, by Edward Tullidge, which was first published in 1877, less than half a century after the Church was organized.

An epic of women! Not in all the ages has there been one like unto it.

Fuller of romance than works of fiction are the lives of Mormon women . . . —so rare in the elements of experience,—that neither history nor fable affords so perfect an example. . . .

Women with new types of character. . . . Women with their eyes open . . . , who have dared to enter upon the path of religious empirefounding with . . . divine enthusiasm. . . .

A later tribute comes from President David O. McKay, ninth president of the Church. As I arose to leave a meeting with him about one year prior to his death in January 1970, he detained me, saying he had a special request to make of me. This was his request, as I recorded it in my notebook:

As you go out among the women of the Church in the days ahead, tell them—young and old—that I am convinced the Church has never had a generation of more righteous, dedicated, or better trained sisters, obedient to Church authority, true to their beliefs. Their influence is beyond measure in the building of the kingdom.

I agree with President McKay—the contribution of our present-day women to the Church is phenomenal. I am aware, however, that much has been given to Latter-day Saint women, and where much is given, there is an accompanying right for much to be expected in return.

President Harold B. Lee paid a unique tribute to women as participants in the family partnership in the home as well as to the place of Relief Society in the welfare program of the Church:

I would like to think this: A wife in a home, a woman, is expected to be not just a scrub woman and a housekeeper, but she is expected to be an intelligent and inspired participant in the family partnership. That is just where we think the place of Relief Society is in the Welfare Program. We do not expect that the Relief Society shall merely be scrub women and housekeepers. We expect that they shall be invited in as intelligent participants in the planning of the Welfare partnership, and without that invitation and without that opportunity, we are not going to get the solidarity that we otherwise could expect. (Relief Society Magazine, December 1946, p. 814.)

Latter-day Saint women are unique among their contemporaries by virtue of being Latter-day Saints with their special beliefs and standards. In declaring ourselves to be Latter-day Saints, we must know that people have a right to expect that our attitudes, our speech, our conduct, our goals will fully support our professed religious beliefs and Church standards. Let us so live as to merit the tributes paid to women of the Church by those who preside over us.
