Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 3

Women: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow

In 1833 a few bold women formed the first woman's club with a political purpose: the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society.

In 1848, a conference that was in reality a gathering of neighbor women was held in Seneca Falls, New York, and issued the first "Declaration of Independence" for women.

Forty years later came another highly significant event: a convention convened March 25, 1888, in Alboughs Opera House in Washington, D.C., to observe the fortieth anniversary of the first public declaration of women's rights. The convention was called by the National Women's Suffrage Association. Two giants of the early suffrage movement—Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony—were the key figures. One of their primary purposes in calling the convention was to further the cause of woman's suffrage.

In addressing a meeting preliminary to the convention, Susan B. Anthony, with all the earnestness of her strong nature and in a voice vibrating with emotion, according to historians, set forth far-sighted views. Said Mrs. Anthony:

We have now come to another turning point and, if it is necessary, I will fight 40 years more to make my platform for the Christian to stand upon, whether she be a Catholic who counts her beads, or a Protestant of the strictest Orthodox creed—these are the principles that I want to maintain: that our platform may be kept as broad as the universe, that upon it may stand the representatives of all creeds and of no creeds—Jew or Christian, Protestant or Catholic, Gentile or Mormon, Pagan or Atheist.

Invited to attend this convention were representatives of national women's organizations or organizations whose programs were of national significance and who had demonstrated interest in the cause of suffrage. Mormon women had been conspicuous figures in the national women's suffrage movement, and so they were included in the conference. Many foreign women were also invited. The chief outcome of this conference was the formation of the National Council of Women of the United States, to be made up of national organizations, and the formation of an International Council of Women, to be made up of the national councils of the respective countries.

The National Council of Women of the United States played a highly significant role in achieving suffrage for women of the United States through the adoption of the 19th Amendment to the Constitution in 1920. The International Council has helped the women of many nations to win national suffrage.

The Relief Society and the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have been continuous members of these councils since their founding. We honor the councils for the way in which they have held to the concept of an aggregation of organized women dedicated to improving conditions for women and children worldwide and for their interest in the preservation of stable home and family life.

During the past fifty years, however, tremendous changes have taken place in the world, many of which have definitely affected woman and her traditional role. The base of women's life, which traditionally was the home, has been shifted to the marketplace, halls of learning, the political arena, the community center, and elsewhere. Woman is being enticed, if not forced, to carry not only her world-old duties of mother, householder, teacher, and the living conscience of her contemporaries, but at the same time, she is expected to accept new duties and interests in community, working world, native land, and international affairs. In so doing, she finds herself competitive with man in her labors and contributions. But in the eyes of many women, she remains subservient to man in many areas of human relationship, as well as under-rewarded in opportunity advancement and financial remuneration. This situation many women have come to resent.

This resentment has given rise to intensifying the women's movement, which is commonly referred to as "women's liberation." In the beginning, the so-called women's liberation movement, as I understand it, was not a strong federation of women's organizations with common, well-defined goals. Rather, it was a sort of loose, unstructured movement. It was small groups springing up here and there throughout the country—in fact, the world. They were inclined to be demanding and militant in character and were not united with regard to their specific goals—goals that were, in large measure, sectional and set by leaders afire with special grievances.

The general goals might be summarized, however, as a demand for the extension of women's rights and the removal of all discrimination against them.

Today, the women's liberation movement has calmed down somewhat insofar as its militancy and radicalism are concerned. Straight-thinking women leaders have analyzed the factors contributing to its rise. Its goals have been more reasonably evaluated and more clearly defined. Procedures for obtaining these goals are becoming better structured and are falling into more conventional patterns. For example, existing conservative and highly respected women's organizations are being enlisted to bring about what is regarded as proper action in relation to women in the light of their changing life patterns.

Nonetheless, opinions with regard to what the movement should accomplish are still forthcoming and often widely differ. A distinguished New York woman who has kept close to the women's liberation movement says of it, "What began in the 1960s as a small but significant tremor in the fabric of the social structure of our country has grown into the shockwave of a major earthquake."

Then she analyzes the reasons for the movement as follows:

[An] increasing number of women . . . , having had their children, are returning in increasing numbers to professional, educational, and business employment. Middle income women are returning to work because the home maintained by two incomes can achieve a higher standard of living, accumulate savings for children's education, and assure greater security for the ingredients of a richer life. In addition, some women are finding that they get a psychological lift out of holding their own in business or professional activities—by being contributing members to the economic system.

But problems have arisen. Many women have found that while they have been away, new technology has produced new ways of doing things. They need retraining. Colleges, slow to recognize this, are only now catching up.

Meanwhile, another ferment is growing. Single women and wives already employed find themselves locked into too narrow a range of jobs in business, government, and many other fields. There is a point beyond which few women can go. Higher level jobs are open only to men. This began to be obvious early in the '70's. Something was going to explode. Marching right along with this, then, came the Women's Liberation Movement and a Sexual Revolution. Both aimed at woman's rights.

Many women of the 1970s are asking for a reorientation of social values that will accept them as human beings with rights and responsibilities. They are fighting for a changing recognition of the status of women, for family planning programs, for the elimination of all discrimination against women, for measures to promote women's rights in the modern world, and for the formulation of programs for the personal advancement of women.

It appears to me that the so-called women's liberation movement has fallen into three periods, beginning in the early nineteenth century: (1) the struggle for suffrage and a recognition of woman's right to vote and hold elective office; (2) a period of awakening on the part of women to the fact that with privilege comes its concomitant "responsibility"—that in meeting her responsibilities, woman must prepare herself through education, training, and experience; and (3) the present period, a period of action, a period when woman sees herself not only as a woman with rights and responsibilities, but also as a citizen, obligated and capable of dealing competently with home and community life. Numbers of women today are concerned with and are making their contribution to the same grave national and international issues as are men. I have noted with interest that at two recent National Council of Women conferences, there have been in attendance a number of men. There was a time when men wouldn't have been seen at a women's conference, nor would the women have admitted them. Today, the tendency is to join hands as citizens. "Partners in development" is a new and frequently used term.

A movement is now gaining momentum to elect women to public office, an area where their progress has been extremely slow after fifty years of voting; women have not elected their fair share of women to office, it is claimed. Today, the aim is to elect their full share, and to do it fast.

At a recent conference of the National Council of Women, four targets were presented that member organizations might properly work toward in behalf of women. These targets demonstrate a new approach to the accomplishment of the goals of the so-called women's movement. They are:

So women move on, facing the painful problems of change, with conservative women's groups trying to preserve the traditional values of home, family, and community life, seeking to be more effective in their contributions to a better world, aroused over what they regard as unjust discrimination against them, and, at the same time, striving to further their personal development and more fully satisfy their self-interests.

What, then, of tomorrow?

At the present time it appears that women will play an increasing role in public life, and home and family life patterns that have already undergone great change undoubtedly will be further restructured. I believe, however, that the family as the world's most basic institution and the cornerstone of a decent society will remain so, since the fundamental social and human needs are best met within the family. The family still has and will continue to have, I believe, the fundamental role it has always had as the best anchor of the individual human being. Its potency in effecting a good life for all, as well as a better society, can be continued through the intelligent efforts of women.

I believe material aspects of the home, as well as the physical aspects upon which we are so centered at the present time, will need to yield to more intensified effort in the preservation of the moral and spiritual values. Home as a sanctuary for family members—a place of love, understanding, the sharing of responsibilities, and peace—is far more important than its physical and material character. Parents will need to look more closely to their own characters and teachings and to serve as an example to their children with a better organization of their time so as to spend an increasing number of hours with their children in free and easy communication. Homes will need to open their doors more widely to religious training where children will have a belief in a Supreme Being who watches over them, who cares about them, and to whom they must ultimately be accountable. These values will preserve the home in a chaotic and changing world and enable it to continue to function as the greatest social institution for the well-being of the individual and the society.

I believe women can successfully achieve these goals. They found the right path through the fog beclouding their way in past eras; I am confident they can find their way today through the darkness and confusion of change.

Family love and togetherness hold sway in millions of homes and have done so for generations. These and similar spiritual experiences are among the richest blessings of life. They are the precious values that I believe women will not forfeit, no matter how enticing will be outside interests.
