Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 4

The Monetary Value of Housework

Two decades ago, at a conference of the International Council of Women in Helsinki, Finland, Dr. Jeanne Edar, ICW president, said: "Today's generations are fated to stand on the frontiers of this new development [atomic energy], gazing with awe into a future destined to be very different from the past." She pointed out that "woman must continue to carry out her age-old duties of mother, householder, educator, and the living conscience of her contemporaries, but she must also accept new interests and duties in the community, working world, native land, and international relations. . . . the days ahead will need our work, our meditation, and our choice of values.

She urged—indeed, she challenged—women to be guided in their decision-making by sound reasoning, unsusceptible to propaganda, as they worked for the preservation of the home as a vital cornerstone of society and for the community as a strong and vital force in citizen well-being.

This far-sighted prognosis, made with regard to a future greatly changed from what we had traditionally known and with an indication of woman's part in new developments, has literally come to pass.

Women generally, in most countries of the world, have moved into the new day with energy and very much in harmony, I believe, with the appeal of Dr. Edar—primarily influenced, of course, by the strength and depth of their respective cultural traditions as well as by national circumstances.

The average woman today is better trained than was her mother to enter the labor force, including the professions. Today more than 15 million women in the United States have had at least some college training—more than twice as many as two decades ago. Concomitant with this training, there also exist more and better work opportunities. In addition, declining family size and rapid technological improvements affecting households in industrialized countries have pushed increasing numbers of married women into the labor market, as has economic need influenced by inflation. Woman's contribution to community life that affects human well-being grows increasingly significant. Furthermore, a wide range of opinion contends that participation in community life encourages the development and use of woman's abilities. With children off to school or departed from the parental home by marriage or job opportunities, the bright, energetic woman finds her days aglow with lustre as she engages in community life on a paid or volunteer basis rather than dull as she confines herself to home.

Yet, withal, housework is still the principal activity of about half of our adult females. The typical United States housewife spends fifty-seven hours a week caring for home and family, according to one study. The average work week in industry is forty hours. These facts are supported by other studies. The demands made upon a woman who assumes the dual role of homemaker-housekeeper and wage earner in industrialized countries are heavy indeed. The question is asked, What effect will this have upon her eventually?

Recently a team of researchers at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, boldly ventured to put a dollar value on the average family's household work. The researchers made clear they were not placing a dollar value on the housewife. They declare there is no dollar value that can be placed on a housewife.

One eminent authority has pointed out that a housewife has the job of managing the household, caring for children, doing endless chores associated with housework. Society generally views her efforts as basic to a healthy society. It is impossible to come up with a value for a housewife because it is impossible to match all the tasks she has to perform to job market pay.

There are certain aspects of the care of children that cannot be bought—things for which no one can substitute for the caring mother-housewife—such as comforting children when sick, attending a school play to see them perform, serving as a voluntary aide on a school field trip, offering understanding discipline to a child in a temper tantrum, giving advice on a range of problems great and small. This role is perhaps the heart and soul of housewifery.

A sociologist described family work as the true satisfaction of creating a home, the personal relationship with husband and children, and the atmosphere of hospitality, serenity, culture, warmth, or security a woman gives to the home by way of her personality. The sociologist asks, "Who would attempt to invent a ledger entry for this?"

Judge Regnal Garff, distinguished juvenile court judge in the state of Utah, supplied statewide figures on children coming before the juvenile courts for disciplinary action for the years 1971 and 1972. The pertinent figures were the percentage of children referred whose mother was working or where both parents were working—which totaled up to 35 percent of the youngsters referred to the court in 1972 and 37 percent in 1971. In the largest urban center of the state, the figures were appreciably higher. In 1973, 14 percent of the mothers only were working, and 28 percent of both parents, for a total of 42 percent. Said Judge Garff:

So obviously in the urban areas, where work for women is more easily obtainable, the percentage of children referred for delinquency is considerably higher where the mother is working outside the home and attempting to carry the dual responsibility of homemaker and wage earner.

Our [juvenile court's] primary concern with the working mother is the measure of the social value of having a mother in the home—the social value to the children. . . . The most valuable commodities she has "to sell" in the home are security, stability and a daily model for the children to follow, particularly young girls. I don't know how you could place a monetary value on these factors. . . .

Security and stability are needs that every young person has from birth until he is on his own. . . . The need for these commodities, offered best by mother in the home, extends beyond the pre-school years. . . . She is as a banister, something that is there which a child can grasp and hang on to when he feels unsure of his own strength. I think this is a fair simile.

Judge Garff concludes:

The woman concerned with the economic well-being of the community does not lose sight of the costs to society of a delinquent child which all too often becomes an adult criminal later, nor does she underestimate the financial saving to her community of rearing a law-abiding child. Costs of dealing with a delinquent youth are phenomenal. The average cost per child institutionalized in a reformatory is now $10,000 per year. In a residential home offering concentrated treatment, it is much higher. Administrative costs of the courts grow increasingly high as referrals increase and more probation officers are needed.

In summary, Judge Garff says:

It would be difficult, if not impossible, to place a price tag on the value to society of a mother who rears a child with a sense of community responsibility and who is law abiding.

In consideration of these points of view on the monetary worth of a housewife, the expert researchers of Cornell University, whose work was extensive and thorough and whose intent was to have findings reliable and useful, confined their studies to the monetary worth of housework as being more measurable.

Briefly, here is a summary of their survey:

Researchers at the New York State College of Human Ecology at Cornell surveyed 1,378 families. The purpose of the use of time study was to develop a measure of the monetary worth of household work. Household work was defined broadly to designate the multiplicity of purposeful activities performed to produce the goods and services that enable the family to operate as a family.

The researchers concluded that an average family defined as a mother and a father of a preschool age child and an infant spends sixty-seven hours a week on household duties such as cooking, shopping, housekeeping, nursing care, for which a fee is paid when this service is given on a "for-hire" basis. The mother was responsible for fifty-six of these hours. (Figures varied a little, differing with numbers and ages of children.) From a complex scale of hourly rates applied to different kinds of work done in these sixty-seven hours, from marketing, management and record-keeping, food preparation and after-meal cleanup, house care and maintenance, yard and car care, care of clothing, physical and other care of family members, the researchers came up with the figure of $8,600.00 yearly as the average worth of household work, with the wife and mother contributing a lion's share.

The clear relationship of time contribution of the husband to the household is with the hours of his employment. The husbands in the study who worked less than 40 hours per week (15% of all) contributed 2.1 hours per week to the household. Those who worked 40 to 49 hours a week (52%) contributed 1.7 hours. Those who worked 50 or more hours (33%) contributed 1.2 hours a week. Clearly, husbands are work oriented and one might ask if increased contributions to the work of the household could be expected.

In general, less time was spent on any of the homemaking activities when the mother was employed.

The study analysis concludes by saying:

It is important that a family recognizes both the costs and benefits that are associated with work for the family and the employment of the husband, wife and older children if work decisions are to be made rationally and reasonably. What are the costs and benefits of alternative choices? It must be recognized that many of the benefits are intangible and cannot be measured; nevertheless, calculating a dollar equivalent for this set of household services may increase the chances of making satisfactory decisions about the use of each family member's time.

Finding the economic measure of the value of such services need not mean that you will ignore the nondollar values, rewards and satisfactions the family receives from them. True value is decided by the individual and the family; the money value can be but one objective measure of the work that goes into making it possible for the household to operate as a unit in our complex world.

Where a woman's circumstances lead to the decision that she must assume the dual role of homemaker-housekeeper and wage earner, she often looks to the community for services that will help lighten the burden. Some communities offer established and well-regulated programs and services. Other programs designed to aid these women are in the legislative mill in the United States, with some approved but not yet implemented, and others in the talking stage only. I cite such provisions as day care centers for preschool children even extended to free care; tax relief; adjustments by industry in work hours, including vacation periods for working mothers; and time off during child bearing; government, university, and privately endowed training programs in housework and child care designed to upgrade homemaking as a para-professional employment, with a proper wage. (It was the opinion that this would increase the availability of women for this service. A number of experiences, however, have not found this to be true. These programs have not attracted women in any significant numbers. Funding is also a primary problem.) It is felt by some women that there should be greater acceptance on the part of industry of part-time employment of women, particularly graduate housewives; not to use these women is considered by some a waste of trained personnel.

Each of these programs to which I have referred has its proponents and its opponents. Women, therefore, have a special responsibility to study them, weigh their ultimate affect on themselves, their families, and society at large.

Recalling again the words of Dr. Edar, in their decision making, women must be guided by sound reasoning, unsusceptible to propaganda, as they measure their responsibilities toward the preservation of the home as a vital cornerstone of society, and their responsibilities toward strengthening community life, which affects every family member as a citizen of the community. In her efforts to strengthen community life, the sensitive woman does not lose sight of her role in community development that will help her to meet her dual responsibilities to home and society.

The Latter-day Saint woman is fortunate in having firm guides from the Church to help her in her decision making. She learns through these teachings that her primary role and divine mission is homemaking and child rearing, and in this she finds her greatest development, joys, and satisfactions.
