Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 5

The Wonderful World of Women

One day I tuned in on my radio to hear an announcement that began, "At a time when people are wondering where we are heading. . . ." Then the announcement continued, "The program The Twenty-first Century will tell you the exciting challenges that lie ahead as a new century opens."

Questions related to woman and her future are being asked on every hand. On an elevator in New York City recently, a woman, who apparently knew me but whom I didn't recognize at the time, said, "Mrs. Spafford, is woman really gaining or losing in this topsy-turvy world? Where is she heading and what path should she follow in order to live a satisfying and socially productive life? I'm totally confused."

My ready and enthusiastic response seemed to surprise her: "We should be gaining, for we are living under very favorable circumstances. We are each one a part of a wonderful world of women."

Never have women had greater influence than in today's world. Never have the doors of opportunity opened wider for them. This is an inviting, exciting, challenging, and demanding period of time for women. It is a time rich in rewards if we keep our balance, learn the true values of life, and wisely determine priorities.

As I look at most women today, particularly young women of purpose, with whom I often talk, I am impressed with the advantages they enjoy for personal development and attractiveness.

Generally speaking, such women are modestly but fashionably dressed. They have charm, gracious manners, refinement of speech. They have well-developed talents. They are cultured human beings, able to carry on an intelligent conversation because they keep themselves well informed. They have preserved their femininity, their womanliness. (Femininity is a very special, almost indefinable quality. Webster defines it as womanliness, but he infers that this is an inadequate definition, since he offers in italics, by way of interpretation, this statement: "She kept her femininity even in greasy overalls, because she was a woman and wished to be identified as such.")

Woman is by nature different from man, not only biologically, but also in her social sensitivity and in her spiritual responses to life. In my opinion, it was never intended that she be otherwise. It was never intended that she take on masculinity in character or appearance.

Today's world offers to woman as never before opportunities for the development and enlargement of her womanly traits and graces. Which one of us does not value such opportunities? Which one of us would want to go back to the little bag filled with cornstarch to be used as face powder, to rainwater in which to wash her hair, to mutton tallow for cold cream, to sunbonnets and long calico skirts sweeping the dusty sidewalks, with few if any laundries or dry cleaning establishments? Which one of us does not treasure her recreational and cultural opportunities? These are women's blessings in a wonderful period of time.

Grateful as women may be for these blessings, the average energetic woman today feels troubled, I believe, because she feels trapped or pressured by having unwisely and unduly involved herself in too many activities without being sufficiently discriminating as to where her efforts would be productive of the most good, or by failing to recognize where she might, to her advantage, forgo certain activities.

The average woman today, I believe, would do well to appraise her interests, evaluate the activities in which she is engaged, and then take steps to simplify her life, putting things of first importance first, placing emphasis where the rewards will be greatest and most enduring, and ridding herself of the less rewarding activities.

The endless enticements and demands of life today require that we determine priorities in allocating our time and energies if we are to live happy, poised, productive lives.

Priority, as I understand the word, means receiving preference or taking precedence because of importance or quality. Countless women as individuals and as members of organized groups are seeking to understand better the activities that should have priority in their lives, but many of them are confused in so doing by new demands being made upon government and society by some organized groups of women who are seeking to enlarge the sphere of opportunity for women and to give them greater recognition. New and disturbing philosophies are also presently abroad that question or even reject the principal roles of women as being the traditionally accepted ones of wife, mother, homemaker, teacher, and humanitarian.

It is my conviction that in the minds of most women, however, the home and family are still regarded as of first importance and should hold priority among the activities that engage their time and energies.

This opinion is born out by an opinion poll that was conducted during the autumn of 1970 and whose findings were announced in January 1972. Interviewers spoke with a cross section of 1,000 women and men; here are some of their findings:

More than two-thirds (two out of every three females, or 71 percent) consider taking care of a home rewarding and extremely important. They see themselves as "homebodies" and consider that their own housekeeping and child-rearing functions are as rewarding and as important as any men's jobs. The survey showed that 68 percent of the men agree.

According to the survey, women want a right to hold their own opinions; and on issues of great concern today, they do. They want to feel that they are an important part of the world in which they live; and for the most part, they actually feel that they are.

The survey further shows that a plurality of women favor change but shy away from undignified protest; they feel that "leaders of some women's organizations are trying to turn women into men," and they maintain that won't work.

Asked what they find most enjoyable about being a woman today, a majority of the women surveyed cited the following in order:

It is significant that only a small minority cited new freedoms women enjoy today, such as job opportunities, educational freedom, being able to have a career, and more sexual freedom.

An analysis of the study indicates that the home and family are regarded as being of first importance in the minds of the majority of American women, and that they hold first priority among all activities that affect the lives of women, men, and children—an opinion that I personally share.

Homemaking, as I view it, falls into two major divisions: homemaking and housekeeping. Homemaking takes into account the spiritual values: love, peace, tranquillity, harmony among family members, security. It makes of a place of residence a spot to which family members can retire from a confused and troubled world and find understanding and rejuvenation. Its character is quietness; it evidences good taste, culture, and refinement. Men, women, and children alike have their individual contributions to make to good home and family life, and each shares in its benefits.

Housekeeping involves the work of keeping a house clean, orderly, and well managed. This includes financial management, failure in which often becomes a source of family friction.

Many organizations and institutions, as I understand their programs, make significant contributions to both aspects of a good home. These organizations include the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We also have in the United States a great national organization known as the American Mothers Committee, Inc., which embraces all faiths and looks with favor upon the pooling of their viewpoints and the coordinating of their efforts in behalf of home and family life that will produce happy, productive citizens who will be able to accommodate themselves to the changes and stresses of our times but still cling to traditional social values that are in accordance with everlasting truth.

The American Mothers organization contends that the foundations of good family and home life are built on moral and religious values, and that young women need training in the important field of homemaking. It offers courses to its members under the title "Young Mothers Council Service." Other women's organizations, recognizing the need of instruction in homemaking and family life, also offer guidance; and a number of colleges and universities have splendid family living departments.

The American Mothers Committee, Inc., annually selects the American Mother of the Year. In selecting the American Mother from among the fifty state mothers—each chosen by her respective state from among many candidates—six basic qualifications are considered:

Thus we have a picture of what is regarded by one organization as the ideal in American motherhood.

While the functions of the home remain the same as in earlier years, homemaking procedures have been greatly changed to the advantage of the homemaker by technological advancements. Much drudgery, familiar to women of the past, has gone out of the home, and many highly desirable comforts and conveniences have come into it, giving the homemaker more time for self-improvement and, hopefully, more time with her children. The woman today holds her high position as homemaker under extremely favorable conditions.

Devoted and intelligent as we may be with regard to the activities within the walls of our own homes, we must not be blind to the impact upon them and upon our children of the social environment about us and the potency of the impact upon the attitudes, development, and behavior of our children. Women today need to sense their responsibilities toward strengthening community virtues, for the sake of their own homes and families if for no other reason. They need to be aware of the power of their influence in the establishment of community standards.

Next to home and family life, I would regard the acceptance of citizenship responsibilities as needing priority consideration in the light of present-day circumstances. Women should wisely use their influence in community life through the exercise of the franchise granted to them with the adoption of the 19th Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1920, one of the very precious privileges of our day. The privilege of the franchise came as a result of more than seventy years of dedicated efforts on the part of the women of the nation and has proved to be an important factor in the creation of the abundant life women enjoy today.

A third priority I would suggest is humanitarian service. The volume and quality of voluntary service given by women is noteworthy. Ours would be a sorry world indeed if we were denied this service. In my judgment, every person—be it man or woman—owes it to himself or herself, as well as to his fellowman, to share voluntarily with others without financial compensation something he possesses—be it time, talents, professional skill, or financial means.

Today's wonderful world offers abundant opportunities for well-oriented and wisely directed voluntary service, from which flow satisfactions and rewards attainable in no other way. President David O. McKay declared, "Homemaking and humanitarian service are the highest and best in women's realm."

I am not a crier of doom, nor do I feel the world is falling apart. On the contrary, I believe we live in a good world today regardless of its tension, insecurities, pressures, social upheavals, and the endless changes to which we must adjust. We are heirs to a progressive civilization. This is a wonderful world for women. The richness, the hope, the promise of life today, particularly for women, are exciting beyond belief. Nonetheless, we need stout hearts and strong characters; we need knowledge and training; we need organized effort to meet the future—a future pregnant with unborn events, big with possibilities, stupendous in its demands, and challenging in its problems.

We know, however, that a good tomorrow is dependent upon the same forces that have brought us a good today—good homes, spiritual strength, integrity in private and public life, and a sense of social responsibility on the part of every individual, with a willingness to engage positively in activities that promote human well-being. Young trained homemakers of today will be effective instruments in a more wonderful world of women tomorrow.
