Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Two

Opinions

Chapter 6

Recreation That Re-creates

Men have long recognized that with health are interwoven most of the fortunes of life. Yet the world is full of people who do not enjoy optimum health. Though most of us come from vigorous racial stock, though we live in a relatively healthful climate, though our knowledge of the rules of health is fairly extensive, we frequently find ourselves ailing, our vitality low, our physical fitness not quite up to par.

Because of the operation of a wide variety of forces today, one of the most common ailments of a great majority of us is fatigue. The nerves, the mind, the body suffer from this miserable malady. It asserts itself in restlessness, irritability, languor, lack of concentration, disturbed sleep, reduced efficiency, a drawn expression of the face, and numerous other ways.

But fatigue is in reality a protective measure, for it is nature's warning to us that it is time to rest. Rest is a fundamental law of health. Every part of the body requires its periods of rest. It is during these rest periods that tissues are nourished and the body restored.

As the summer season approaches, most of us look forward with anticipation to a vacation. Webster's dictionary says a vacation is an intermission from labor, a period of rest. How many of us make our vacations conform to this definition? Do we plan the type of activity that will provide surcease from the taxing routines in which we are daily engaged? Do we view vacations as periods in which to rebuild ourselves that we may return to our labors with renewed vitality? Or do we feverishly search about for something stimulating to do—some place exciting to go, returning with nerves taxed and bodies tired, grateful for the order and regularity of our normal lives?

Everyone needs a vacation—the school child, the tired mother, the busy businessman. No matter how urgent may be the demands of labor, we should occasionally take a vacation, for truly, "All work makes Jack a dull boy." But vacations should be more than a few days set aside in which to travel far and spend much. They should be days of genuine recreation—days in which to conquer that commonest of all ailments—fatigue.
