Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 8

A Golden Future

A golden tomorrow can only be assured if the highly perfected products of science are utilized by highly perfected personal character. The laboratories of citizenship—the home, the school, the church, and the community—must be as patient, tireless, and intelligent in the production of fine character as is science in the products of its laboratories.

"The youth of today is the citizen of tomorrow." Beginning life at a time when vast social changes are taking place, it must be fitted to meet the challenge of its day.

The home, the initial laboratory, must recognize its responsibility and opportunity. It must realize that within its sacred precincts, the basic elements of good character are most readily established. Here ideals that direct the course of conduct throughout life are most easily inculcated. The home should impress upon young people that the only tool they have to work with is themselves, and whatever tempers them to truer steel, whatever compels them to adjust their efforts to their obstacles is the best thing that can happen to them. It must help them to realize that persons grow big not only doing big things but also doing lesser things in a big way. It must teach them that they owe something to the world, not that the world owes them, and that the world which lies ahead for them will be of their own making.

The future has always been dependent upon the education of its young men and women—education that builds up a sense of responsibility to help develop a cultural civilization and a better world. Every child has a right to an edution. This does not necessarily mean a university education, but rather a right to the education for which his talents and tastes fit him. Children are differently endowed, and if our schools are to adequately function as a laboratory for tomorrow's citizenship, they must offer a curriculum that will provide opportunities for the varying aptitudes, interests, and abilities of youth, and they must help each individual to see the need of his special endowment in the world's work.

The present tendency toward trade schools and vocational institutes is a recognition of the varying educational needs of youth. Too many parents have felt that any kind of position in a well-furnished office, even doing the most uninteresting routine work, was somehow superior to a job that required work with the hands. But the world is fast teaching us that it has great need for men trained to work with the hands as well as for men trained to work at a desk.

The influence of the church in molding character must be felt in tomorrow's world. Its imprint must be seen in the deep-seated desire of individuals to do right; motivating conduct, it must function in making the Golden Rule a reality.

The community can best discharge its responsibility by providing opportunities for healthful recreation and constructive activities. This is important in making the youth of today the useful citizen of tomorrow. Playgrounds, libraries, recreation rooms, ball parks, tennis courts, health clinics, music centers, lectures, club activities, gymnasiums, art centers should be made available and their activities directed to meet the special needs of youth.

The work of developing a fine citizen is a big one. It is beyond the ability of any one agency to accomplish alone. But if each sees its individual responsibility and meets that responsibility, the citizen of tomorrow should be a superior one.

In the laboratories of today the future is indeed being born. The laboratories of citizenship must not fail to keep abreast with the laboratories of science.
