Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Three

The Satisfactions of Service

Chapter 10

According to Your Natures

Foremost among the treasured possessions of Relief Society are the words of instruction, inspiration, and blessing given by the Prophet Joseph Smith to the sisters when they were privileged to have him with them in their meetings in Nauvoo.

For well over a century these words have served the sisters as a guide and a comfort. At the sixth meeting of the society, held on April 28, 1842, the Prophet attending a meeting wherein, according to the records of the society, "The Spirit of the Lord was poured out in a very powerful manner, never to be forgotten by those present on this interesting occasion." (History of the Church 4:607.) Said the Prophet: "This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures." Then he defined some of the natural characteristics of women, saying, ". . . it is natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence." He referred to the innocence, kindness, and affection of women, which he said were more mighty than a millstone hung about the neck. He spoke of the meekness, the love, the purity of women, as the things that would magnify them in the eyes of all good men. Then he made a significant statement with regard to the organization he had so recently established, saying that the women were now placed in a situation in which they could act "according to those sympathies which God has placed in your bosoms." (HC 4:605.)

He further made this oft-repeated statement: ". . . I now turn the key in your behalf . . . and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads." (HC 4:607.)

A wise man has said that a sense of somebody's need is the most powerful motive in the world for worthy action; it appeals to the largest number of people of every age, race, and kind. It wakens the whole nature—the powers that learn as well as those that perform. It generates the vigor of interest that submerges selfishness. It arouses the inventiveness and ingenuity that slumber so soundly in the lives of so many people. For many of us, work that is service taps a great reservoir of power, sets free some of our caged and leashed energy, and rewards us with a deep-seated sense of satisfaction.

Now I ask the question, Why did the women need an organization through which to act in accordance with these God-given sympathies? Could they not have acted in accordance with their natures without this? Would not action prompted by their natural impulses be equally effective when expressed individually in their own way, as when it is proffered through an organization?

Experience has taught us that acts of kindness and charity performed independently by a person are good and should be encouraged. Nonetheless, we must recognize that there are certain distinct advantages when such services are organization identified. It is important, in giving service to those in need, to follow sound principles that safeguard against the service being unwisely or inadequately performed. These principles are best disseminated through an organization—certainly through a priesthood-directed organization.

Organization effort, generally speaking, is more orderly and more justly directed, and resources other than time and effort are usually more available. The service is less inclined to be merely temporary in nature, rather than to be continued until the underlying cause of the distress is reached by its healing influence.

Furthermore, an organized body of benevolent women has greater power of accomplishment than does the individual woman acting alone. As an example of the power of organization, I am reminded of the story of a historic tree that had stood for years in a public park. The city officials, influenced by the recreational department, decided to cut the tree down to make way for a tennis court. A woman who was familiar with the history of the tree and the struggles incident to its planting, and who had visited the park often with her children and enjoyed its comforting shade, felt it would be wrong to cut this tree down, that it was a historical landmark, and that through the years it would be more beneficial to most people who visited the park than would a tennis court built to accommodate a special few.

She decided to take her case to the mayor. He was unavailable for appointment, however, on the matter, and his secretary directed her to the city recreation department—the very department that proposed the tree be cut down. Of course, she got nowhere. A number of individuals objected to the proposed action, but none were effective in reversing the decision.

At length an organization of women took up the cause. Upon arriving at his office one morning, the mayor found a large group of women, representing the organization, awaiting him. He greeted them cordially, listened to their story, and, in the end, committed himself to leaving the tree standing. When his secretary asked him why he had so readily acquiesced to the request of the women after his long and firm position in opposition to it, he replied that he could stand up against one individual or even against several, but not against an organized body of women.

The more impressive example of the power of an organization to aid one in trouble and bring about righteousness comes to us from the history of the Relief Society in Nauvoo. The summer of 1842 was a most difficult period for the Prophet Joseph Smith. He spoke to the sisters of some of the difficulties he had to surmount due to what he called "aspiring elders" in the Church. Also, during this summer enemies of the Church had sought to involve the Prophet in an attempt that had been made upon the life of ex-Governor Boggs of Missouri. It went so far that they finally secured extradition papers to have the Prophet returned to Missouri from Nauvoo, Illinois, where, in the graphic language of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "they would have made short shrift of him could they have got hold of him."

The Prophet turned to the sisters of the organized Relief Society, and they, with love and compassion for their Prophet, responded to his appeal. They circulated a petition, which was signed by the Relief Society members, "for protection from illegal suit then pending against the Prophet Joseph Smith." This was presented to Governor Carlin at Quincy, Illinois, by President Emma Smith, Secretary Eliza R. Snow, and Relief Society member Amanda Smith. The appeal of an organized body of women brought the desired results.

The Prophet, deeply moved by this action, expressed his gratitude in these impressive words:

The Female Relief Society have taken a most active part in my welfare against my enemies, in petitioning to the governor in my behalf. These measures were all necessary. . . . If [they] had not been taken, serious consequences would have resulted. I have come here to bless you. (HC 5:140-41.)

Thus the compassionate nature of women, expressing itself through an inspired organization, spoke and was heard.

Benevolent women working through the divinely founded Relief Society were a boon to the Saints in Nauvoo. The sisters ministered to the sick, cared for the convert immigrants pouring into Nauvoo, found needed employment for the unemployed sisters, visited the widows and the fatherless orphans, sought out the needy through a "necessity committee" (the forerunner of the visiting teaching program), and administered to the wants of the poor through contributions solicited in the name of the society from those few who had something to spare.

The Nauvoo days were of short duration for Relief Society. Persecution of the Saints rose in intensity, culminating in the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum in June 1844, to be followed in February 1846 by a long and arduous exodus from Nauvoo.

For ten long years circumstances rendered the Relief Society inoperative, but the benevolent spirit of the sisters and the genius of the society lived on in the hearts and minds of these good women as they ministered to the weary Saints crossing the dreary and often hazardous plains and the rugged mountains, and as they did their part in establishing homes and administering to human needs in the valleys of the mountains.

In time, at the direction of President Brigham Young, organized Relief Societies began to flourish in the Rocky Mountains. The benevolent spirit of the women readily found orderly expression through their beloved Relief Society, which promoted health and hygiene classes and had its members wait upon the sick. The society operated a much-needed hospital and organized nurses' training classes. The admission requirements of those classes differed considerably from those of today and were largely a matter of good health and natural aptitude.

An interesting account of the services given in the early days comes from the Woman's Exponent of September 15, 1872. It reports that Brother Abraham O. Smoot of Provo had met Sister Eliza R. Snow in Salt Lake City, canvassing from door to door for students in view of opening a school of medicine and surgery for the instruction of females, that those possessed of nerve, energy, and ambition for a laudable life might have the opportunity of qualifying themselves. Thus the kindly nature of the sisters expressed itself in pioneer days.

The same spirit of benevolent concern on the part of Relief Society sisters for our people has prevailed through each succeeding era of time with primary action directed toward the most urgent current needs.

Early in the twentieth century war clouds gathered and in 1917 the United States became involved in World War I. The society had to shift its efforts from the intensive promotion of its own programs to tremendous effort in meeting the problems and needs created by war. The culmination of Relief Society aid came in 1918 through a very special and unusual type of service. Many years earlier, at the direction of President Brigham Young, Relief Society sisters had begun garnering and storing wheat against a day of need. At the request of the United States government, the society turned over 205,000 bushels of wheat to meet the national emergency, for which the government paid a fair price. The sisters were benevolent patriots, as is evidenced by the account of this transaction recorded by Sister Clarissa Williams, counselor in the general presidency of the Relief Society at that time, who reported, "How proud we are to perform this service. . . . Our hearts and prayers go with the gift we have laid upon the altar of our country."

Following the war came the great depression. Many of our most substantial, self-sufficient families almost collapsed under its impact. Wage earners found themselves without employment. Homes were lost, insurance was borrowed upon to the limit, and in many cases its protection was lost because of the inability of families to meet premium payments. Many families were hungry and without the necessities of life.

The magnificent manner in which the Relief Society sisters rose to the needs of our people will be forever engraved on the records of the society as the epitome of loving service.

In April 1936, after more than five years of economic depression, President Heber J. Grant announced plans for extending and increasing facilities for the care of Latter-day Saints through a Church welfare plan. This plan involved organization, the dissemination of guiding principles, and the establishment of effective procedures in giving service in the Lord's way as set forth in the scriptures. Church leaders restated the principles of self-reliance, independent and provident living, and self-preparation for a day of need. They made clear the place of the Church in the care of its worthy members. The announcement of the welfare program brought hope, comfort, and encouragement to the discouraged Latter-day Saints. Certainly the plan was divinely instituted by the Lord through his prophet, with great men specially chosen of the Lord and specially endowed by nature to carry it forward—such great leaders as President Harold B. Lee, President Marion G. Romney, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., President Henry D. Moyle, and others.

Relief Society was honored and blessed to be invited to lend its strength to this newly organized effort of the Church. President Clark, in an address given at Estes Park, Colorado, on June 20, 1939, said:

In all that relates to the supplying of clothing, the preparation and preservation of foodstuffs, the nursing of the sick, the burial of the dead, in all that relates to the infinities of kindly attention and sympathy, in all that relates even remotely to the love and ritual of motherhood, the women's Relief Society carry the burden. The bishop is the father of his ward; the Relief Society is the mother. The Church welfare plan could not be carried on without them; it serves in the greatest measure where they are most active.

Through Relief Society's participation in the program, its services to those in need were stimulated and increased, and the quality was greatly improved. The society also became magnified in the eyes of people in many walks of life and in many lands.

I cite one example of this, which followed the cessation of hostilities at the end of World War II. At the beginning of this war, the Relief Societies in every ward had been advised by the brethren to have on hand at least one well-made quilt for emergency use. The sisters responded willingly. As hostilities ended, our Saints abroad found themselves impoverished by the ravages of war. Among their urgent needs was the need for bedding. Upon authorization of the brethren, the Relief Society general board called in the quilts and, in cooperation with the welfare committee, two carloads of beautiful, well-made quilts were on their way to Europe in less than two weeks.

One day I sat in a meeting in New York City with presidents of member organizations of the National Council of Women. A gentleman had been sent to the meeting from Washington, D.C., to commend the member organizations on their contributions to the war effort. He invited each president to report, and I told, among other things, of our sending quilts. Almost before I had finished a Madame Pelantova, president of the Free Czechoslovakian Women of America, arose. An escapee of Czechoslovakia, she had formerly been deputy mayor of Prague.

She said she wished to bear testimony to the value of the quilt contribution of the Mormon Relief Society. She explained that it had been a requirement that a government official help supervise the distribution of all commodities, including bedding, to assure equal assistance to all needy families, regardless of the source from which the help had come. She had been given this assignment by her government. Then she described the quilts. They were large, she said, and made of new materials, bright and pretty beyond description. She referred to the tens of thousands of stitches that had made possible the production of the quilts—stitches made by thoughtful women who loved their fellowmen enough to share their tedious labors. She concluded by saying, "The Relief Society quilts not only warmed the bodies of my people; they were the spark that gave new life to their dying spirits."

This was a moving moment for women at the meeting, who represented over twenty million American women.

Now in this day of a fast-growing church which is expanding into many areas of the world, President Harold B. Lee and his wonderful counselors saw fit to restructure and revitalize the Church Welfare Services and to coordinate all welfare service units of the Church under a committee appointed by the First Presidency and chaired by Presiding Bishop Victor L. Brown.

Relief Society welcomes being vitally involved in this revitalized welfare services program. Two approaches characterize our services. One will be services designed to prevent family problems. These will include such things as family health lessons, which have been prepared in cooperation with the Church Health Services Corporation, and home nursing classes conducted in cooperation with the Red Cross organization. More than thirty thousand women have already taken advantage of these classes. The problems incident to inadequate income to meet the high cost of living are being attacked through training the women in provident living and teaching them simple, practical, money-saving skills, such as how to put a washer on a leaking tap or repair the plug on an electrical appliance. Wards are urged to conduct sewing classes that will include pattern and fabric selection, shortcuts in sewing techniques, how to properly fit the clothing, and other related matters. The cost of clothing is excessively high, and these classes should prove very helpful in stretching the family income. Money management lessons will be an important aspect of the training program.

The second approach to problems will be services that offer help in relation to existing needs. In cooperation with the Church welfare services program and as directed by priesthood leaders, Relief Society will go forward with its life-long compassionate service program with responsibility for assignments in the experienced hands of ward presidents.

In the light of all this, who could doubt the divinely guided insight of the Prophet Joseph Smith with regard to the nature of women and the need for an organization through which these virtues might find expression and become a blessing to the Father's children? Who could doubt that Relief Society was divinely instituted?

My earnest prayer as we endeavor to enlarge the spirit of benevolence in the hearts and minds of Relief Society members and as we strive to increase the amount and quality of Relief Society service is that we will not lose sight of our obligation to keep strong and virile the God-given, priesthood-guided medium through which the women of the Church work as a supporting arm of the welfare services program.
