Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 11

Reaching the One

With increasing frequency we are reminded of the importance of "reaching the one" in our Church programs and activities.

Reaching the one! For Relief Society sisters, does this mean that with our new enrollment policy—enrolling every woman eighteen years of age and over, plus married women under eighteen and those under eighteen who are maintaining their homes—we are now responsible for bringing into activity every one listed on the membership roles, every mature Latter-day Saint female? If this is so, what a challenge! Is it possible of accomplishment? Do we have the facilities, the programs, the resources to achieve such a goal? In the final analysis, will we not be doing very well if we maintain a reasonably high average? Really, how important is it that we reach every single one?

I ask, What is your personal attitude in response to these questions?

I call to mind two true incidents that seem to have bearing on the question. The first was related to me by a general board member.

A father and mother with ten children started on a vacation trip in a large station wagon. The father was an easy-going man whose general attitude toward life's problems was, "Something will turn up. Give us time and things will work out." The mother fussed and worried, but did little about problems, leaving action to the father.

After the family had traveled a long distance, they stopped at a service station for gas. The father ordered the children out of the car to stretch their legs and race about until the car was serviced. Then he ordered them back into the car and away they went. Fifty miles farther along the road they stopped again and discovered that one child was missing. He had been left at the first stop. The mother panicked but offered no solution. The father slowly counted noses then, said, "Well, we've hung on to nine. Nine out of ten is a good average!"

The other incident occurred one day when I was invited to visit the Henry Street Settlement in New York City, located in a crowded section of the city where there are many disadvantaged families and deprived children.

As my hostess and I were leaving the settlement house, we saw approaching us a mother with a brood of little children ranging in age from a babe in arms to a child about eleven or twelve years old. My hostess greeted the mother and children warmly and then introduced me. I said to the mother, "You have a good-size family to direct on this busy street. "

She replied, "Yes, we're on our way to the public playground. There's seven of them with me. Some of them are quite bright and get along pretty well by themselves. I had eight when we started, but one slipped away from us back a distance. " Then, pointing to a little girl, she said, "She is her twin; they're seven years old. The one that strayed away is the brightest one."

"Won't you have to go back for her?" I asked.

"No," she said in a tired voice, "I can't be troubled. She knows where we're heading. She's bright. She'll just have to find the way herself."

Now I ask, Can we justify being content with a good average when the best interests of a human being are at stake? Or are we justified in shedding responsibility for the one who doesn't move ahead with the group, allowing her to find her own way because it is too troublesome for us to lend a helping hand?

Relief Society has many ways whereby it may reach the one. I believe that there is no more effective way to reach the "hard to reach"—the one who does not voluntarily come along with us—than through the visiting teaching program, which is based on the establishment of friendship and is evidence of our genuine concern for one another.

It seems a fairly simple thing for two lovely sisters to call at a home as emissaries of Relief Society; to make friends with the sister in the home; to lead her step by step to see the values awaiting her through activity in Relief Society; to show her how the society can meet her special interests and needs. Yet, behind this simple and brief visit is a long chain of organized, intensive, and well-directed effort. There is prayer and fasting; there is priesthood authority; there is study; there is humility and an earnest seeking for wisdom and judgment; there is development of leadership; there is love.

Unlike the father about whom I spoke, the bishop, the Relief Society president, and the visiting teachers are not satisfied with good averages. Unlike the mother about whom I spoke, the bishop, the Relief Society president, and the visiting teachers are all deeply concerned about every single missing "one." They know the hazards incident to leaving a sister to her own resources to find the way—regardless of how bright she may be, regardless of how well they think she may know where she is headed. Rather, they are like the shepherd of whom the Savior spoke when he said:

. . . if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?

And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.

Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these littles ones should perish. (Matthew 18:12-14.)

The visiting teachers, going forth two by two, armed with the authority of their calling, knowledgeable in the ways of women generally—their needs, their interests, their desires, their longings, and their problems; alert to the special interests and circumstances of the one whom they are visiting, fortified with proper instruction, prepared through study and prayer, confident in the knowledge that they are emissaries of a divinely established society, and with the assurance that they are about "their Father's business"—they are eminently qualified to make the appeals that touch the heart, quicken the mind, strengthen the spirit of a sister, and lead her to the rich and abundant life prepared for her by the Father.

While the actual visit to the home may seem a simple and uneventful call, countless times it has been the means whereby a miracle takes place in the life of a sister. Therein lies the reward not alone for the visiting teachers, but for that great body of women and priesthood leaders who stand behind the teachers and who give so much help to them in "reaching the one."
