Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Four

The Ever-Sustaining Power of Faith

Chapter 12

The Prophets

In the Articles of Faith, penned by the Prophet Joseph Smith, in which are set forth the basic tenets of our faith, there is one article that declares our belief in prophets as a part of the organization of the Church, both in the primitive church and the church today:

"We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, viz., apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc." (Article of Faith 6.)

Scriptures also attest the reality of the prophets in Old Testament days: Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah, Malachi, and others.

A prophet in no wise must be regarded as a soothsayer—one who, relying upon his own reasoning, foretells future events; nor should he be compared to a so-called fortune teller—one who professes to predict the future. A prophet is one chosen and inspired of God to speak in God's name regarding the future happenings pertaining to the church on earth and also to the well-being of God's children. We in this dispensation know by the will of God that he is also the seer and revelator. As the revelator, he is the one to whom the Lord reveals whatever is necessary for the conduct of the affairs of the Church and the good of the people. He is the living oracle of God—God's mouthpiece on earth.

In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith." (D&C 21:5.)

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the prophet is also God's chosen servant to preside as the president, accepted and upheld as such by vote of the priesthood and laity of the Church assembled in a general conference. To him are given all the keys of authority of the priesthood upon the earth. By the word of the Lord, he is president of the high priesthood of the Church, and as such, he presides over the priesthood; and every office in the Church is under his direction while he himself is directed of God.

These are marvelous things to contemplate, and if we truly believe in prophets and their divinely ordained calling as we claim to do, we impose upon ourselves a responsibility of strict obedience to their teachings.

Since the founding of the Relief Society, the general presidency of the society has been favored in having frequent opportunity to meet with the presiding prophet-president of the Church and receive his inspired counsel and direction. This was true in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who met often with the Relief Society sisters in Nauvoo, giving them instruction and encouragement, confiding in them, and blessing them. The minutes of the first meeting record the Prophet as saying, "I gave much instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants. . . . (History of the Church 4:552.)

This same attention has been given the society by the prophet-presidents during the days I have served as general Relief Society president.

It has been my unusual and blessed privilege to serve as president of Relief Society under six prophet-presidents. I was called to office by President Heber J. Grant. I later served under President George Albert Smith, then President David O. McKay, then President Joseph Fielding Smith, then President Harold B. Lee, and presently under President Spencer W. Kimball. I bear witness that I know each has been divinely ordained for his great and responsible calling. Each, I am confident, has been among the noble and great spirits that the Lord showed unto Abraham, men who were chosen before the world was for this great and responsible earthly position.

As I have met with each in counsel regarding the affairs of Relief Society and matters pertaining to women, I have been awed by the depth of insight and understanding; I have marveled at the foresight and the wisdom of counsel; I have been blessed by the patience and tenderness of each as he has directed the course to be pursued by the Relief Society. I have heard each speak of the future with prophetic vision, and I have seen the fulfillment of his words.

This does not mean that these prophets with whom I have had close association have been totally alike, as men. On the contrary, they have differed in personality, in their native endowments, in their approach to building the kingdom of God, and in their methods of dealing with those over whom they have presided. As I consider the men and the needs of the Church and the world during the time of the presidency of each, I feel confident that each was prepared and peculiarly suited to preside over the Church at the exact period of his calling.

I could relate many great and divinely inspired prophecies as well as highly significant counsel pertaining to the work of the women of the Church given by each of these prophet-presidents. Let me pass on to you some of the wisdom, given informally in most instances, that has served me well and that may also serve you and give you some insight into the natures of these God-ordained Church leaders.

Prior to being made Relief Society president, I was for eight years editor of the Relief Society Magazine. During this period I became quite well acquainted with President Grant, who exercised close watch-care over the contents of the Church publications. If an issue appeared containing something displeasing to him, particularly as it related to Church doctrine, you may be sure the editors would hear from him. He was quick in his judgments, forthright and right in counseling us. He admonished us always to make certain that articles dealing with Church doctrine were in harmony with interpretations given by the presidents of the Church. He advised us to be precise in quoting the scriptures or the words of the brethren, and always to give the source reference. He warned us against publishing accounts of dreams of individuals that they regarded as spiritual manifestations, almost personal revelation. Said President Grant with regard to these: "Encourage the reading of revelations, but let them be the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants."

An oft-repeated bit of wisdom of President Grant that has served me well is this: "Discouragement is one of the sharpest tools in the hands of Satan to weaken a person and open the way for the devil to have power over him. Avoid discouragement as you avoid a plague."

President George Albert Smith was a man who taught and practiced brotherhood. He was very approachable. There was an occasion during his last illness when I was deeply impressed with his words. I was driving home after a busy day at the office and passed his place of residence. Though I knew he was seriously ill, I felt prompted to stop and, without going into the house, to ask his nurse to express to him the love and concern of the sisters of the Church for his well-being and to assure him that we were praying for him. The nurse asked me to wait a moment while she conveyed the message. Returning to the door, she said that President Smith wished me to come in, as he wanted to speak to me.

After a short period of time the nurse assisted him into the living room and seated him, well wrapped, in an easy chair. He thanked me for the support the women of the Church had always given him as president. He said he knew that his earth life was nearing its end, and that he was unafraid of death because he understood it. One thing he sorrowed over, however, was the fact that he might not be spared long enough to dedicate the Los Angeles Temple. This had been a long-time dream. He said he knew it was just a selfish human desire.

Then with conviction he said he knew that in the Lord's due time the temple would be dedicated by a prophet of God, one of the Lord's choosing, even though it appeared he would not be the one. He said that the work of the Church goes on as the Lord desires and will do so until all is accomplished. He affirmed as the Lord's plan for his children the law that each must go on to another sphere of service as his individual earthly mission is completed; that everyone should accept release from earth life with joy if he has been obedient to God's commandments. He reiterated that the Church would endure and would always have a prophet at its head. Thus testified a prophet whose earthly mission closed in a few short days. This was a deeply moving experience.

An unusual experience with President David O. McKay comes to mind in which you may be interested. One day I received a telegram from President John F. Kennedy inviting me to attend a meeting at the White House the following week to which the presidents of women's organizations of the United States having a membership of 100,000 or more were invited.

I didn't wish to attend. I thought the matter to be discussed was controversial legislation. I felt I might be called upon to speak, and I preferred not to be involved. I felt, however, I should refer the matter to President McKay before sending my regrets. I took the wire to him, and he read it and then surprised me by repeating the twelfth Article of Faith:

"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law."

Concluding this, he said, "In view of this belief, I don't see how you can refuse to honor the request of the president of the United States if it is at all possible for you to go."

Of course, I agreed to attend the meeting. I then explained my reason for hesitating, saying what I thought would be the subject of the meeting and asking what counsel he had for me. To this he replied, "Remember, you do not speak for the Church; this is my role. You speak only for the Relief Society. We would expect, of course, that what you say would be in harmony with Church views insofar as you know them."

With the interview closed, I rose to leave the room. Then President McKay, as was his custom, walked with me toward the door. In leaving I once again said, "President McKay, have you no further advice for me?"

With great understanding for my feelings he replied, "Yes, I have further counsel. Go in peace and trust in the Lord."

I went in peace, trusting in the Lord, who I attest guided my actions and directed my speech during the meeting.

President Joseph Fielding Smith, a man of tenderness and great love for the people, evidenced at all times great depth of understanding of the work of Relief Society and passed this on to the Relief Society presidency countless times and in many ways. An oft-repeated statement relative to this, which is recorded in one of his Relief Society Conference addresses, is as follows: "Relief Society was revealed to the Church as a fundamental part of the gospel." (Relief Society Magazine, January 1965, p. 4.)

It is my firm conviction that President Harold B. Lee was endowed with all the graces, gifts, and powers needed to conduct the affairs of a fast-growing and expanding church in a perilous period of time. He continually evidenced warm friendship and concern for the individual members of the Church. He never spared himself when the well-being of a member required his service. His life was the embodiment of his belief in the scripture, "The Church hath need of every one."

Some thirty-five years ago, the Relief Society president met weekly with the brethren of the Church Welfare Committee as the program was in the course of development. President Lee, then a member of the Council of the Twelve, would, with foresight and inspired wisdom beyond our comprehension, voice viewpoints and influence decisions related to the future of the welfare program that seemed so remote, indeed so far outside the realm of fulfillment, as to be beyond our understanding. Yet today we see these views firmly incorporated in the welfare services program as among its cardinal principles, and his prophetic judgments are an essential part of the welfare programs and procedures.

Sister Florence S. Jacobsen, former president of the YWMIA, and I visited with President and Sister Lee one day a few years ago in their hotel room in New York City. He spoke of his concern for the youth of the Church and his feeling that the Church needed to do more for them and in a better way. As he talked, we became aware that he envisioned efforts that could affect long-established patterns, even some of them related to the auxiliaries over which we were presiding. Leaving him, we both affirmed our conviction that we had listened to prophetic utterances. Today we see the influence of his prophetic inspiration in the new programs and patterns for youth and young adults that are being set into action.

Close association with President Spencer W. Kimball as a member of the Council of the Twelve has been a strength and a blessing to Relief Society. His tenderness toward women of the Church is attested in these impressive words:

God bless the women, the wonderful women of every time and age and place, who establish first in their lives their Lord, His work, and their families. ("Women, Wonderful Women," Relief Society Magazine, January 1958, p. 8.)

Thus I speak of the prophets I have known personally. We may speak with equal conviction of the greatness of all the prophet-presidents who preceded them in this dispensation. Church history is replete with convincing evidence of this truth.

Again, I attest that the great prophets under whose direction I have worked as president of the Relief Society have counseled me with prophetic vision relative to the work of the Relief Society. In addition, I am convincingly impressed that the prophet-presidents who preceded them were chosen of the Lord.

The world has always needed prophets—never more, I believe, than today. Blessed are we indeed to have the restored gospel with a prophet to lead us in these troublesome times. We must remember, however, that just as we need prophets, so the prophets need us. They need our faith, prayers, labor, and obedience to their teachings. The Prophet Joseph Smith appealed to the sisters in Nauvoo, "Your prayers in my behalf shall avail much. Let them not cease to ascend to God continually in my behalf."

Even as the first prophet-president of this dispensation needed this support from his people, so does he who presides over us today, President Spencer W. Kimball.
