Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 13

Hold Fast to Thy Faith

Often great sermons are delivered in a few words, by an opinion, a passing comment, or an observation of an unrefutable truth, which take deep root in the hearts and minds of the hearers, influencing attitudes and impelling them on to more righteous action.

An example of this came to my attention recently. I was in a small group wherein was a man of rare ability upon whom the storms of life had beaten with almost relentless fury. He had endured a series of trials and hardships, ranging from false accusations, which temporarily robbed him of his good name, to seriously impaired health. Yet, withal, he evidenced a good spirit, a hopeful outlook on life, a firm belief in God as a God of love and mercy, and confidence in the Lord's appointed earthly leaders. Someone commented, "You have truly weathered the storms of life well. You are an example to all of us."

The man replied,"I have had one great blessing that has enabled me to rise above adversity. I have been able, through the help of the Lord, to hold fast to my faith. My faith has been as a supporting and sustaining staff that has enabled me to endure the vicissitudes of life and to move forward and climb upward. The most important thing in life," he added, "is to hold fast to your faith."

Hold fast to your faith! What a simple statement, but what a powerful sermon. Yet, there are those among us who love the Lord and who trust in his goodness, but who allow their faith to be weakened or even destroyed in the face of trial. To illustrate, in contrast to the attitude of the brother of whom I referred was that of a sister. An automobile accident had taken the lives of loved ones. Sorrow and bitterness engulfed her. Despondently she said, "Why should this happen to us? All the days of our lives we have served the Lord. Why should we be so cruelly and unjustly dealt with? I can't understand. Where was the protecting arm of the Lord? My faith is shattered."

Still another incident that came to my attention dealt with a promising, active Latter-day Saint boy, one who had been a leader in Church and school activities but who had gradually accepted false philosophies and teachings of the day and then slowly succumbed first to one and then to another of the temptations of life, ending finally in apostasy. With broken heart the mother of the boy declared, "I have prayed for that boy from his infancy. I have prayed for him of late till no words were left with which to appeal for help, but no answer, no help came. I have lost faith in the power of prayer."

How weak or, more properly, how absent is the faith that allows such utterances, such feelings?

President Harold B. Lee, in addressing a large group of Young Adults in a fireside in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in August 1972, referred to the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord spoke of the day that would speedily come when peace would be taken from the earth, and the devil would have power over his dominion. Said President Lee, "Is there anyone here who questions whether or not this is the time of which the Lord spoke when the devil has mighty power raging over the earth? But," he continued, "here is the promise: 'And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world."' (D&C 1:36.)

In the fulfillment of this precious promise so full of hope, every Latter-day Saint has a part that, in my opinion, begins with faith: a faith that draws one's spirit into communion with the Lord; that enables one to walk in the straight and narrow path; that impels one to uphold and sustain Church leaders not alone by the uplifted hand, but by willing obedience to their teachings.

And what is this thing called faith that we declare to be the first principle of the gospel? Is it synonymous with belief? Dr. James E. Talmage, in his book Articles of Faith, declares:

The terms faith and belief are sometimes regarded as synonyms; nevertheless each of them has a specific meaning in our language. . . . Belief . . . may consist in a merely intellectual assent, while faith implies such confidence and conviction as will impel to action. (Pages 96-97.)

He defines faith as "a living, inspiring confidence in God, and an acceptance of His will as our law, and of His words as our guide, in life," "the assurance of things for which we hope, and the evidence of things not discernible through our senses . . . the motive principle that impels men to resolve and to act," and "the impelling force by which men struggle for excellence, ofttimes enduring vicissitudes and suffering that they may achieve their purposes. Faith is the secret of ambition, the soul of heroism, the motive power of effort." (Pages 100, 102, and 103.)

Faith once acquired does not necessarily remain constant. It is not a static element in our lives. Like testimony, it may be strong today and weak tomorrow; it needs constant cultivation and nourishment. What President Lee so beautifully said of testimony applies equally to faith, which, according to my understanding, is a prerequisite of testimony or knowledge. According to President Lee,

Testimony isn't something that you have today and you keep always. Testimony is either going to grow to a brightness of certainty, or diminish to nothingness, depending on what we do about it. The testimony that we recapture day by day is the thing that saves us from the pitfalls of the adversary. (Fireside talk, Salt Lake Tabernacle, August 20, 1972.)

So also is this true of faith.

The prophet Moroni has given us the great guide to the nourishment of faith:

And now, my brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing?

And now I come to that faith, of which I said I would speak; and I will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing.

Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing. . . . (Moroni 7:20-21, 25.)

Through a study of the scriptures, through ordering our lives according to the teachings of God's prophets, through keeping God's commandments, our faith grows strong.

One wise man has said:

Faith and obedience are bound up in the same bundle. He that obeys God trusts God; and he that trusts God obeys God. He that is without faith is without works; and he that is without works is without faith.

For those who would doubt or question, Moroni gives this wise counsel:

. . . I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith. (Ether 12:6.)

The power of faith to dispel evil, to overcome Satan's purposes, and to bring peace into hearts is beyond measure. Scripture, both ancient and modern, is replete with accounts of the manifestations of faith: the stilling of the tempest on the Sea of Galilee, feeding the multitude with a few loaves and fishes, walking on the water. It was the faith of Adam and Amulek that caused the prison to tumble to the earth. It is through faith that miracles are wrought.

The magnitude of the power of faith is set forth in Matthew, wherein the Savior said:

If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you. (Matthew 17:20.)

A mustard seed, according to Bible commentators, was regarded as the smallest of all seeds in biblical times.

The Savior at one time told his disciples that if they had faith, if they believed, they could say to a sycamine tree, "Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you." (Luke 17:6.)

These are not myths or fables or platitudes. They are not falacious statements that build false hope in the hearts and minds of the Father's children. They are unfailing truths given us by the Father to enable us to meet the vicissitudes of life and to win our eternal rewards.

I appeal to all who may be tried and tested (and this, I believe, is most of us)—perhaps tested almost to the limits of strength—to call to mind the testing of Job, the strength of his faith which enabled him to say:

For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. (Job 19:25-26.)

I urge you to apply in your lives the words of the hymn by Edward Hopper, a hymn we have so often sung:

Jesus, Savior, pilot me Over life's tempestuous sea; Unknown waves before me roll, Hiding rock and treacherous shoal; Chart and compass came from thee: Jesus, Savior, pilot me.

Remember always to hold fast to your faith, even as did the brother of whom I referred earlier whose life was made sweet even in the face of sore tribulation because he did so.

May you have the kind of faith found in a verse whose message is dear to me, by John Greenleaf Whittier:

And as the path of duty is made plain, May grace be given that I may walk therein, Not like the hireling, for his selfish gain, With backward glances and reluctant tread, Making a merit of his coward dread, But, cheerful, in the light around me thrown, Walking as one to pleasant service led; Doing God's will as if it were my own, Yet trusting not in mine, but in His strength alone! —"First-Day Thoughts"

May faith be yours, and testimony, that you may be equal to all that life may require of you.
