Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Five

The Offerings of Relief Society

Chapter 14

Prophecy Fulfilled

More than 131 years ago, eighteen women met with the Prophet Joseph Smith and experienced the joy of seeing the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo organized. The organization is now referred to as the Relief Society.

The Prophet established, through revelation from the Lord, the basic organization structure; he enunciated the primary purposes or objectives of the society; he defined the fundamental procedure for operating the organization and advancing its work. (He told the women the work was according to their natures, and if they would live up to their privileges, the angels could not be restrained from being their associates.) He made no reference, however, with regard to any age regulation for membership in the society. This remained for later prophets to do. Nonetheless, it is of interest that, even though the charter members, in the main, were young married women, there was among the group a nineteen-year-old married woman, Bathsheba Smith; a single woman, Miss Cook; Eliza R. Snow, age thirty-eight and single; and undoubtedly others in these classifications. The Prophet accepted them all as suitable for membership in the society.

Life for these sisters was complex and problems incident to the period of time and to their particular circumstances pressed heavily upon them. They were feeling the impact of change in reference to their lives due to their acceptance of the gospel, which many people of that day regarded as a strange, non-acceptable religion. This had brought persecution and severe trials upon the sisters.

While their problems were in many respects unlike those encountered by women today, they were nonetheless just as complex, and the pressures were undoubtedly equally relentless. An excerpt from a journal containing accounts of life and circumstances in Nauvoo—handwritten by Sarah M. Kimball and Eliza R. Snow—sets forth some of their particular problems. Eliza R. Snow describes them as follows:

City of Nauvoo, June 29th, 1842. This is a day of much interest to my feelings. Reflecting on past occurency, a variety of thoughts have presented themselves to my mind with regard to events which have chas'd each other in rapid succession in the scenery of human life.

As an individual, I have not passed altogether unnoticed by change, in reference to present circumstances and future prospects. Two weeks and two days have passed since an intimation was presented of my duty and privilege of remaining in the city of the saints in case of the removal of my father's family: one week and two days have transpired since the family left, and though I rejoice in the blessing of the Society of the saints, and the approbation of God, a lonely feeling will steal over me before I am aware, while I am contemplating the present state of society—the pow'rs of darkness, and the prejudices of the human mind which stand array'd like an impregnable barrier against me and against the work of God. While these thoughts were revolving in my mind, the heavens became shadowed with clouds and a heavy shower of rain and hail ensued, and I exclaimed "O God, is it not enough that we have the prepossessions of mankind—their prejudices and their hatred to contend with; but must we also stand amid the rage of elements?" I concluded within myself that the period might not be far distant, that will require faith to do so; but the grace of God is sufficient, therefore I will not fear. I will put my trust in Him who is mighty to save; rejoicing in his goodness and determined to live by every word that proceedeth out of his mouth.

Standing by Sister Snow and her associates was the newly organized Relief Society's supporting influence enabling them "to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:4.)

The Lord knew the needs of these sisters, choice daughters of our Heavenly Father, undoubtedly chosen by him to come forth at this very period of time to help this great society grow strong in the Lord's way; to be an instrument that would build the faith of women of the Church, thus enabling them and those who came after them valiantly to meet the problems of earth life in these latter days.

This society has had nine general presidents, four of whom were among the charter members: Emma, Eliza, Zina, and Bathsheba. Sister Amy Brown Lyman, my immediate predecessor in the presidency, used to say she was the link between these early leaders (some of whom she knew; others with whom she had worked personally) and those presidents who would follow after her. I pay tribute to the manner in which Sister Lyman passed on to me an appreciation of the strength and the greatness of these sisters, and an understanding of the depth of their insight into the divine origin and purposes of Relief Society. She brought to me an awareness of my responsibility to pass this on to those who may follow after me.

Through the years, tens of thousands of women young and old have embraced Relief Society. It has taken hold of their hearts, won their love and confidence, and been a bulwark against destructive forces. I don't believe there has ever been a time when there were not single females holding membership. It has been my observation that it has not been uncommon for women representing three or four generations in a family to be active Relief Society members. I cite the case of Sister Marianne Sharp's family. Her grandmother in pioneer days was a ward Relief Society president; her mother joined when she was eighteen years old. Sister Marianne joined when a girl of eighteen, single, residing in a big city in the eastern part of the United States; later, after her marriage, her daughters, single and in college, became active members—four generations of young women becoming active Relief Society members.

It was a glorious day when the First Presidency authorized Relief Societies on college campuses. This was indeed a step forward in the work of the society. It is estimated that approximately 20,000 young women, most of them single, are members of college campus Relief Societies.

A unique experience was mine last spring. I spoke at a branch meeting on the campus at Brigham Young University. The attendance was large and made up almost exclusively of single girls, the majority of whom were active Relief Society members. At the close of the meeting, the Relief Society president asked if I would accept a gift. It was a folder containing the handwritten testimonies of seventy-five of these young single women. May I quote from two of these testimonies:

Dear Sister Spafford: I am so excited about Relief Society. I have gained such a warm testimony of the gospel and the important role of Relief Society in the life of a young, single girl. I have come to look forward to Relief Society meetings more than any class I attend.

Dear Sister Spafford: My membership in the Relief Society organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of the greatest privileges and responsibilities that I have in this life. This inspired program is helping and training me in the specific areas of my life that are most important to me: my testimony of Jesus Christ and his church; my role as a future wife and mother in Zion; my position as an LDS woman in the world. I have a personal knowledge, witnessed to me by the Holy Ghost, that this organization is inspired of God and directed by him. I know this to be true, for I have experienced the Lord's direction and help as I have fulfilled my responsibilities this past year as the 83rd Branch Relief Society president.

Now, the Lord in his wisdom has looked with further loving compassion on the women of the Church. Through his prophet, he has enlarged the scope of Relief Society to include all single females eighteen years of age and over, as well as those under eighteen who may be married or maintaining a home.

In this, as in all great events in the Church, the prophets have foretold of its coming. I quote from President Joseph F. Smith:

I expect to see the day when this organization [the Relief Society] will be one of the most perfect, most efficient and effective organizations for good in the Church but that day will be when we shall have women who are not only imbued with the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and with the testimony of Christ in their hearts, but also with youth, vigor and intelligence to enable them to discharge the great duties and responsibilities that rest upon them. . . . We want the young women, the intelligent women, women of faith, of courage and of purity to be associated with the Relief Societies of the various stakes and wards of Zion. We want them to take hold of this work with vigor, with intelligence and unitedly, for the building up of Zion and the instruction of women in their duties—domestic duties, public duties, and every duty that may devolve upon them. (Gospel Doctrine, Deseret Book Co., eleventh edition, 1959, p. 387.)

To President Harold B. Lee came this prophetic vision relating to the young women of the Church; accompanying this there came to him the responsibility to take action, leading to the fulfillment of the prophecy. What a responsibility!

A glorious work lies ahead for us as we meet the needs, the interests, the desires, and build the faith of these single Latter-day Saint women in order that they may properly meet the complexities of life in their day and period of time and, regardless of their individual circumstances, help them to realize their self-worth, enjoy happy life fulfillment, and obtain eternal blessings. A vital responsibility is also ours to provide experiences and training opportunities that will qualify them for strong and effective leadership in carrying out the divine mission of Relief Society in the years ahead.

The First Presidency assigned to Relief Society accountability for these sisters, which entails placing the name of each one upon the Relief Society roll, together with her attendance record at meetings held under the auspices of Relief Society. Thus, she becomes anchored to Relief Society and its teachings. At the same time, opportunities to meet her needs for social, recreational, and other types of activities are open to her through cooperative programs with the Melchizedek Priesthood Mutual Interests Association. Thus, through these two avenues, she lives a balanced life in harmony with Church teachings.

So Relief Society goes forth on an exciting, challenging, and promising period in its history, fortified by the knowledge that it is the will of our Heavenly Father, for his prophets have so spoken. Those of us who are called to positions of leadership in this period of time are privileged to see that the entire womanhood of the Church is adequately served: the young woman for whom life is just beginning to blossom; the woman whose life is nearing its close; the single woman regardless of her age; the mother with her infant in her arms; she whose children are grown and away from the parental home; the woman whose companion for one reason or another is no longer with her. It is our further duty to unite this great body of women, almost a million in number, into a loyal and powerful sisterhood supporting the priesthood in advancing the work of the Church both through service and example.

At a conference of the Church held in June 1831, only one year after the Church was organized, the Prophet Joseph Smith spoke these encouraging words to his people:

It [is] clearly evident that the Lord gave us power in proportion to the work to be done, and strength according to the race set before us, and grace and help as our needs required. (History of the Church 1:76.)

I am confident these blessings will be ours if we devotedly and obediently do our part as directed by our prophets, and as we work cooperatively with the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA.
