Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 15

The Offerings of Relief Society

In a message from the First Presidency addressed to the women of the Church in 1942, at the time of the centennial observance of the founding of Relief Society, some bold and highly significant statements were made, including the following:

We ask our Sisters of the Relief Society never to forget that they are a unique organization in the whole world, for they were organized under the inspiration of the Lord bestowed upon that great Prophet who was divinely called, by a visitation of the Father and Son, in person, to open up this, the Last Dispensation, the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. No other woman's organization in all the earth has had such a birth.

. . . Members should permit neither hostile nor competitive interests of any kind to detract from the duties and obligations, the privileges and honors, the opportunities and achievements of membership in this great Society.

. . . They should give to Relief Society service precedence over all social and other clubs and societies of similar kinds. We urge this because in the work of Relief Society are intellectual, cultural, and spiritual values found in no other organization and sufficient for all general needs of its members. (Relief Society Magazine, September 1942, p. 593.)

Women have found great satisfaction in the work of Relief Society and answers to their intellectual, cultural, spiritual, and general needs. This is continually attested to by Relief Society members.

Recently Relief Society was granted time on a national network radio program called Faith in Action. Two sisters were interviewed, one from Miami, Florida, and the other a member of a campus branch Relief Society at the University of California at Los Angeles. These are the responses of these two sisters to the question, "What does your membership in Relief Society do for you?"

The Miami sister replied as follows:

When our children were babies, I enjoyed being a mother and housewife, but felt that I wasn't making full use of the years that I had spent as an undergraduate and graduate student in college. One Tuesday, the Relief Society literature teacher invited me to help present part of the lesson. This was a very rewarding experience. It made me feel useful and gave me an opportunity to use some of the experiences I had gained in school.

As I attended Relief Society and learned more about its purposes, I was excited to find that here was an organization with a well-rounded program that involved spiritual, cultural, intellectual, and homemaking activities—a kind of compact college course. From that time on, my life became enriched because I was able to fulfill my desire to keep learning and to keep developing as I also made use of the training I had received in college. I sincerely feel that the knowledge I've obtained has helped me to be a better wife and mother and to be better equipped to guide my children.

It is difficult to put into words what Relief Society has meant to me so far, but I do know that it has strengthened my testimony and has changed me from a housewife who felt as if she were retrogressing into an individual who is constantly trying to develop the few talents she may have in order to use them for the good of her family and others.

Differing values, but equally important ones, were emphasized by the sister from California, who said:

Ours is a campus ward Relief Society. Our members are the wives of men who are students at the University of California at Los Angeles. Most of the men are doing graduate work, which means that they have very little time away from their studies. The majority of these young families are from out of state, living in this large city, surrounded by unfamiliar faces and away from the loving care of parents. Our Relief Society provides loving service and in many ways makes the absence of loved ones and familiar places easier to adjust to.

We have an enrollment of 32 young women with an average attendance of 21 at our weekly meetings. Whether or not a sister is able to attend these weekly meetings, she is happy to be a member, knowing that her welfare will be of prime importance to the president who serves as the 'mother' of the ward. This same sister knows that in times of stress the Relief Society will send loving and able sisters into her home to assist her.

There are frequent calls for many types of compassionate service in our Relief Society. Of course, the most frequent calls come at the birth of a new baby. Twelve times this past year members of the Society have been sent into homes in answer to calls from new parents. The service these young women perform relieves to a great extent the expense attendant upon the family at such a time.

The rewards that come from this voluntary service are inestimable. There is no exploitation. Each woman knows that she will eventually be able to repay in kind for the service she receives. Each woman knows that there are 31 other young women who are faced with problems similar to hers. The spirit of sisterhood inspires them all to make an honest effort to solve their own problems before they call for help, but when help is genuinely needed, they may call upon the Relief Society.

We are a blessed and fortunate group to have Relief Society.

Such expressions are not confined to well-established and fully functioning Relief Societies within the United States. Mission, district, and stake Relief Society presidents in other lands, with vision and devotion, are utilizing the organization and directing its affairs so as to enrich the lives and expand the usefulness of women in ever-increasing numbers. Here are a few excerpts from a letter written some time ago by the president of the Denmark Mission Relief Society:

September 29 and 30 were not only bright, autumn, sunny days in Copenhagen, but there was a feeling of excitement and great happiness here. The women from the entire land of Denmark met together for the first time for two wonderful days—days filled with activities and instruction that will improve every phase of Relief Society work—days rich in opportunity for the sisters to express themselves and to demonstrate and develop their varied talents and skills. . . .

At a special meeting of all district and branch officers, the sisters were given the challenge of having 1,000 members of the Relief Society by the end of our Relief Society year. This will mean that our present enrollment of 500 or 520 will have to be doubled through the combined efforts of every sister to bring back an inactive member or bring in a new member. The sisters expressed a desire to do this and we are planning different ways and different activities to help bring it about.

A highlight of the convention was the concert given by the 70-voice Singing Mothers chorus on Saturday night. The hall was filled to capacity and the songs were rendered in a beautiful and thrilling way. The sisters worked very hard for many months for this concert, and the results were wonderful. Eyes were shining and hearts were full of gratitude and love for this wonderful activity of Relief Society.

At the closing session of the convention, an address was given by the mission president, who talked to the sisters about keeping a vision of the great future of the Relief Society organization and of endeavoring to realize the importance of living according to the standards set by it.

As the congregation sang the closing song, "God Be With You Till We Meet Again," there were many eyes filled with tears, tears of sadness that the convention had ended, and tears of joy for the wonderful two days the sisters had enjoyed together under the auspices of Relief Society.

There were many benefits derived from this convention in the way of learning and a better understanding of the Relief Society program—better teaching methods and better record keeping, but I think one of the greatest benefits in this wonderful experience was the feeling of sisterhood and companionship and love for one another that was so prevalent. Many sisters had never seen more than a few members of Relief Society at one time in all the years they had been members of the Church. One sweet sister was 90 years old and had traveled from the farthest distant city in Denmark. She bore a strong testimony. Another sister was the only member of the Church on an entire island. She had not been able to come to church for nearly three and one-half years. You can imagine the joy she felt when she could associate with hundreds of friendly, happy, progressive women who believed as she believed and lived as she lived.

From Ireland there came an interesting report of a Relief Society seminar:

On the 8th of September we held an all-day Relief Society seminar. We wanted to give the sisters a vision of what can be done if they understand the program and policies of Relief Society, and to help them to analyze their specific situations and problems and have new ideas, methods, and approaches in dealing with them. Since learning is always directly correlated to involvement and participation, we tried to structure the situation so that through this medium of participation all were able actively to take part, express their opinions, and analyze and discuss common problems in their districts.

The attitude of the group was marvelous, spontaneous, and eager. The sisters were teachable and happy to be able to express their opinions and discuss their problems.

The Relief Society program is indeed suited to the basic needs of women and satisfies their innermost urges, regardless of where they may reside or the circumstances under which they live. Rarely do you find a woman who actively devotes herself to the work of this society who does not sincerely love it.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, referring to the work of Relief Society at a meeting held in Nauvoo April 28, 1842, gave the key to why it is so satisfying to women. He declared:

This is a charitable Society and according to your natures. . . . You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms.

If you live up to these principles how great and glorious will be your reward in the celestial kingdom! (History of the Church 4:605.)

The women of that day lived lives somewhat different from women of today. Regardless of the differences, however, the basic nature of the normal woman remains the same, and those things which bring to her true satisfaction have been little altered. She has always sought and will always seek for the expressions of her inner urges. Woman is by nature, as the Prophet declared, a "charitable, sympathetic, humanitarian being. She is by nature spiritual in the full sense of the word. She is concerned with the sacred things of Church, and the lofty ideals of life."

Woman is by nature a homemaker. All may not be by nature housekeepers, but there are few, I believe, who are not endowed by nature with the homemaking instinct. I see this often in beautiful, young, so-called career women whom the years are taking a bit beyond the youthful days of many beaux into a day of fewer opportunities for marriage, but with increasingly high standards of selectivity. The longing for husband, home, and family, so natural to women, does not diminish in them with the years; it often becomes an almost predominant urge, greatly affecting their lives and their happiness. Every woman has special talents that she can develop and use for the betterment of mankind, as she seeks avenues whereby she may develop self-esteem and know full self-realization according to her nature.

Today, many organizations are bidding for the time and interests of women. They are offering them development and opportunities for service along one line or another. There are few women today, particularly American women, who do not belong to one or another type of club or organization. In fact, many thinking women leaders today are feeling that there are far too many clubs and organizations enticing women into their folds; that there is too much program duplication among organizations; and that too much organized energy is being turned to unprofitable and unimportant account. Let me quote from a letter I received from a woman who has considerable stature nationally as a leader of organized women:

The women of the world, particularly American women, are becoming involved in too many organizations. This, in my opinion, is one of their greatest troubles because in too many of these organizations too much energy is scattered on nonentities. As individuals, women allow themselves to be smothered by the herd instinct. There are really only a limited number of independent thinkers and real leaders among women. To be a leader one must exhibit constant, unadulterated initiative, rigid determination, and strict adherence to a cause of benefit to herself and to others to which she unwaveringly devotes herself. One must possess innate never-wavering courage radiantly expressed in the face of doubting, faltering multitudes. One must not be a follower ready to succumb to joining all kinds of nondescript organizations of little importance. . . .

It is my opinion that relatively few of the typical programs arranged by women's organizations are much above the commonplace in interest or achievement, or value to the members. Too much of the time is aimed at entertainment rather than at vital, strong programs, which favorably affect the members and advantageously influence American life.

Mrs. Spafford, what I have said does not apply to your Relief Society. In my opinion it is one of the truly great and worthwhile organizations in the world.

May I conclude with this message:

Latter-day Saint women who for any reason find themselves outside the realm of Relief Society should take stock of themselves, asking, "Can I afford to be an outsider? Can I in justice to myself disregard being a participant in the powerful and continuing onward flow of Relief Society as it so magnificently serves women who, through it, may in turn effectively serve others?" Today, approximately one million women are enrolled in Relief Society, but the Society is so structured that it will never be submerged or smothered by members, nor will the development and usefulness of a single woman be lost sight of. The larger its numbers, the greater becomes its influence and accomplishments. Relief Society needs every Latter-day Saint woman and every Latter-day Saint woman needs Relief Society.
