Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 16

The Destiny of Relief Society

In March 1974 Latter-day Saint women in many parts of the world observe the 132nd anniversary of the founding of Relief Society in Nauvoo, Illinois, by revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

At that time, Nauvoo was a thriving frontier town located on the bend of the Mississippi River, known as "Nauvoo, the Beautiful." It had been founded by the Saints driven by persecution to this swampland, which they soon reclaimed. By 1842 Nauvoo was a busy, thriving city in which the walls of a temple were rising. The History of the Church records the Prophet as saying, in January 1842,

. . . the Saints seem to be influenced by a kind and indulgent Providence in their dispositions and [blessed with] means to rear the Temple of the Most High God, anxiously looking forth to the completion thereof as an event of the greatest importance to the Church and the world. . . . (History of the Church 4:492.)

It must have been an exciting day in the lives of the women when, in response to their request to be organized into a "Ladies Society" in order that they might more effectively do the women's part in the completion of the temple, they met with the Prophet, John Taylor, and Willard Richards on March 17 and were organized under the priesthood and after a pattern of the priesthood. Eighteen women were present to hear their beloved Prophet and President utter these words long to be remembered by the sisters of the last days:

I now declare this Society organized with President and Counselors according to parliamentary usages—and all who shall hereafter be admitted into this Society must be free from censure. . . .

Following the official organization of the society, Elder John Taylor addressed the sisters, saying he "rejoiced to see this institution organized according to the law of heaven . . . and to see all things moving forward in such a glorious manner." (The law of heaven is divine law, priesthood administered.) Elder Taylor concluded his remarks with the prayer that "the blessings of heaven might rest on this institution henceforth."

The Nauvoo days, however, were of short duration for Relief Society. Persecution of the Saints rose in intensity, culminating in the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, in June 1844, to be followed ere long by the long and arduous exodus from Nauvoo.

Then for ten long years, circumstances made inoperative the priesthood-organized Relief Societies, but the spirit and genius of Relief Society lived on in the hearts and acts of the members as they ministered to the weary Saints crossing the sun-baked plains, and as they did their part in their new desert homeland in establishing homes and wresting a living from bleak and barren soil.

In time, however, by divine intent, Relief Societies began to flourish in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains and to steadily increase in numbers. The women, by nature, teaching, and training, maintained good homes. They were also active in Church and community life. They became conspicuous figures in the national woman's suffrage movement. It was a Mormon, Seraph Young—a grandniece of Brigham Young—who is generally credited with being the first woman to vote in the United States. Mormon women wished to see this privilege extended to all women.

So active in the national woman's suffrage movement had Mormon women become that in 1888, when the National Woman's Suffrage Association convened a conference in Washington, D.C., to observe the fortieth anniversary of what has been called "the first public declaration of independence for women," which demanded "equal social, educational, industrial and political rights," Relief Society and the YWMIA were among the national women's organizations invited to send representatives. Many distinguished international women were also invited. The chief outcome of this conference was the formation of the National Council of Women of the United States, to be made up of national women's organizations, and the formation of the International Council of Women, to be made up of National Councils of the respective countries. Each national council would automatically become an affiliate of the International Council.

The two Mormon organizations became charter members of the National Council of Women of the United States. This action projected these two organizations into the national and international scene as active participants. Their acceptance, however, by organized women was not always the warmest and best. At times, slights and lack of consideration prevailed. Nonetheless, the presiding brethren of the Church directed a continuation of the membership.

Time has a way of moving forward. Soon the one-hundredth anniversary of Relief Society was near at hand and elaborate preparations were made by the general board and by the local societies for its observance. Among the general board plans was to be the issuing of a pictorial and narrative history of the society. Sister Marianne C. Sharp and I were assigned to prepare this publication. For more than a year we researched Church and Relief Society records to make sure the historical information would be factual; we wished everything accurately reported and well documented.

As we read through the minutes of pioneer days in the Salt Lake Valley, we would run on to such interesting statements by the sisters as these:

. . . standing as we do at the head of the women of the world . . .

. . . in our position as leaders of women of the world. . . .

Emblazoned on the front page of the Woman's Exponent was this ambitious caption: "For the rights of the women of Zion and the rights of the women of all nations."

Here were these pioneer women closeted away in the vastness of the Rocky Mountains trying to wrest their daily bread from a hard and barren soil, envisioning themselves as leaders and defenders of women of the world.

Sister Sharp and I would read such statements and exchange amused glances and, at times, even make discrediting comments. "How could they think such things, let alone write them!" we reasoned.

By the time the one-hundredth birthday dawned, the world was engulfed in a second tragic world war. Anniversary observance plans had to be greatly modified; most were cancelled. Gasoline was rationed, visits to stakes as well as general conference sessions were cancelled, and Relief Society had to shift its efforts from the promotion of its own programs into high gear for the war effort. Women who were active in the society at that time need no reminder of Relief Society's contribution.

With the cessation of hostilities, further demands were made upon the society in ministering to a suffering humanity—impoverished, deprived, and ill from the ravages of war. Let me cite one example of Relief Society service.

I recall sitting one morning in a General Church Welfare Committee meeting. A letter was read from the president of the mission in Holland, making a moving appeal for the Church to send soap to the Saints in Europe. The brethren pointed out the desperate need for this item, but explained that the one soap factory in the welfare program simply was not producing enough to meet the request.

Soap was rationed and was available for purchase only to individuals having coupons. The brethren said they saw no way whereby the request could be met. The Relief Society presidency, all of whom were present (I was a counselor to Sister Lyman), said that they believed the women of the Church had been obedient to the counsel of the brethren to keep a year's supply on hand and that, undoubtedly, some of them had tucked away a few bars of soap that they would be willing to share with their sisters in war-torn Europe if the brethren would so authorize. Shortly after noon that day, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., telephoned and accepted the offer. He authorized us to call stake Relief Society presidents who, in turn, would be asked to call ward presidents who, in turn, would ask their respective bishops to announce the program in a sacrament meeting on Sunday. He suggested that the soap be brought to a central place in each stake on Monday. On Tuesday the welfare trucks would pick up the soap, and on Thursday it would be shipped. The telephone calls to stake Relief Society presidents took the entire afternoon. The sisters responded enthusiastically. When the soap was counted for shipment, 50,000 bars had been contributed.

In April 1945, in the midst of the society's great humanitarian efforts, the general board was reorganized. I was named president and Sister Marianne Clark Sharp and Sister Gertrude Ryberg Garff were named counselors.

Shortly after our appointment to office, we received a notice of a meeting to be held in New York City by the National Council of Women, urging us to send representatives. Feeling disturbed over the lack of consideration that had been shown Relief Society by the Council during the preceding few years, the new presidency drafted a letter to the First Presidency recommending that Relief Society terminate its membership in the Council. By appointment one morning, I went alone to see President George Albert Smith, taking the recommendation with me, together with a list of the reasons why the recommendation was being made. The President carefully read the typed material. Then he inquired, "Isn't this the organization which the sisters joined before the turn of the century?"

I said, "Yes, sir."

He said, "Am I then to understand that you now wish to terminate that membership?"

I said, "Yes, sir." Then I added, "You know, President Smith, we don't get anything from the Council."

The President looked at me with surprise. He said, "Sister Spafford, do you always think in terms of what you get? Don't you think it is well at times to think in terms of what you have to give? I believe," he continued, "that Mormon women have something to give to the women of the world, and that they may also learn from them. Rather than have you terminate your membership, I suggest that you take several of your ablest board members and go back to this meeting."

Then he said with emphasis, "Make your influence felt."

Obedient to this counsel, we did attend the conference. Apparently our work was well done, for a year or two later when an International Council of Women conference was held in Helsinki, Finland, I was named by the officers of the National Council of Women to head the ten-women delegation from the United States to this great conference, at which more than 500 women representing national councils from thirty-four free nations were in attendance. The press referred to the delegates as "serious-minded, intellectually brilliant, responsible women."

The official opening of the conference was a brilliant and impressive affair, held in the imposing auditorium of the University of Helsinki. In addition to the conference participants, many public officials and other prominent persons were in attendance, including Madame Alli Passikivi, wife of the President of Finland. The ambassadors, foreign ministers, and other officials of the thirty-four countries represented were in attendance, each accompanied by his wife. The men wore their dress suits and decorations; the wives were elegant in evening gowns and furs.

A very impressive part of this meeting was the formal introduction of the chairmen of the respective delegations. Finnish girls dressed in national costumes carried on standards the flags of the different nations to the dais of the festival hall, where they stood in front of a row of white marble pillars. I was assigned to lead the march of the chairmen of all nations. It was a stirring experience to stand in front of the glorious stars and stripes and be formally introduced while a 100-piece, all-woman orchestra softly played strains of "The Star Spangled Banner." In introducing me, the president of the National Council of Finland announced that I was chairman of the oldest and most influential council in the world. As I looked out at the glittering audience made up of people of many nations and heard these words spoken, my mind suddenly flashed back to the words of our pioneer leaders at which Sister Sharp and I had smiled—

. . . standing as we do at the head of the women of the world . . .

. . . for the rights of the women of Zion and the rights of the women of all nations.

This night in that far-away northern country, I did not smile. I knew that our pioneer women leaders had been given by divine insight a knowledge of the destiny of Relief Society that many of us who have followed after them have had to gain through the tedious processes of learning and experience.

I caught a new vision of my beloved Relief Society. I thought, Relief Society is a composite of women of many nationalities, women with differing backgrounds, traditions, and training, but all with the self-same fundamental needs that Relief Society is well equipped to meet.

It is my belief that this event in Finland marked the beginning of Relief Society's present position of prestige among organized women of the world. It is my conviction that the time had come for Relief Society's influence to be felt worldwide among womankind. The ravages of war had brought new patterns of life, new philosophies, new concepts of right and wrong that were adversely affecting women, their homes, and their children. The Lord surely knew of this trend and the need for Relief Society to extend its influence. In his mercy, he opened the doors of opportunity.

A second singular recognition of Relief Society came in 1968 when I was elected president of the National Council of Women of the United States, an organization presently made up of thirty-two national women's organizations through which the Council has access to 23 million American women. I served the prescribed two-year term. Presently I hold the position of honorary president, and I am chairman of the powerful Constitution and By-Laws Committee. Through the Council I have had close association with the most distinguished women leaders of the free world, as well as abundant opportunity to extend the influence of Relief Society.

Relief Society today holds a position of responsibility, confidence, and trust among organized women of the world. It is my conviction that in the years ahead it will grow in influence and be, in very deed, the power for good which the Lord designed for it. Truly the prayer of Elder John Taylor at the founding meeting has been realized. The blessings of heaven have rested on this institution and will continue to do so henceforth.
