Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 17

Our Beloved Lamanite Sisters

Our Latter-day Saint heritage, insofar as the Lamanites are concerned, is far more than one of acceptance and consideration. It is one of love and concern for these people. This spirit has evidenced itself in many ways throughout the years and is based on the belief that the Lamanites have a divine destiny, in the realization of which we as Latter-day Saints are expected to play an important part.

The attitude of helpfulness toward the Lamanites, or Indians, asserts itself in a desire to aid their families by bringing to their children of elementary school age greater opportunities for education and social advancement than were available to them in the areas of their place of residence. The parents, awakened to this need, have been grateful for these opportunities.

A program known as the Indian student placement program has been established and is now conducted as a division of the Latter-day Saint Social Services. It was developed as a result of work with Church officials, state officials, tribal council members, professional caseworkers, and parents.

The objectives of the program are to provide opportunity for the Indian children to receive schooling in community public schools, to have opportunity for acceptance and participation in American community life, and to have wholesome living experiences during the time the educational training is given. The adjustment of the child to his new home and school and the adjustment of the home and school to the child are carefully safeguarded through casework services of professionally trained workers. Special attention is given to health of the children, with provision made for complete physical examinations before each school year, as well as for any needed health care.

Of special concern to Church officials is the need to keep strong the ties between natural parents and their children, to preserve the beauties of their native culture even as they learn to adapt to the white culture in which they live, and to inculcate firmly in the children pride in their race as a mighty people with a great destiny. It is the goal that in time these children, educated and experienced, will be leaders, able to work with understanding and effectiveness among the Lamanite people to improve the general quality of their home life and community life, as well as to contribute effectively to Church life.

It is the opinion that the program is truly successful. The academic achievements of the children are attested by a large number of high school graduates and by the records of a number who have been and are enrolled in colleges and universities.

While the other goals of the program do not lend themselves to as precise measuring as does academic achievement, there is ample evidence in the lives of these children that the other goals set for the program are also being realized in good measure.

In recent years Relief Society has recognized a need to intensify and improve its efforts in behalf of Lamanite home and family life, and to work more effectively with the women through organized programs, two primary purposes of which are the development of the woman so that she may realize her full potential as a woman and the promotion of good home and family life.

Relief Societies with all-Lamanite membership are increasing in number, offering to these women leadership positions and experience as well as opportunities for personal development and service to one another. Courses of study, issued by the general board of Relief Society, are taught at weekly meetings. These are designed to help the women in their spiritual, social, cultural, and intellectual development and also in homemaking activities and family relationships.

One meeting a month, often several hours in length—according to the work to be accomplished—is devoted exclusively to the art and skills of homemaking. A portion of the time is given to a discussion of some important aspects of homemaking, such as money management, thrift practices, home safety, health and sanitation, the use and care of fabrics, and similar subjects. The balance of the time is spent in helping the women to become proficient in the homemaking skills through demonstrations and through actively involving them in the learning experience.

The results of these efforts have been encouraging. Some time ago I attended a Relief Society conference in Arizona at the invitation of the president of the Southwest Indian Mission. The conference compared with Relief Society conferences generally. There was ample evidence of the leadership development of the women. They responded to calls to speak extemporaneously and did so with judgment, poise, and intelligence. Their remarks revealed resourcefulness as well as progressiveness in meeting the needs of their Relief Society members.

An elaborate exhibit of instructional materials for the teaching program was impressive. It included charts, graphs, drawings, and many other types of original and useful visual aids. In addition, there was a beautiful display of articles produced in the homemaking meetings. This was augmented by a fashion show in the evening, with lovely Lamanite girls and women modeling clothing made by the women, ranging from the colorful Indian dress of the past to today's modern apparel. Workshops held in connection with the conference were excellent.

We find the Lamanite women responding to special activities of Relief Society. At the general Relief Society Conference in 1969, a chorus of 135 Lamanite women from the Northern Indian Mission (in the Dakotas, Montana, and Nebraska) provided music for one session of the conference held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, where more than 8,000 Relief Society leaders from many parts of the world were assembled. Dressed in the recommended dress for Relief Society choruses—a white blouse and dark skirt—and backed by the beautiful Tabernacle organ, the women of the chorus were a picture long to be remembered, as the sweet and harmonious tones of their voices resounded through that sacred edifice.

In cooperation with the American Red Cross, Relief Society women in many areas of the Church have received training in home nursing. Upon satisfactorily completing the prescribed course, a woman receives from the Red Cross a certificate of graduation. When the course was opened to Lamanite women in the Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona, areas, attendance was gratifying, as was the number who earned the certificate of graduation. The Red Cross was delighted with the results, as were our general board officers. This program is now being extended to Lamanite women elsewhere.

May I mention one activity of our beloved Lamanite sisters that has had national and international significance and brought great credit to Relief Society, the Church, and the United States.

A few years ago the International Council of Women met in Bangkok, Thailand. A feature of the conference was to be a display of items provided by each of the sixty-four participating nations, which would represent the very finest of its native culture. The United States Council decided that the most exquisite work truly representative of the native culture of America would need to be American Indian.

Sister Florence S. Jacobsen, former president of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, and I were assigned to gather the articles. Rare and beautiful items were contributed by members in the Southwest Indian Mission, Alaskan Relief Societies, and individuals representing tribes throughout North America. Sister Jacobsen prepared an attractive and authoritative pamphlet entitled Original Handmade Arts of the North American Indians, which gave a brief account of the history of the American Indian, with illustrations of their exquisite crafts. This was distributed to the women representing the International Council member nations.

The articles contributed were almost beyond belief in beauty and workmanship. So valuable was the exhibit regarded that the airlines provided without charge a man to accompany the exhibit as it was flown from Salt Lake City to Bangkok, where it was received by the United States ambassador to Thailand. Arrangements for its display and for safeguarding the articles while on display were made by the U.S. Embassy. No other country had a more beautiful display, or one that attracted such great attention. Each country sold its items and contributed the money to the International Council of Women to help finance the conference. In the U.S. Embassy in that far-away country are two articles purchased by the wife of the ambassador—work of our American Lamanite sisters. We are grateful to the Lamanite sisters for their part as Latter-day Saint women in bringing admiration to Relief Society, to the Church, and to our nation, and for the beauty and workmanship of their hands that is unique in all the world.

A few years ago at a reception held in connection with the Relief Society Annual General Conference, a group of Lamanite sisters passed through the receiving line to shake hands with the general board members. I asked one of the sisters how long she had been a member of the Church.

"Two years," she promptly replied.

"And what has Relief Society done for you during these two years?" I continued.

She replied, "Before I joined the Church and became active in Relief Society, hate was inside of me. I hated white women because I thought they looked down on me, an Indian woman. I hated the government because I felt it has not done right by the Indians. I was always looking for something wrong in people." Then gesturing with her hands as though she were pulling something from inside of her, she said, "Since I joined the Church and Relief Society, hate has gone out of me. Now I know that the white women are trying to help me. I know that the government wants to do better by the Indian. I have learned to love people. I am a better woman."

Then another of these sisters came along, and I said to her, "How long have you been a member of the Church?"

"I was baptized two days ago."

"There is no use asking you what the Church and Relief Society have done for you; that remains to be seen. So I must ask you what you want it to do for you."

Turning to look at all the women dressed in their lovely evening clothes, she replied, "I want it to make me a beautiful woman like these, my sisters."

And so we move ahead. But what of tomorrow? Certainly our programs for the Lamanites that have been proved good will be intensified, expanded, and improved. Two new courses of study in Relief Society are being introduced: (1) an extension of the mother training course, and (2) an illness prevention course. New and better methods of teaching are being adopted. More and more Lamanite woman leadership is being developed by involvement of larger numbers of women in positions of leadership and by better organized and more modern leadership training programs. We are working to overcome some of the problems that stand in our way today, such as the problems of distance from the women's homes to the places where the meetings are conducted, and the lack of adequate transportation.

The future looks promising. I think, however, that those of us who are trying to be helpful need to pause and take a look at ourselves: our attitudes, our motives, our practices, and the values incident to what we are doing in terms of the good life for these sisters.

May I suggest that there might be a greater recognition of the capacity of the Lamanite women to benefit from education, training, and opportunity, and more sensitivity to their desires as well as dealing primarily with their obvious needs. To illustrate: I visited one area a few years ago where the Indian women were being taught the same handwork items as I had seen there eighteen years earlier. This was in the face of a genuine desire on the part of these sisters for practical sewing and dressmaking help. Two women stood beside me, each with a package in her hand.

I asked, "Do you have something to show me?"

They opened their packages and showed me some pretty print dress material. "Could the Relief Society show us how to make a dress from this like our daughters in the placement program wear?" they asked.

May I further suggest that better methods be devised for helping the Lamanite to be self-directing and self-maintaining—contributors to their own people, to their church, and to their country. There needs to be more open communication between the helping groups, as well as better coordinated programs. And we need to know better those whom we are trying to help—their history, their traditions, their culture, their needs, their desires, their general characteristics, their problems, and the facilities available to them for taking advantage of what may be offered.

As I know women the world over, they are basically very much alike. They want good, peaceful homes that are inviting to their families. They love their children and want advantages for them. They have a bit of personal vanity that makes them want to look attractive and to be their best selves, and they are willing to work for these values. On these longings and desires, and on our experiences, let us build.
