Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 18

Instruction through the Order of the Priesthood

There is nothing more fundamental to the well-being of Relief Society than that it is organized by the priesthood and that it functions under the direction of the priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith placed inspired evaluation on this when the sisters of Nauvoo sought to be organized as a ladies society in order that they might more effectively contribute toward the erection of the Nauvoo Temple. They took with them a proposed constitution and by-laws for the consideration of the Prophet.

After reading this document, the Prophet replied that it was "the best he had ever seen. But," he said, "this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and he has something better for them than a written constitution. . . . I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after a pattern of the priesthood."

And, indeed, time has proven that the Prophet did have something better for the organization than a written constitution and by-laws.

At the founding meeting the Prophet made clear that the society should be presided over by a presidency and that the president, or, in his words, the "presiding officer," should choose two counselors to assist in the duties of her office by priesthood authority. Then the minutes state that the Prophet told the new Relief Society presidency that if they needed his instruction, let them ask him, and he would give it from time to time. Thus, the sisters knew they were to refer to the priesthood leader matters on which they needed instruction or counsel, and he in turn would give them instructions from time to time as he saw a need for this.

At the third meeting of the society the Prophet again made reference to the relationship of the Relief Society leaders to the priesthood. He said:

You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood which God has established, through the medium of those appointed to lead, guide and direct the affairs of the Church in this last dispensation. (History of the Church 4:607.)

Yet, withal, Relief Society was given its autonomy within the sphere assigned to it by the presiding priesthood authority of the Church and within the framework set by these brethren.

At the meeting of the society to which I have just referred, the Prophet also made the following significant statement, which is familiar to Relief Society sisters the world over:

. . . I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads. (HC 4:607.)

In an article written by Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Council of the Twelve, we find the following statement:

By turning the key, the Prophet delegated to the duly appointed officers of the new organization a portion of the keys of the kingdom. Under the Priesthood they were now authorized to direct, control, and govern the affairs of the Society. They thus became legal administrators, holding the key of presidency. Under this appointment, their lawful acts would be recognized by the Lord, and he would work with them in the rolling forth of the kingdom in the sphere assigned to them. (Relief Society Magazine, March 1950, p. 151.)

Thus we see that the Relief Society does enjoy the privilege of autonomy in an orderly way, as a unit of a priesthood-governed church. Its autonomy is respected by the General Authorities and by stake and ward, mission and mission district, and branch priesthood leaders as well as by Relief Society leaders themselves. Rarely have I seen the self-government principle of the Relief Society, working under the direction and with the blessing of the priesthood, disregarded; and when this happens, it is usually due to a lack of knowledge or understanding on the part of the Relief Society leaders or, at times, on the part of priesthood leaders as to the governing regulations of the society, as approved by the presiding brethren of the Church. I cite an example:

During a visit to one of the overseas countries some years ago, I was invited to attend a special Relief Society function given by a district Relief Society board honoring the visiting teachers of the branches of the district. The sisters had worked very hard and had prepared an excellent program, to be followed by a luncheon. The hall and tables were artistically decorated, and most of the decorations had been made by the sisters. All three members of the district presidency were there, in addition to the Relief Society board and officers.

When the hour to start arrived, I noticed the district president lean toward the district Relief Society president and appear to be discussing the meeting with her. Then he took from her the typed program and a few notes she had prepared. He then arose, called the meeting to order, and conducted the entire afternoon's activities. At the end the Relief Society officers were briefly recognized. When questioned later regarding this, the district president said that he had understood that at Relief Society gatherings, when he was present, he was the presiding officer, and that this included the responsibility of conducting the meeting. Had he known the proper procedure, he would have had the district Relief Society president conduct the meeting, and she would have recognized him as the presiding authority present. He so appreciated the understanding that came to him that day.

Some time ago the Relief Society general presidency and two general board members conducted three regional Relief Society conferences in Great Britain, under the direction of Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve. I conducted each of the sessions. Elder Petersen was seated beside me on the stand. He was the presiding officer. He, of course, participated in the conference, but I conducted. At the close of the conference in London, a district president said to me, "I didn't think I would ever live to see the day when a woman would conduct a meeting at which an apostle of the Lord was present. I have learned something today. Elder Petersen has taught me by example."

The general board is the planning and regulating unit for the Relief Societies of the Church. The programs and regulatory directives issued by the general board are approved by the General Authorities and are within the framework set by these authorities for Relief Society. Priesthood leaders of the various ecclesiastical divisions of the Church direct the Relief Society in harmony with the presiding priesthood-approved programs and instructions issued by the general board.

Thus, the basic purposes set for Relief Society by the Prophet Joseph Smith through revelation from the Lord, and the directives that come from each of the prophets who have succeeded him, are achieved, and uniformity and strength are maintained throughout the Relief Societies of the Church.

From time to time, special problems or matters requiring special consideration arise within an organization, the importance of which seems to call for priesthood counsel or instruction. We recall again the words of the Prophet to the Nauvoo Relief Society presidency: "If you need instruction, ask him [the priesthood leader]."

I suggest to Relief Society presidencies, however, that on matters that are troublesome, they first try to solve them themselves through applying established rulings, policies, recommendations, and procedures. Even the traditions and history of the society may serve as a guide. This, of course, necessitates a knowledge of these regulations and familiarity with the history.

Before taking any matter to the priesthood, the three members of the presidency should carefully and prayerfully weigh it and discuss it, and all possible light should be brought to bear on the matter. Then they should unitedly determine how they feel the matter might be most wisely dealt with. This is only preparation before approaching the priesthood leaders.

In presenting the matter to the priesthood leaders for counsel, the president should not only present the problem or the matter under consideration, but she should be ready to present the thinking of the presidency and their recommendation, together with the factors that influenced the recommendation. In discussing the matter with the priesthood leaders, the president has a responsibility to call attention to any related established regulations that need to be considered and respected. Then, whatever counsel the priesthood presidency may give, the Relief Society presidency should accept and abide by it.

Law and order must prevail in the Church. While we are a priesthood-directed organization, we must also remember that we are the set-apart officers to carry forward the work of Relief Society in the sphere assigned to us by the priesthood. We must not burden the brethren needlessly, but when their counsel is needed we must meet our obligation to the Relief Society by properly referring the matter to them, at the same time calling to their attention any related General Authority regulations. Then it is our responsibility to be entirely obedient to their decisions.
