Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Six

Walk in the Light

Chapter 19

Walk in the Light

We are highly privileged to live at this particular period of time when God's great plan of life and salvation, as taught by Jesus Christ during his earthly sojourn, has been restored, with prophets, seers, and revelators directing his priesthood-governed church in harmony with revealed truth.

At the same time, we recognize that we are living in perilous times when the forces of evil are sweeping the earth, leaving their destructive influences behind them. Conditions remind us of the predictions recorded in the Book of Mormon more than 2,000 years ago, when Mormon declared that the sacred records were "to be hid up unto the Lord that they may come forth in his own due time." (Mormon 5:12.)

This is the day to which Moroni referred when he declared:

. . . it shall come forth in a day when the power of God shall be denied and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts. . . .

. . . when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands;

And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in divers places.

. . . when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the last day.

Then Moroni warns:

But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. (Mormon 8:28-31.)

As we look about us, as we read the daily papers, listen to the radio, or view television, none would deny the fulfillment of this prophecy.

In the midst of all this stand the choice daughters of our Heavenly Father, distraught over conditions, to be sure; torn by the shattering impact on home and family life; all too often confused by false philosophies and deceptive theories, convincingly aired, that are running rampant. Countless women are reaching out for firm guidelines in which they can place full trust. How blessed are we as Latter-day Saint women to have the teachings of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ to light the way!

On every hand we hear the hue and cry of organized groups of women in many parts of the world demanding greater recognition and power, together with full equality with men in all things. The Church has always accorded to woman a position of dignity and confidence. It recognizes her mental capacities and provides her opportunities to develop and use her talents to the full.

But it respects the natural differences between man and woman and assigns to each a divinely ordained division of labor for forming, maintaining, and protecting that precious unit of society known as the family, and also for forwarding the work of the Church.

Today we find all too often the very sanctity of marriage defiled. Louder and louder come the voices: "Marriage is too binding; it robs one of full freedom; it stifles natural impulses that contribute to individual development and happiness. If marriage is entered into," say these voices, "and it becomes incompatible to the marriage partners, what is wrong with dissolving it?" Thus divorce increases, with its destructive disruption of family life and its adverse effects upon the offspring of the marriage.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has always taught the sanctity of marriage. It upholds temple marriage as the ideal; it teaches that temple marriage is the beginning of a relationship whereby a family is bound together eternally. For those who are not yet married and those who are married but who, for one reason or another, have only a civil marriage, it urges a study of the doctrine of eternal marriage and an earnest striving toward one day obtaining the blessings of such a marriage.

Today we also hear the voices pleading that families shall be limited to two or fewer children for the good of society. A great wave of opinion declares that no unwanted child should have to come into the world. This has prompted liberal abortion legislation. Our First Presidency has spoken out positively on this subject, warning women with regard to abortion.

The Latter-day Saint woman knows that motherhood is a divine calling. As a mother, she is a co-partner with the eternal Father in the creation of a human life. To bear and rear children, to feel the dependence upon her of husband and family, to know that upon her rests, in large measure, the health, character and happiness of human beings whom she loves and whom she has helped bring into the world and for whom she has responsibility, to see herself laying and preserving the foundations of so basic and necessary a structure as a home, to rear children so they will be of service to the Church and society is a responsibility of greatest magnitude. The Latter-day Saint mother knows that no other work to which she might set her hand could be so broad and inspiring, so filled with interest, so demanding of intelligence and capability, so rewarding.

The present-day relaxed attitude toward sexual purity and the ever-increasing toleration of sexual promiscuity is appalling and is among the most serious evils of our day. This runs directly counter to God's laws. In the Book of Mormon we read: "For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me. . . . " (Jacob 2:28.)

These are but a few of our present-day evils that touch intimately our lives as women. These are all areas, however, in which Latter-day Saint women need not find themselves confused, for the gospel lights the path of right. To the degree that we understand gospel teachings and apply them in our lives, we will be able to determine right and to stand firm in defense of it. This we call testimony.

Testimony contemplates a full acceptance of the doctrines taught by Christ and given again through the latter-day prophets, along with the application of these truths in our daily lives.

To implant in the hearts and minds of the sisters of the Church an unwavering testimony of the gospel in order that they will unalterably walk in the light of revealed truth is a major responsibility of Relief Society. A firm and abiding testimony on the part of a mother not only sets the pattern of her daily life, but it has great bearing upon her children and even upon her grandchildren and those who follow after them.

Many years ago a little girl sat at the knee of her grandmother, who had pinned to the blouse of her black silk dress a large gold watch attached to a heavy gold chain. It had a slide that the grandmother lovingly slipped up and down along the chain with her slender fingers. The grandmother had brought the watch all the way from Scotland. It had crossed the plains with her as she walked the weary way. It had proved the best time keeper, so she said, for the pioneer company. Admiringly, the little girl watched her lovely grandmother, with a special eye for the gold watch.

At length she said, "Grandmother, will you will to me your gold watch and chain when you die?"

Wisely the grandmother said, "By the time I die, it probably will be worn out or lost. It's of small worth, really. But I will leave you something very precious that I also brought all the way from Scotland and that I carried with me across the plains, something that will be of value to you on into the eternities. I will leave you my testimony of the gospel."

This grandmother today has a host of active Latter-day Saint descendants who honor her name and recall with joy her testimony.

For women without children of their own, the strength of their testimony often becomes a powerful factor for good in the lives of children of other members of the parental family as well as in the lives of their associates.

Relief Society women will recall that the Prophet Joseph Smith admonished the sisters of Nauvoo to strengthen community virtues. We, today, would do well to heed this counsel. To be sure, we would do so in the manner approved by the Lord and his priesthood authorities.

All too often one of our loved ones falls victim to attitudes and conditions in the community, at times even in the home, of which parents may be unaware, and engages in conduct that violates God's laws and the teachings of the Church. This is heartbreaking to parents. A wise present-day apostle has said: "A child is never lost until his parents give up."

The mother with a testimony, knowing the path of true repentance so mercifully given us by the Father, stands close by the erring one, a strong supporting influence. Lovingly and understandingly she strives to guide him back toward righteous living, seeking always the help of an understanding Heavenly Father. Having done this, she may be comforted through knowing she has done her part. With a restoration of the erring loved one to a good life, there will then come to her exquisite joy. This has been the blessing of countless mothers.

Mothers must ever be alert to safeguard their children against the evil influences that prey upon them and that may lead them into unrighteous conduct. With love and wisdom they will protect their children against these influences.

May I tell you an incident related to this. A number of years ago a young Latter-day Saint college girl and her Latter-day Saint boyfriend planned to go to a public dance hall of questionable reputation. Coming home early in the afternoon, the girl gleefully announced the couple's plan, saying, "We think it will be a fun experience."

Properly the mother questioned the girl as to the advisability of going and cautioned her, but the girl was unconvinced. "We won't do anything wrong," she declared. "What harm is there in just going to see what goes on?" The mother made no further protest.

That evening as the girl prepared to dress for the dance, the mother suggested she wear her loveliest white party dress. The girl was delighted. She thought her mother had relented. As the time neared for the couple to leave the home, the father, sitting in his easy chair, casually asked the girl if she would go out to the smokehouse and bring in a side of bacon before leaving.

Appalled, the girl said, "I can't go into the smokehouse in my best dress! I would never get rid of the awful smell!"

With composure, the mother said, "Why don't you apply this to your going to the public dance hall?"

After a moment's pause, the girl said to her boyfriend, "I think we should not go."

That young girl, now a wonderful, mature woman, later told me, "My parents always seemed to join hands in safeguarding me against innocently running into trouble."

Next to homemaking, a woman finds her greatest life fulfillment in humanitarian service. Kind and helpful service to those in distress is a realm wherein God and nature destined women to bless mankind and develop their better natures. Relief Society honors this and engages in it in an orderly, well-directed manner that blesses both the recipient and the sister who serves. It is a great developer of the character and talents of a woman and enlarges her soul.

In the Book of Mormon we read the words of Lehi to his son Jacob: " . . . men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) The joy spoken of by Lehi is the joy that comes through righteous, well-directed effort, and through knowing and meeting with intelligence and composure our basic obligations to the Lord, to our families, and to our fellowmen in the Lord's way as marked out by his prophets.

It was not intended that our lives should be a succession of confused, wearisome, frustrated days. Rather, it was intended that they should be orderly, fruitful days of true joy as we triumph over evil and rise above tribulation. This comes about as we approach our problems positively in the light of gospel teaching.

Grateful indeed we should be to live in a period of time when the gospel is upon the earth to show us the way. Certainly as a sisterhood we should rejoice that the Lord has given us a society through which we may learn what is expected of us. Favored are we to mingle with sisters who believe as we believe, who share experiences and who are comforted and sustained by the Spirit of the Lord and by the wisdom and love of one another.

These are blessings of magnitude that are for all of our Father's daughters. None should be denied. Those of us who know the guiding and sustaining power of Relief Society should reach out this very day to any sister whom we know whose life is not being touched by the society. Through faith, energy, and wisdom, let us bring her within its influence as a participating member, whether she be a young and energetic eighteen-year-old or a sister whose ripened years press heavily upon her, for Relief Society is for all women, and all women need its blessings.

New and exciting programs lie ahead for the sisters of the Church—inspired, flexible programs designed to meet the special needs and interests of every woman in a way best suited to her age and circumstances. Let none of us be remiss in extending our sisterhood to encompass every one among us.

I am grateful for the knowledge I have of the divinity of Christ and the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I am grateful for the knowledge I have of the divinity within Relief Society. I love the gospel; I love the Relief Society. Daily their beauties and values take deeper root in my life. My testimony gives purpose to my life; it lightens my load; it brings peace to my heart. God grant unto you, my dearly beloved sisters, the blessings of a testimony, that your lives may be fruitful, your burdens light, and your souls at rest.
