Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 20

The Latter-day Saint Price Tag

What does it mean to be a good and consistent Latter-day Saint?

It means that we have been baptized by immersion and have had conferred upon us, by men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, the gift of the Holy Ghost; that the gospel as taught by Jesus Christ during his first ministry on earth has been restored in all its fullness; that modern revelation given to our present-day prophet and president guides the Church today; that we place a high enough value on our Church membership to live in harmony with Church teachings.

Many members do not always realize, however, that this membership carries with it a high price tag, which we have an obligation to pay. I am reminded of the words of Alfred, Lord Tennyson in his "Vision of Sir Launfal" wherein he said, "Earth gets its price for what it gives us."

I know an eminently successful man who has acquired great wealth, who holds the respect of all who know him, and who has industrial influence and power, as well as social prestige. Everything appears to come very easy for him. Everything in his life seems to just fall into place without exacting any unusual effort or sacrifice on his part. One day I said to him, "My, but good fortune has followed you readily throughout your life, hasn't it?" To this he replied, "Yes, but my good fortune has been built on the foundation of hard work, sacrifice, self-discipline, and integrity, which began in my early youth. This is the price I have paid."

We all know that everything of worth in life has its price tag. A person must pay the price if he would possess it. In all too many cases, people desire the best but they are unwilling to make the full investment required to obtain it. Our rewards are pretty much commensurate with our investments. The person content to be a small investor must also be content with small returns. We have some Latter-day Saints who want to be top-flight Latter-day Saints. They want the full rewards enough to pay the full price. We have others who are content to be mediocre Latter-day Saints; they are willing to pay only a bargain price.

This leads me to ask, Is your Latter-day Saint membership of high worth to you, or is it of mediocre worth? What price are you willing to pay for being a Latter-day Saint?

I have found Church membership to be of intrinsic value and worth the fall price. Its price consists, I believe, of very special types of currency, such as self-discipline, respect for Church authority, obedience to Church teachings, strict adherence to God's commandments, uncompromising integrity, courage to be a practicing believer, maintenance of Church standards irrespective of prevailing attitudes or circumstances. As Latter-day Saints, we are unique among our contemporaries by virtue of our membership in the Church.

In declaring ourselves to be Latter-day Saints, we must realize that people have a right to expect that our attitudes, our speech, our appearance, our behavior, and our goals in life will support our professions. Yet there are some of us who accept and live certain principles of the gospel and are inclined to question or disregard others. Such persons can scarcely be called top-quality Latter-day Saints. They are the small investors, often without fully sensing that the returns on their investment will be proportionately small. Yet the Lord has made clear to us that there is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of the world upon which all blessings are predicated, and when we obtain any blessings from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (See D&C 130:20.)

Sometimes, even though we honestly believe and generally observe the Church standards, we yield to such things as peer attitudes or social pressures, allowing our actions to run counter to our religious beliefs and professions. When we do so, we invite criticism and often distrust. We invite criticism of the Church itself. It is, in reality, a form of deceit—or some may use a harsher word, hypocrisy. I assure you that no one admires a hypocrite. The Savior despised the hypocrite. In Matthew 15:7-8 he severely rebuked the Pharisees who were in Jerusalem, saying:

Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying,

This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.

Conversely, the individual who steadfastly refuses to compromise his or her beliefs and standards against even the most unusual circumstances or pressures wins respect. This I know to be true.

Relative to this, there comes to mind an experience I had in the autumn of 1970. At that time I was presiding as president of the National Council of Women of the United States. This is an umbrella organization made up of distinguished national women's organizations through which the council has access to over 25 million American women.

The National Council has its headquarters in New York City. Annually the president gives a formal dinner for the presidents of the member organizations of the council and for distinguished international women who may be in New York. Many of them are identified with the United Nations.

These dinners given by the presidents have always been elegant and exclusive affairs. They have traditionally been given at the home of the president, who, until my election, had been a resident of New York with a luxurious home there. I had no New York home. Where to entertain posed a problem, but I knew I must give a dinner. Sensing this, the immediate past president graciously offered me her home, which I impulsively accepted but soon declined. I realized that she had always preceded her dinner with a cocktail hour; this, of course, I could not do. Yet, I asked myself, would I have the right to tell her what she might do in her own home if she voluntarily planned such entertainment?

There was only one answer: I must go elsewhere. Then the wife of the Eastern States Mission president learned of my plight and kindly offered the use of the beautiful mission home. I felt, however, that I couldn't accept this offer. I could not be the one to set a precedent of using a Church facility, particularly a mission home, for a non-Latter-day Saint group.

Discouraged, I returned to the hotel, where I met the wife of the hotel manager, a Mormon woman I had long known. She said, "You appear discouraged. What's on your mind?"

I told her my plight, and she said, "Well, I have an apartment here in the hotel that you may use."

"No," I said, "if I'm going to use the hotel, I'll use one of the banquet halls."

To this she replied. "Let me help you with the dinner. Let us give one that will be second to none. Leave the arrangements in my hands and you plan the entertainment."

So I accepted her offer. A day or two before the party, however, the ugly spectre of a cocktail hour loomed again. If the party were to be held in a fashionable New York hotel, would my guests who accepted a cocktail hour as an established social custom expect it?

I immediately phoned the executive director of the council from my hotel room and asked if she would kindly call the guests and remind them of the dinner hour and also that there would be no cocktails served, nor would there be smoking. I told her that I felt that to notify them was a courtesy that was due them. To my utter surprise, she replied, "There is no need for such a thing, President Spafford. They wouldn't expect you to go counter to what you profess. They know you are not a hypocrite."

To conclude my story, every invited guest attended. There was no liquor or smoking; nor was there any evidence that these things were missed. For entertainment, I had a double quartet of young Relief Society women provide the music. I showed the Church film Johnny Lingo and concluded by telling them that I hoped they would all be "eight-cow" women. Everyone seemed to have a delightful time. To cap the event, at the end of the party the hotel's maitre d' said, "This has been an interesting party; it poses no cleanup problem."

A wise man has said, "A man is already of consequence in the world when he can be relied upon; that when he claims he knows a thing he does know it; then when he says he knows it he will act in accordance with that knowledge."

What I'm saying doesn't mean that one should be self-righteous. This is counter to Latter-day Saint teachings and repels rather than wins people to our point of view. The teachings of the Lord breathe a spirit of forbearance, tolerance, even love for those who differ from us in beliefs, standards, and actions. We recognize free agency as a law of God, and we respect tolerance as a part of gospel teachings. But this in no way involves emulation or acceptance of that which is counter to that which we profess as Latter-day Saints. Only as we have firm and unwavering testimonies of the gospel, only as we are truly converted, will our actions fully conform to what we profess in claiming to be Latter-day Saints.

I have often told a story about my Scottish grandmother, whom I adored. She joined the Church in Scotland when she was seventeen and walked with her brother across the plains. She accepted all of the principles of the gospel save one—the Word of Wisdom. Every morning she would have for breakfast a bowl of Scotch oats and a cup of tea. When she grew older and came to live at my parental home each morning my mother would prepare for Grandma's breakfast a bowl of Scotch oats and a cup of tea.

One day I asked her, "Grandma, don't you know it's wrong to drink tea?"

"Oh, my dear," she said, "when I look up at the stars at night and see all of the worlds that God has created, I don't believe that he's going to look down on me in my little kitchen, seated at my little table, with my little cup of tea, and care one bit whether I drink it or not. I don't believe a word of it."

A few months went by and then Grandma attended a stake conference. Elder Melvin J. Ballard, a member of the Council of the Twelve and a vital speaker, was the visiting authority. Grandma was growing hard of hearing, and they invited her to sit close to the stand so she wouldn't miss anything. Elder Ballard talked about the woman who couldn't do her washing without a cup of tea.

The next morning Grandma said to Mother, "I don't think I'll have my cup of tea this morning."

Mother said, "Why not? Aren't you well?"

"Yes, I'm all right, but I don't want tea."

Two or three mornings went by and each morning Grandma said, "I don't want my tea this morning."

After a while it dawned on Mother that Grandma had quit drinking tea. She asked, "Grandma, is it possible at your time of life that you've quit drinking tea?"

To this Grandma replied, in all seriousness, "Yes, you know Brother Ballard says it's wrong to drink tea."

"Why," Mother laughed, "all of the brethren since the days of Brigham Young have been telling you that, and you've never paid any attention to them. How is it that now at this time of your life you suddenly say, 'Brother Ballard says it's wrong,' and so you quit?"

She replied, "Oh, yes, but now I'm converted."

That's what it takes to live the principles of the gospel: conversion!

Where may we turn for the knowledge, the insight, the understanding that enables us to develop a testimony sufficiently strong to carry over instinctively into the activities of our lives? Certainly the first place is the home—a gospel-centered home—where both father and mother teach by precept and example. There are countless good homes in the Church today. Unfortunately, all are not so. An individual from a home that is weak in allegiance to the Church and its teachings, however, need not be without the full blessing of a testimony if he wants one. The Church provides abundant opportunities—the priesthood and auxiliary organizations, the sacrament meetings, the seminaries and institutes of religion, the Church schools, the missionary program, and the scriptures—the great source of truth available to all.

None need be without a testimony. Countless young people from partially active or completely inactive Latter-day Saint homes have gained testimonies and been instrumental in bringing into activity in the Church their family members as well as some of their associates. To this I bear testimony, feeling secure in the truth of what I am saying.

And what is the image of the young Latter-day Saint that one has an obligation to protect? He or she will be modest in dress and refined in speech and manner. He will seek after those things that are virtuous, of good report, and praiseworthy. He will honor his father and his mother. He will be sensitive to the best interests of the Church. He will seek learning. He will respect the right of others to their own viewpoints, but in no wise adopt them as his own if they run counter to revealed truth. He will be tolerant, but he will not be self-righteous. He will be a person of integrity.

In regard to maintaining good relationships with associates who may differ in behavioral standards, may I suggest that the problem usually is not that one does not know the way; rather, it rests in mustering the courage and the stamina to stay on the right track when others whose good will we would court might invite or entice us to follow a path of their choosing.

Elder Sterling W. Sill, Assistant to the Council of the Twelve, tells the story of a schoolboy who once wrote a lesson about a backbone. Among other things he said, "Your head sits on one end and you sit on the other. The backbone represents the beginning and the end." Backbone as commonly used in reference to character implies courage and staying power. In dealing with the permissiveness and false philosophies that are abroad today, we need backbone.

In my experience in working with non-Latter-day Saint women, in the main women of good conscience but living by man-defined rather than God-revealed truth, I have countless times had to call upon all the courage I possessed in order to stand firm for what I knew to be right. In doing so, I have never once lost a friend—temporarily, perhaps, but never permanently.

Emerson once said that nothing puts so much order and decency into one's life as a set of good principles to live by. Whether one may be an athlete, a businessman, a builder, a scientist, a housewife, or a social leader, it is important that he or she has a set of dependable governing rules to go by. An expert builder can erect the most magnificent building that the greatest architect can conceive merely by knowing how to follow a good blueprint.

Our young Latter-day Saint men and women have the most perfect blueprint in all the world for living well-adjusted, happy, productive personal lives and for influencing others to live likewise. They have a blueprint for effectiveness in advancing the work of the Church, which is so needed in today's world. May they have the integrity and the courage—the backbone, if you please—to use the gospel blueprint and build for themselves a good earth life and win eternal rewards. Mark Twain, in his inimitable style, put the message of right living in these terms. Said he, "Let us endeavor to so live that when we come to die, even the undertaker will feel sorry." Now that's the way to live. May the Lord bless us all to do so.
