Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 21

Eternal Horizons

One June day, shortly after graduation time, a young graduate from an engineering college came to my office and asked if I would give him a letter of introduction and recommendation to the personnel manager of a young but fast-growing corporation in California with whom I happened to be acquainted. The young man was clean-cut looking, and his grade-point average was reasonably good, so, having known the fine family from which he came, I responded quite willingly to his request.

Several weeks later I met the young man, who told me he was working for a small firm in Salt Lake City. I asked what had happened with regard to the California corporation. He said he didn't know; the personnel manager had just told him he felt he was not suited for employment with that company.

Some time later the personnel manager came to my office. He said he wished to explain why he had not hired the young man. In interviewing any person for employment, he explained that his first question was, "Why do you wish to work for us?"

In reply to this question, the applicant had said, "You have a better beginning wage than most companies. I like your fringe benefits, such as medical and hospital insurance. Your retirement program is good, and, if I should decide to quit within a given period or should be fired, you would return to me all I had paid into the retirement fund. Your work rules are not rigid and work hours allow for personal choice. These factors are important to me."

Then the manager explained to me, "We are a young and fast-growing firm. We want young engineers who are anxious to grow with the company, whose attitudes indicate a desire to contribute to its success, who come in because they want to be a part of a developing institution. This boy's horizon was limited to self-interest. We want men whose horizons of success are concern for company interests and programs. This is why I didn't hire him."

In contemplating horizons, several questions force themselves upon me. First, what do we mean by horizons? Second, to what extent does thought have bearing on these? Third, is a horizon constant, or is it altered by one's position, experience, or learning? Fourth, may it be foreshortened by what is expedient or of momentary interest? Fifth, does a clearly sighted horizon have value to the spectator? And last, do the teachings of the Church influence the horizon of the Latter-day Saint, and, if so, does this impose special requirements upon him, or does it offer special incentives, or both?

Generally speaking, I think we regard the horizon as the apparent junction of earth and sky. More fully defined, however, it is a focal or visible point within the range of perception or experience or desire of the spectator on which he projects certain goals or marks certain bounds toward which he intends to advance.

Thought has definite bearing upon one's horizons—thought that carries over into action, often difficult, self-sacrificing, courageous action.

I am reminded of the story of Christopher Columbus. As I recall it, he loved the sea and was an expert seafaring man. Often he would watch from the shore the ships going out to sea. At the shore, the design of the ship and the nature of its cargo were clearly discernible, but the farther out to sea it sailed, the less clearly visible the ship became, until at length, after reaching the horizon—the point where earth and sky seemed to meet—it dropped out of sight. Columbus pondered upon this. He engaged in thoughtful contemplation. He reasoned. At length his reasoning seemed to confirm a growing opinion that the earth was round rather than flat, which had been a prevailing belief but still remained to be proved.

This led Columbus to the conviction that the Far East, rich in spices and jewels, which had always been reached by sailing east, could be reached also by sailing west. This became the focal point of his belief and efforts—his horizon, if you please. He must test the theory. He must obtain support for it. He must have ships and sailors. He stood ready to endure the difficult experiences incident to proof. Though he did not reach the Far East, his thoughtful reasoning, which gave him a focal point, and the determined action that followed as he advanced toward this horizon brought achievement that immortalized him.

So it would seem we are justified in the belief that thought is a factor in setting our sights on a horizon; and thought stimulates action, even action that may require tremendous stamina and courage; and these lead to achievement.

A horizon is not constant. It is altered by one's position, learning, experience, and development. It is expanded as one grows spiritually and intellectually. Conversely, it may be foreshortened, usually by some expediency or by detouring a bit from the path in order to satisfy some passing pleasure or interest.

I recall an experience I had one day with my car, an experience that provides a simple homemade analogy. Each week day I drive to the office in downtown Salt Lake City from my home in Holladay on a four-lane highway which allows a high rate of speed. Cars travel long distances between semaphores. Always, however, I keep my focus on the semaphore lights far ahead so I may properly slow up and come to a full stop should the light turn red. I have done this without accident for years.

With the stormy, cold weather, though, some deep chuckholes developed in the road. I hit one and grew concerned about my tires. So one morning as I drove to town, instead of focusing on the semaphores, my attention was focused on the road immediately ahead to avoid the chuckholes. This seemed expedient. Suddenly there appeared before me a semaphore with the light changing to red. I put on the brakes with force. The car stopped short. My open purse and briefcase with two large boxes filled with precious papers fell to the floor of the car, scattering their contents in every direction. It was a mess—but worse still, at almost the same instant I heard screeching brakes behind me and felt a terrific jolt.

My mind had been on expediency, not the long-range horizon that would take me to town safely.

Expedience often foreshortens one's horizons and impedes his advancement toward the point he should reach. A clearly sighted, worthwhile horizon is of inestimable worth. Like any well-defined goal, it keeps one moving forward; it tends to wash out extraneous activities and unprofitable ventures. It serves as a behavior control and is a factor in achievement.

What one is taught and accepts as important has definite bearing upon the focus of his life, upon his actions and accomplishments. For the average Latter-day Saint, the teachings of the Church greatly influence his horizon, extending it far beyond the place where earth meets sky and on into future life. I cite one pertinent verse of scripture from the Doctrine and Covenants:

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. (D&C 130:19.)

So we are led to pursue learning.

The teachings of the Church impose upon the individual well-defined behavior restrictions, but they also offer him prime incentives that lead to eternal rewards. As one's testimony grows, so grows his strength to conduct his life in a manner that will lead to these rewards. To all Latter-day Saints, I say: Let your horizon be eternal. The earthly rewards will then take care of themselves.
