Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 22

Let Every Man Deal Honestly

A month or two ago, I attended a sacrament meeting in a new and beautiful meetinghouse located in a ward made up of affluent people. In making the announcements near the beginning of the meeting, the bishop told the members that he felt they should know that the meetinghouse had been broken into three times during the preceding week. He briefly told of the destruction by vandalism and losses by theft. He appealed to members living in close proximity to the meetinghouse to keep watch and to notify him of any suspicious-looking persons loitering about the building. He concluded by saying, "Parents, teach your children to be honest and to respect the rights and property of others. These are among the most needed teachings of the day."

The speaker for the evening was the proprietor of two of our very beautiful department stores in Salt Lake City. As he arose to speak, he said that, in light of the bishop's comments, he would set aside his prepared text and speak on the importance of honesty. He told of appalling losses in his business last year due to shoplifting. He said that a deplorable aspect was the fact that a high percentage of the shoplifting proved to have been done by well-paid and trusted employees and by young people who had no special need for the things they took. Then he told of the ease with which shoplifters were caught and the severity of the penalties imposed upon them. He concluded his remarks by saying, "Personally, I question the intelligence of any person who would engage in this form of dishonesty."

A few days later I read a newspaper account that reported a New York department store as having sustained a greater loss through shoplifting during the Christmas season than was the profit on their sales.

One Saturday afternoon not too long ago, the Mormon Handicraft Shop, located in Salt Lake City and operated by the general board of the Relief Society, was robbed. Just at the closing hour as the cashier was counting the cash and making out the bank deposit slip, six well-dressed young men forced their way into the store as the custodian was trying to lock the door. They were told graciously by the custodian that the store was closed and that sales were no longer being made that day. They brushed past him, saying they were not interested in buying anything. They walked directly to the cashier's office, tossed a bag on the desk, threatened the cashier, and told her to put the money in the bag. In reporting the robbery, the cashier said it was difficult for her to believe that such well-dressed, fine-appearing young men would rob a store. The police officer on the case, in response to our inquiry as to why boys of this type who appeared to have no need for money would do such a thing, replied, "They do it for kicks, to prove to themselves and their buddies that they are big enough and brave enough and smart enough to get away with it." Then he added, "If they could just know that the greater challenge to their courage and ability and brains is to be honest, they would be far better off in the end."

Recently I spoke in one of the wards in the Salt Lake Valley at a sacrament meeting. At the close of this meeting, the bishop said he wished to advise the ward members to exercise special care to lock their doors and windows when not at home and to put garden tools out of sight, as well. He said a number of homes in the ward had been broken into during the past month. TVs, stereos, radios, money, and jewelry had been stolen, as well as garden equipment. He said he was of the opinion that it was the work of young boys and girls. Then he vigorously admonished his people not to make it easy for youth to steal.

Now, in the light of these experiences and others, I feel that it might be well for us to consider the subject of honesty.

Occasionally I read in the newspapers the "Dear Abby" or the "Ann Landers" columns. The other day I read this:

Dear Ann Landers: My parents have gone on an honesty kick. They sat all of us kids down the other night and told us that each one of us can make the world a better place by being better ourselves.

My dad said a lot of people are crooked because nobody ever explained the difference between right and wrong to them. He said this is a responsibility of the parents and he wanted to make sure he did not fail his kids.

There are certain things, however, on which we could not agree; so we would like you to give us the final answer. Like:

Ann Landers replied:

Dear W. W. S.: It would be wonderful if more families argued about what is honest instead of which TV show to watch. In answer to your questions:

Then the columnist added:

What is dishonest in the mind of one person may be regarded as honest by another. I have found a good measure of honesty to be: Does it do an injustice to another by word, deed, or implication? Is it within the law?

Now, this to me was a good answer. One who is strictly honest, I believe, is always disposed to act with careful regard for the rights and properties of others. He does not misrepresent or falsify by word, act, or implication; nor does he knowingly appropriate unto himself that which belongs to someone else.

Strict and complete honesty may be difficult at times to practice. It may be harder for some persons than for others, depending upon their nature and their training. A person who by nature is selfish and self-centered, greedy, excessively ambitious, inclined to rationalize and justify his behavior in the light of his own interests and what he regards as his rights undoubtedly will find it more difficult to be strictly honest than a person who does not possess such attributes or characteristics. A person who has been taught the importance of honesty by precept and example, who has had its values internalized in him, will innately respond more honestly to a situation than will one who has been denied such training. Therefore, fortunate indeed is the person who has been taught to be honest.

There are some people who believe that dishonesty under certain circumstances is justifiable; that dishonesty, practiced in a skilled way in today's world, may enable a person to render great public service and thus become a highly respected citizen.

Diogenes, a well-known Greek philosopher in early days, maintained that a strictly honest person was impossible to find. And it was said that, to illustrate his position, he went about the streets of Corinth in broad daylight with a lighted lantern looking for an honest man.

I do not accept this belief. I think there are countless honest and trustworthy people—tens of thousands of them in the Church who are eminently successful and entirely honest. Nor do I accept the implication that one cannot achieve success in life and be honest.

In matters such as honesty, which are of great importance in relation to one's success and well-being in life and on which there are opposing views, Latter-day Saints have no need to question the course to pursue; for the Lord, in his infallible wisdom, has given us clear directives. So important does he regard honesty that he deals with it by way of commandment. In Exodus we read the Ten Commandments. Among them are these:

Thou shalt not steal.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

Thou shalt not covet. . . . (Exodus 20:15-17.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants Latter-day Saints are told:

And let every man deal honestly, and be alike among this people, and receive alike, that ye may be one, even as I have commanded you. (D&C 51:9.)

In Proverbs the prophet Solomon reminds us of seven things the Lord hates:

These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,

An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief,

A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. (Proverbs 6:16-19.)

To be honest in word and deed requires constant appraisal of one's self, one's attributes and character traits. It requires a penetrating evaluation of the motives that prompt what one says and does. It demands of one a determined effort to adhere to truth. I believe that honesty grows easier with practice just as dishonesty grows easier with practice. With this in mind, I will tell you an experience I had recently. I have an eleven-year-old grandson who comes on Saturday to do a few chores for me. Each Sunday I am invited to the home of his parents for Sunday dinner. One week I decided that I would not accept their invitation and would give them one Sunday to themselves; so I said to my son, "I won't be with you for dinner tomorrow because I am going to have dinner with some friends. I have accepted an invitation." He said, "Who are your friends?" I promptly told him. Then on Sunday he came to me and said, "You know, Mother, I don't believe you went out with friends to dinner today." He said, "I think you were lying to me." I had to confess that I had been. I said to the little boy the next Saturday, "How do you suppose your father knew I was telling a lie?" And the little fellow looked up at me in surprise and smiled and said, "Oh, Grandma, anybody can tell when you're telling a lie. You don't keep in practice."

Well, I feel also that an awareness of the satisfactions and joys that come from honest conduct is an effective motivating power. Not the least of these satisfactions is an easy conscience. So we should train ourselves to be sensitive to the satisfying aspects of honesty.

By way of illustration, may I quote an excerpt from a letter written to me by a missionary in New Zealand:

This is perhaps the last letter I will write you from New Zealand. I expect my release in two weeks. A mission is a valuable experience for a boy. I will always be grateful to my bishop and my parents for the opportunity they afforded me. I had poor study habits when I came into the mission field. I had to learn to study, but I have studied and worked hard and I have tried to be conscientious in obeying mission rules. Yet, I have made no world-shaking record of convert baptisms. Nonetheless, I leave the mission field with good feelings inside of me because I can truthfully say I have been honest with the Lord.

I wish everyone could say, "I have been honest with the Lord." About a year later this boy was made a bishop.

Now, in contrast to this, a mother came to see me troubled over what she thought was the dishonesty of her eighteen-year-old boy. He was an excellent skier, but he did not have particularly good skis. The mother, a widow, had hoped to buy him a new pair for Christmas, but the cost proved to be prohibitive. The boy was disappointed and surly about the matter. One day shortly after Christmas, he came home from the ski slopes with a new pair of skis—the very finest—saying that a skier from out of state had given them to him. The man had had an accident, he said, on the mountain slopes; and the boy had helped him down. The man, shaken from his fall, had said, according to the story of the boy, that he would never put on a pair of skis again in his life. Then, in appreciation for the boy's help, the boy said the man told him, "Take the skis."

The story did not seem plausible to the mother. She said it occurred to her that even a rich man would not give away such expensive skis to a boy whom he had only just met. The mother questioned the boy: "What was the man's name? How old was he? Where did he come from? Did you get his address so that I might write and thank him? Who was with you when the man gave you the skis?" Bit by bit the boy tried to answer the mother's questions, but in so doing he entangled himself in one conflicting reply after another. The mother became convinced the boy was lying and that in all probability he had stolen the skis. She said to me, "I stand ready to have that boy severely punished for his own good." And she asked for counsel in how to proceed.

Now, it might be of interest to you to know that the boy was caught. He confessed. The court served sentence upon him, and he had a difficult time meeting the requirements of that sentence. I said to him one day, "You really paid the price, didn't you?" He said, "Sister Spafford, I paid the price before I was ever caught. I paid it in a guilty conscience and the loss of my self-respect."

The entanglements of lying, of dishonesty, bring sorrow and bondage. The Lord, who regards dishonesty as sin, warned us of the entanglements of sin which would rob us of our liberty, saying, "Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean. . . . " (D&C 88:86.)

Dishonesty takes on many forms: lying, cheating, stealing, misrepresentation, covetousness, the bearing of false witness, and similar evils. Dishonesty asserts itself in such things as plagiarism, the act of passing off as one's own the ideas, words, or writings of another. This to me is an unfair form of dishonesty—one that has given rise to extensive and costly copyright regulations.

Time is a valuable asset with which people often deal dishonestly. For example, they come to work late or slip away unnoticed earlier than the closing hour. They prolong the rest or lunch periods beyond the time allotted. They waste time on the job by failing to apply themselves to the work at hand. A short time ago we had to dismiss a highly competent secretary, primarily because of her dishonesty with time. Later, when asked for a letter of recommendation as this secretary sought employment elsewhere, we could only be honest by speaking of her competency, but also pointing out that she needed strict supervision insofar as her use of time was concerned. I heard one of the Church leaders say, "I could not fully trust any person who is dishonest with time."

To harm the character of another by bearing false witness against him is a despicable form of dishonesty. William Shakespeare spoke of this as follows:

Who steals my purse steals trash; It is something, nothing; 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed. —Othello, Act 2, sc. 3

Deliberate evasion in the payment of honest debts is a growing form of dishonesty. I am told that a recent survey showed that a growing number of students who borrow money to finance their higher education are failing to repay the loans. It was suggested in the summary of the survey that the schools need to reevaluate their teaching to determine why supposedly educated persons are failing to understand the importance of fiscal responsibility and simple honesty.

Failing to uphold and stand firm on what one knows to be true because it might temporarily interfere with one's popularity or might bring criticism, ridicule, or persecution is a cowardly form of dishonesty. The Prophet Joseph Smith in his story of the first vision graphically dealt with this important aspect of honesty. He compared himself to Paul before King Agrippa when Paul related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him. Some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his last breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or speak otherwise. The prophet wrote:

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (Joseph Smith—History 1:25.)

In our Articles of Faith we declare: "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men. . . . " (Article of Faith 13.)

To believe means to be persuaded of the truth and validity of the thing to the extent that we will put it into practice in our lives. If we believe in being honest, then we practice honesty to the best of our ability in all things. And I assure you that as we practice honesty, we enjoy the choice rewards of so doing.
