Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Seven

Wives and Mothers

Chapter 24

Mother's Day

On Mother's Day 1973, my grandson Robert paid an impressive tribute to me that was sincerely appreciated, particularly because behind his words were his supporting attitudes and actions. He frequently drops into my home just to say hello and to inquire if there is anything he might do for me. He willingly meets me at the airport to drive me home when I arrive late at night. He welcomes me warmly when I am in his family home. He often confides in me. Precious as kind words may be, the kind deeds that support the words are the true confirmation of his feelings.

I recall a five-verse poem I used to teach the children in Sunday School that illustrates this. The poem ran something like this:

"I love you, Mother," said little John; Then, forgetting his work, his cap went on And he was off to the garden swing, Leaving her the water and wood to bring.

"I love you, Mother," said rosy Nell. "I love you better than tongue can tell." Then she teased and pouted full half the day Till her mother rejoiced when she went to play.

"I love you, Mother," said little Fan. "Today I'll help you all I can. How glad I am that school doesn't keep." So she rocked the baby till it fell asleep.

Then, stepping softly, she fetched the broom And swept the floor and tidied the room. Busy and happy all day was she, Helpful and happy as a child could be.

"I love you, Mother," again they said, Three little children going to bed. How do you think that Mother guessed Which of them really loved her best?

Since 1914, when President Woodrow Wilson asked that flags be displayed as "a public expression of love and reverence for the mothers of our country," each President of the United States has issued an official proclamation asking that the second Sunday in May be set aside for honoring mothers for their devotion to their loved ones.

Reverence for mothers, of course, did not begin in 1914, nor did observances in honor of mothers. Reverence for mothers is universal and ageless. According to recalled history, mothers as a group were first officially feted in Rome about 250 B.C. The Romans called their mother's day the "feast of Hilaria." It was celebrated during the Ides of March, and people brought offerings to a huge temple erected for the purpose. Through the ages people of every race and creed have honored their mothers.

This is as it should be, for by divine command we are told to honor our father and mother. God, speaking to ancient Israel who had become sinful and fallen, reminded them that he was the Lord, their God, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Then he gave to them the Ten Commandments, one of which directs us to honor our parents. "Honour thy father and thy mother" was the fifth of the Ten Commandments and has been called "the first commandment with promise."

I have always felt this commandment meant we should honor our parents not only with words and other expressions of esteem, but we should also bring honor to their names throughout the generations by the proper conduct of our individual lives.

A sweet story that illustrates this comes to my mind, a story from Roman history. Cornelia, a Roman matron, had three sons to whom history refers as the Gracchi. (Grachus was the family name.) These sons so distinguished themselves as soldiers, reformers, and statesmen that a great statue was erected in recognition of their service. But when the statue was unveiled, the inscription did not refer to the sons of Cornelia; rather, it referred to the mother who bore and reared them. On it were inscribed these words: "To Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi."

History, both ancient and modern, is replete with the names of women who may serve as an inspiration to mothers today.

It was the mother love of the mother of Moses that inspired her to place her babe in the bulrushes, that the woman-heart of Pharaoh's daughter might cause his life to be spared. It was gratitude for the gift of motherhood that gave Hannah courage to fulfill her promise and give her son Samuel to God's service. Mary of Nazareth, the mother of Jesus, brought to earth a pattern of motherhood that trusted to the end.

Many mothers of latter-day Israel inspire us with the nobility of character and strength they have possessed.

Mother's Day is important because it prompts thoughtful expressions of love for mothers. Strange indeed would be the woman who did not appreciate this and who would not be inspired by it more earnestly to strive to merit the kindnesses and the praise.

Today it assumes great importance in the lives of all women as it holds aloft the idealism of motherhood and the joys and satisfactions inherent in this divinely ordained role of women. There are few things more needed in today's world than this.

I conclude by saying I am grateful for the love and teaching of my precious mother, long since deceased. May Mother's Day ever be an especially happy day for mothers and for grandmothers, even as this day has been for me as I listened to Robert. May we remember that motherhood is a glorious blessing, but it calls for responsible action.
