Belle S. Spafford, Woman's Reach ( 1974)

Chapter 25

Mothers through the Ages

There perhaps is no theological doctrine of the Church that more intimately affects the life of the Latter-day Saint, be he man, woman, or child, than the doctrine of the eternity of the family unit. It brings hope, comfort, and promise to the Latter-day Saint. It motivates action in keeping with commandments of the Lord. It gives joyful purpose to life. As with all things, however, that are rich in promise and genuinely rewarding, it exacts of each one of us its toll in adequately meeting our responsibilities toward home and family life as directed by the Father.

The Lord requires that each member of the family shall do his part according to guidelines set by his divine word and conveyed to us through his prophets. To children, the Lord has said, "Honour thy father and thy mother. . . ." To me, this means not only to respect and esteem them, but to heed their counsel and to so act as to bring honor to them.

To parents in this dispensation, the Lord has been explicit. We are all familiar with the mandate of the Lord recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 68:25-26:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

Nowhere in the scriptures or in the teachings of the prophets has this directive been rescinded, nor have parents been authorized to shift the responsibility to other persons or institutions. Nonetheless, the Lord has not left parents without clear guidelines, worthy examples, and duly authorized helpers.

In the writings of President David O. McKay we read:

God has placed upon parents the responsibility of instilling [righteous] principles into the minds of children. Church schools, Sunday Schools, Mutual Improvement Associations, Primary organizations are all helps in government, established here to assist parents in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important factors as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and influence of the parents in the home. (Pathways to Happiness, Llewelyn R. McKay, comp., Bookcraft, Inc., 1957, p. 118.)

He further states,

Without discounting the worth and influence of the father, it is after all "the mother who makes us most." . . . True motherhood is the most beautiful of all arts, the greatest of all professions. (Ibid., p. 116.)

The mother, then, looks to herself, knowing it is her duty to live so that her children will associate with her everything that is gracious and good, understanding and loving, attractive and worthy of respect. They look to her as the creator of the home environment; they feel in her a sense of security; they respect the example of her life.

The story of happy and righteous family living, reflecting the work of notable mothers, has been unfolded to us in the Old and New Testaments, in the Book of Mormon, and in recorded accounts of many noble mothers of this dispensation. Their homemaking artistry, their skills, their concerns, their teachings invite contemplation on the part of the mothers and homemakers of today. They say to all women, including the young women who will be the mothers of tomorrow, "Look, listen, consider, emulate so you may know the joy we have known and partake of the eternal blessings of which we now partake."

Latter-day Saint mothers rejoice in the birth of a child. What righteous mother has not felt her being tingle in response to reading Eve's exultant cry of joy at the birth of her son when she said, "I have gotten a man from the Lord." (Genesis 4:1.)

Rebecca of the Old Testament, a worthy mother, undoubtedly was a good cook, so much so that reference to this was regarded as worthy of recording. She said to her son: "Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth." (Genesis 27:9.)

Particularly delightful and impressive is the fact that Rebecca involved her son in a simple homemaking activity designed to please the father.

The story of Samuel's parents, Hannah and Elkanah, provides a glimpse of happy home life and good relationships between husband and wife as well as reflecting the homemaking skill of mother. Hannah was childless and sorrowed over this so that "she wept, and did not eat." (1 Samuel 1:7.) Then, tenderly supported by her husband, she went to the Lord in prayer. The Lord blessed her with a son, and in accordance with a covenant made in prayer, she lent him unto the Lord for "all the days of his life." (1 Samuel 1:11.)

Hannah did not forget her growing son while he was in the house of the Lord. She held him close to her through yearly visits and an annual gift—the creation of her own hands—for was she not still his mother? With loving and skilled stitches each year she made him a little coat and brought it to him when she came to the temple with her husband to offer sacrifice. Hannah must have been a skilled seamstress, for would she not have taken to her son the best she had to offer—an expression of her love?

Dorcas, also called Tabitha, was a great humanitarian. I once heard President McKay refer to her as "the Relief Society sister of the New Testament." She too was a skilled seamstress. The sisters all appeared to have taken pride in her handwork. Then Dorcas grew ill and died. In their grief the sisters sent two brethren to Lydda for Peter, that he would come without delay.

Then Peter arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them.

But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

And he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive. (Acts 9:39-41.)

I wonder if the showing of the garments that Dorcas had made and in which the sisters showed such pride was not somewhat of an appeal to Peter as to her worthiness for his blessing.

The wonder and glory of motherhood seems to reach a climax in the stories of Elisabeth and Zacharias and their baby son, John, and without doubt in the story of Mary and Joseph and their child, Jesus. In the story of Mary, a radiance is shed on motherhood, but the human concern of the human mother for her twelve-year-old boy is equally well-depicted.

At twelve years of age the boy Jesus counseled with the doctors, or learned men, in the temple:

Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.

And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast.

And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.

But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.

And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.

And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.

And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.

And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business? (Luke 2:41-49.)

I wonder if that might not have been the reaction of most of us as mothers.

In Timothy we read of the great love of the apostle Paul for Timothy. He remembered him in his prayers night and day. Then, says Paul:

. . . I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.

Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and love, and of a sound mind. (2 Timothy 1:5-7.)

Then we read the admonitions of Paul to Timothy later when he said:

But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them;

And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. (2 Timothy 3:14-16.)

In the Book of Mormon we read the story of the 2,000 striplings, the sons of Helaman, and their courage and bravery, their devotion and faith in the Lord, which they credited to the teachings of their wonderful mothers:

Now they never had fought, yet they did not fear death; and they did think more upon the liberty of their fathers than they did upon their lives; yea, they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them.

And they rehearsed . . . the words of their mothers, saying: We do not doubt our mothers knew it. (Alma 56:47-48.)

As far as noble mothers of this dispensation are concerned, each of us must choose those whom she knows best and those whom she would most desire to emulate. We recall Lucy Mack, Mary Fielding Smith, Rachel Ivins Grant, Jennette Evans McKay, Julina Lambson Smith, and countless others.

I have given examples of some of the factors that seem to be important to mothers in meeting the obligations placed upon them by the Lord, as exemplified in the lives of noble women of the scriptures and of this dispensation. These are virtues and skills that we might truly desire to emulate in order that the rewards of continuing joy with our loved ones in the eternities might be ours. I briefly enumerate these:

We welcome new spirits into our homes. We recognize that we are co-partners with the Father in bringing his spirit children to earth life.

We serve the children lent to us by the Father through the simple homemaking arts and skills that tie them to us in love and companionship—the cooking, the sewing, the daily story, the teaching and example.

We safeguard these children; we seek to know where they are and why they are where they are.

We train children in the principles of the gospel.

We are obedient to the mandate given to parents by the Lord in Section 68 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

In all of these areas, Relief Society fortifies the mother; it does not take over her work nor is it intended that it should do so; it undergirds her in her great and important calling. It does not do the work for her; rather, it works with her through an organization given by the Father in order that she may wisely and well do the work assigned to her as wife, mother, and homemaker and worthy daughter of our Heavenly Father, who has honored her with a divinely ordained mission.

It's an interesting, even a touching story. But as I read the details, some questions come to mind. Some of these insights have been refined in a speculative gospel discussion with one of those dear and trusted friends I mentioned earlier. Why would the president of the church come all the way from Joppa to be at this woman's side? Why did the sisters bring clothing that had been prepared? When Peter extended his hand and Dorcus arose, why were the sisters crying so? When the Prophet Joseph Smith instituted the Relief Society, he said he was turning the key for women, that the Church wasn't complete without the Relief Society. But we know that the Church was complete at the meridian of time. Could it be that the women were organized, that Dorcus was the president of the Relief Society, and that because of her calling, Peter had come to be at the side of this "elect lady"? I don't know, but it's fun to think about it.

The more I study the scriptures, the more questions I have to ponder, the more thinking I must do—and the more desire I have to explore. In terms of my eternal salvation it really doesn't matter if Tabitha, called Dorcus, was or was not president of the Relief Society. As a scholar and a student, however, I find the possibility exciting, because to me learning is delightsome and sweet. If our goal is to become like the Lord, we must have a great urging, a great exhilaration, a great desire to learn of him. Nothing could be more compelling than to lose oneself in the process of giving oneself. When I study, I do just that, for one of the joys of studying is to forge oneself in immortality.

In closing, I would like to share a few lines from Tolkein's Fellowship of the Ring:

"'I wish,' said Frodo, 'it need not have happened in my time.'

"'So do I,' replied Gandalf, 'and so do all those who live to see such times. But that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given us.'" (New York: Ballantine, 1965, p. 82.)

The methods and processes we have considered work. So whatever your gifts, whatever your endowments, whatever your opportunities—indeed, whatever your burdens—now is the time to decide to become scholars of the scriptures lest the children of our mortal minds become the orphans of our immortal souls.

I testify that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true and that to be motivated to study will infuse your being and your very living with knowledge, light, and testimony. In so doing lies the potential to fulfill God's grand purpose of bringing to pass "the immortality and eternal life of man."

Chapter 11 Notes
