No specific author, Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1986)

Being Well Balanced: A Key to Mental Health

Libby R. Hirsh, M.D. [^1]

President Spencer W. Kimball delared: "One skill or attribute need not be developed at the expense of another. Symmetry in our spiritual development is much to be desired." (Ensign, November 1978, p. 104.) This teaching is of great importance to us because it emphasizes that we cannot grow and develop only one part of ourselves to the exclusion of others; to do so becomes the first step on the road to disappointment, or worse.

Let me begin by reminding you of someone we all know well—or who we think is in our midst (although in reality this may be far from the truth). Our fictitious friend goes by the name of "Patti Perfect," and she was first brought to our attention by two sisters from Orem—Margaret Black and Midge Nelson—in the spring of 1979. (See "Patti Perfect," Exponent II, vol. 5 [1979], no. 3.) From Patti's 5:00 A.M. jogging to her midmorning supervision and baking, through her afternoon's work as a special education director, her visits with relatives, her "quality time" with her children, and her projects, to the culminating evening trip to the temple with her husband, Paul Perfect—she overwhelms us with her absolute perfection. We are awed by the success that marks every aspect of her life. But after our moments of awe, some of us begin to think, "This is really sickening!" Nevertheless, having met up with Patti is absolutely wonderful. She is one of those lovely creatures we all really believe we should be, although in actuality none of us is likely to achieve anything even close. In fact, if Patti teaches us anything, it should be that if some persons are coming close, they are doing so at tremendous personal cost. These are the women for whom outside faces and at-home realities could never be the same. But the dilemma is that while we tend to laugh at the thought of "Patti Perfect," we often feel we are not doing enough. We feel we must do all things at once but then feel we have no handle on our own lives.

In an enlightening discussion in which I was recently involved, I heard two very good quotations from past Church leaders that beautifully illustrate the kind of dichotomy we sometimes face in the Church. The first is from Heber C. Kimball, who stressed the principle of obedience (which, of course, is very important) by saying, in essence, "Do what you are told; don't be concerned if it's right or not. If it's wrong, it will be upon the heads of the leaders." The parallel quotation is from Brigham Young, who expressed his great concern that people within the Church were going about as mindless robots. He feared that the people were becoming blind, putting too much trust in their leaders, allowing themselves to believe what was fed to them, never really thinking about anything. In our own lives, and certainly in Utah, we can relate to Brigham's fear.

My greatest difficulty as a resident of Utah—and surely this must by why the anti-Mormon sentiment is so strong here (as it is not in the mission field)—results from my encounters with complacent Mormons. These are people who do not try to put things in perspective or make any sense of what we are asked to understand. Certainly I am not opposed to following the teachings of Church leaders, but how often do we understand those things with surety and receive our own witness? Have we learned to rely truly on our own strengths and not those of others? Doing so is absolutely necessary if we are to live a life characterized by balance.

In addressing the issue of balance and mental health, I should like to point out those problems that can result when we do not stay in balance, before looking specifically at what can help us to stay in balance. You most likely know the outcomes of imbalance: physical illnesses, "garden variety" anxiety crowding into our days, tension, feeling "uptight," and so on. All of us feel these things to some degree in our day-to-day living. Yet with more stresses, the cycle may lead to more serious physical difficulties, chronic complaints, and depression. Many people whose bodies give them aches and pains would do well to understand that their head is the source of many of these problems. In fact, national statistics indicate that some 80 percent of all persons consulting their family doctor or internist do so for complaints that ultimately turn out to be psychosomatic, which means that for many of us with chronic headaches, backaches, and so on, our only relief may be to resolve the ongoing stresses in our lives and learn to express these things verbally or in action rather than through our bodies.

I would like to discuss for a moment KSL-TV's production "Depression and Mormon Women." I felt privileged to be a part of that effort, and I would like to tell you how the opportunity came to me. The story is particularly pertinent to our discussion of keeping in balance. The documentary was put together by Louise Degn, a very talented producer and writer for the KSL-TV series "Dimension Five." Louise and I had known each other in Chicago, when I was in medical school and she was working for WBBM-TV. We went to the same ward. When Louise moved back to Utah, I lost track of her. Then, some months after my arrival here, I stumbled onto her name, voice, and picture as I watched the evening news. The result was a renewal of acquaintance and then a fortuitous mesh of common concerns.

At that time I was working at the inpatient psychiatric ward of the University of Utah Medical Center, and when Louise asked me if I saw any one problem more frequently than others, I could only respond with an emphatic yes—that our biggest problem was common to Mormon women, many so very young: They felt terribly depressed and, what is worse, terribly guilty about being depressed. Nor did they know how to handle it. Later Louise explained that she was working on a project regarding depression among Mormon women and asked me for sources to speak with.

At that time my knowledge of Salt Lake LDS psychiatrists and counselors was limited, but I gave her several names and great encouragement to go to them. To my surprise, not one of them would speak to her even on tape, much less on film. I was quite nonplussed by this, and I began to wonder if there really was a "big brother" I did not know about. So in the original version of the documentary, all the professional sources other than myself were from outside Utah. Amazing—all of a sudden I became an expert! In the expanded version—the one that finally was aired—we were able to get more local people because, after considerable press and promotion, the original film was pulled two days before it was due to be aired. And what a reaction that created! My non-Mormon colleagues at work, who felt it was time that the Church take an honest look at itself and had been glad it was happening, turned to saying, "See, we knew they couldn't do it; they'll never be able to face their problems." But the furor surrounding the cancellation made people aware that something was really up, and many came forward to express their own views or to share their personal experiences.

Perhaps we will never know the full story of why the film was pulled, but one of the stories that circulates is that someone in the Church was offended by a statement made by one psychiatrist who, when asked if Mormon women were any more or less depressed than women in general, said, no, he felt they were "just people." To me, we have a tremendous problem if we are not allowed to consider ourselves "just people." Perhaps we in the Church are lucky, being somewhat "the elect," but every person on this earth is a spirit child of our Heavenly Father.

In any case, the film did air, and the rest is history. Certainly my life and the lives of many of the participants have been changed as a result. And we have seen great changes in many other women's lives. For example, the statistics at community mental health centers and within private practitioners' files all reflect an abrupt jump in the number of people finally getting the help they need. The personal gratification is truly great. I recall one woman who came to me from Vernal, Utah. She had been depressed for eight years, had seen perhaps ten different counselors in that time who for whatever reason had not recognized her difficulty, had nearly killed herself on four different occasions, and was totally disheartened. She had even thought of asking her bishop to excommunicate her because she believed that her continued suffering must only reflect her unworthiness. Nine months later, this woman was an entirely different person—and this was the result of recognizing and then treating her depression.

For another person, a young woman my own age, depression had had its onset in her teens, leaving her swinging forever from day to day as moods would come and go. The negative effects on her self-esteem and the guilt this caused led to devastating effects. Her well-meaning parents would tell her of her faults, and she would work diligently to correct them, yet in the end she never felt any better. Then, after years of suffering, she arrived at the conclusion that her suffering resulted from some innate weakness. A disrupted marriage, a turning away from the standards of the Church, prescribed medication to "take her away from her pain," and the like—all, she believed, had been caused by her weaknesses.

This person ultimately elected to pull herself together again. She remarried in the temple, sacrificed for husband and children, and did as many things as could be humanly expected in her striving toward that great pinnacle of—who else?—Patti Perfect. But she did not feel any better. Having material comforts for the first time in her life had no effect on her. She would read in the scriptures for hours, fast, pray, and request innumerable blessings. People outside her family would fast and pray for her. Still she did not recover, and these same people then led her to believe that she was depressed "of the devil" and that she was "allowing" this (!) by just giving in. This woman took countless self-help classes, read the best of books, followed all the platitudes and prescriptions friends and family would dictate—yet the more she did, the more worthless she felt. She questioned all of her talents and abilities, and eventually she reached the incredible conclusion that her place and circumstances must surely reflect her having done so badly in the premortal existence that she would be required to learn more things through suffering in this life than perhaps any other soul who has dwelled here.

May I now tell you of the other side of the coin? This woman has been cured of her depression, and she now describes feeling much more spiritually in tune than she had during all those years of weekly temple attendance, fasting, and so on. She describes the Spirit as coming to her only when she is relaxed and feels good about herself. In her constant efforts to draw it into her life before, she experienced only failure and the ultimate realization that it cannot come in such a forced context. So many women (and men) suffer these difficulties! And how much we could enrich their lives and our own if we would learn to recognize vulnerabilities, define problems, and then put this knowledge into practice.

So what about this problem of depression? It is very common. As a matter of fact, as I list many of the symptoms and how depression affects one's life, you may say, "Has she been in my house?" No, I haven't. It is just that these problems are predictable, real, and can confront all of us. Let me give you some statistics to start with, as it is worthwhile for us all to be aware of the magnitude of the problem. The National Institutes of Mental Health estimate that at some point in life, 25 percent of the population will experience a significant depression—not a brief dejection, but something sustained and of sufficient severity to require some form of outside help. What is even more significant is that of all persons who become depressed, at least two-thirds are women. This is not a statistical fluke. Many arguments attempt to explain away this phenomenon, saying women just complain more, women go to doctors more, women are given "soft" diagnoses while men get called things like "passive-aggressive," and women are freer to let others know of their problems and pain. However, a very comprehensive study by Yale University revealed the hard fact that almost three-fourths of all depressions occur in women. There are some things about us, then—perhaps parts of our biology (some aspects we have yet to specifically define), and certainly things about us culturally—that make us, as a group, more prone to depression. Insofar as this is true, we would do well to become aware of the syndrome—its symptoms, what others see, what it comes from, and how we may get help and get better if we should experience it.

Symptoms of Depression

We can group the symptoms of the depressive syndrome (I say syndrome because its specific causes are many) into three major categories. Given these frameworks, it may then be easier for us to comprehend the total picture of depression.

The first category, probably the most familiar, represents all those feeling states and attributes that the depressed person experiences. At the most obvious level, we may all relate to the depressed feeling of being sad, blue, down in the dumps, or low. We have all experienced such feelings in small degrees in our day-to-day living. Less familiar feelings may make no sense to us and in fact may take us aback: low self-esteem and total sense of inadequacy, negating any positive attributes or actions that are part of us; total emphasis on our bad qualities; excessive guilt about everything, even back to such trivia as a cross word spoken to a friend or teacher twenty years ago. (Of course, as Mormons we are already very good at feeling guilty about all those things we should be doing, or not doing, but the essence of this problem is guilt totally out of proportion to what is real.) We may experience feelings of worthlessness, uselessness, pessimism. We may feel totally helpless and inert, believing that there are no solutions to our pain and that this way of feeling is one for which there is no cure. We might feel a total dissatisfaction with all facets of our lives—hating a job previously well liked, picking out only faults in our spouse or children. We might lose any and all usual interests (e.g., the formerly active church member who draws into her shell, no longer wanting to associate with others, no longer finding any satisfaction in anything). We might experience the sense of not caring about anything, or crying spells for which there seems to be no basis (or feeling like crying much of the time), or feeling out of control—the sense that just now we are really "going crazy." We withdraw and become isolated from family, friends, church. There are shifts in our perception of things such as people's actions or our own image.

Irritability is an extremely common hallmark of depression. In my work in mental health and social services, I see countless cases of true child abuse and neglect, even spouse abuse, that stem from this irritability—feeling out of control, feeling incapable of functioning adequately, or being unable to cope. (Of course, the more positive thing to note here is that many abusive parents can be treated; they can return to their more normal ways of life, and they can keep their children or have them returned.)

A key differential having to do with how we tell when someone is just in a "garden variety" depression as opposed to a significant, clinical depression is the concept of "anhedonia." (This will help us also to distinguish between a normal grief reaction and something that has gone beyond and is more serious.) One of the old schools of philosophy had as its basis the concept of hedonism—the total pursuit of pleasure; hence, "anhedonia," or no pleasure—the inability to experience pleasure. This is a crucial point to be aware of. When I am in a minor depression, no matter how poorly I feel most of the time, I am party to moments of excitement, pride, and the like (e.g., at my child's first piano recital). I will for that period of time be able to extend my feelings outside of myself; I will experience real pleasure and satisfaction, and I will forget for at least that time how much the rest of my world may seem to be a failure. In a true, clinical depression, on the other hand, this capacity does not exist, and the extent of my responsiveness may be at best a deadpan, "That's nice, Johnny, I'm glad you did well." Most depressed persons lose their normal sexual drives and feelings, and it is not uncommon for a patient to complain to a counselor, "My wife won't respond to me anymore." There are even cases in which, because of all these symptoms, marital troubles progress so far that needless divorce is the result.

It is important to note that part of virtually any significant depression is the unwanted intrusion of thoughts of death or suicide. This has nothing to do with whether one is a Latter-day Saint or not. In the midst of depressions, Mormons, like people in any other group, may have the strong desire to commit suicide, and some of them do do it. Statistics indicate that one out of two hundred suicide attempts succeeds. And many Latter-day Saints, even knowing that they will come to the other side of the veil with the same problems as now, and with the added burden of being unable to deal with them, are in such pain that they simply cannot handle life. They feel they can no longer inflict their problems on their families or even that the devil has total hold on them and that they must therefore give up. This is tragic, but it happens.

It is important for you to know that you cannot cause a person to have suicidal feelings. Since this is part of the depression anyway, most depressed people will only feel relief to have someone ask about these feelings openly. If the person has definite plans, a method, or has tried before, then you will not, of course, want to handle that yourself, but do seek out professional help. While the individual may grumble, fight, or push against you, you will have given him the best present a friend or family member can. One last feeling state to be aware of: In severe depressions, thoughts may actually lose contact with reality, and the person becomes what is called psychotic. There may be hallucinations, paranoia, false beliefs (delusions), or worse, even total inability to care for oneself. If we can remember that these are a part of severe depression, they need not be so fearsome.

The second major group of symptoms in the depressive syndrome has to do with a person's cognitive abilities—one's thinking processes. In a depression, it is typical for a person to be completely unable to concentrate, to complain of poor memory, to be unable to follow through on lists or projects, to increase in inaccurate perceptions of just about anything. Because we may not be aware that a person is having these problems unless he is specifically asked, it is worth describing what typical kinds of day-to-day functioning are affected. One group tragically overlooked in the past, but much better diagnosed now, is the elderly. With failing memory and disordered concentration, they may be diagnosed as senile or having dementia. While many forms of senility have no remedy, many of these elderly people are depressed, which is treatable. Teenagers who complain of not doing well in school may be suffering from depression; in fact, a significant number of them will fit this description: unable to concentrate, inattentive to teachers, unable to remember, can't do schoolwork or pass tests, lacking interest in school, truancy, perhaps involved in alcohol or drug abuse, possibly antisocial, even ending up in juvenile court. What a tragedy if these symptoms are missed! The husband or wife at his or her job or housework may be unable to stick to tasks, and there may be an increase in disorganization that results in hours spent in nonproductivity. One may no longer be able to read or even to watch television attentively.

Finally, the third symptom group in depression consists of various physical complaints and problems. A hallmark of depression is sleep disturbance, waking up off and on and waking too early, or (especially in younger age groups) excessive sleep. Appetite change is an additional sign. The most common form is poor appetite with weight loss, but sometimes (again more often among younger age groups) one's appetite and weight may increase dramatically. I have mentioned already the loss of sexual drive, but this too may go to the other extreme. Chronic fatigue, no energy, "dragging," and other such descriptions are probably the best-known symptoms of depression. How many persons go to their family doctor with this complaint? Of course, there are many causes for fatigue that are not related to depression, but too often individuals or physicians neglect the possibility that the fatigue might stem from depression.

Many people suffering from depression will experience what is referred to as "agitation"—an internal feeling of tension, hand wringing, even pacing or hyperactivity; others may be slowed down in all spheres—in speech, walking, and such. Gastrointestinal symptoms are frequent, and constipation or "nervous bowels" may be the result. Frequently nightmares increase. Most people will become preoccupied with their bodily functions in general. And, most important, any and all varieties of physical complaint may develop, intensify, or become chronic, especially such things as headaches and muscle tension. If we know the signs, we need not take offense if our family physician can find nothing wrong.

All of these symptoms may be a part of depression. They will come in clusters, and, of course, not all individuals will have exactly the same set, nor will any one individual have all of them. Because of a cultural phenomenon that inhibits the discussion of mental-health problems (we are doing better, but we have a long way to go), most often individuals are reluctant to let others know that they are having these difficulties. As neighbors, family, friends, we need to be aware of some compensating behaviors. Workaholics may be suffering from depression. As they attempt to remove their difficulties by immersing themselves in work, many of these people actually function less effectively, but they are also achieving the social isolation they desire. Acting out behavior in children, teenagers, or adults may be secondary to depression. School difficulties, especially truancy and excessive absenteeism from work may result. An enormous difficulty that may arise from depression is the abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and street drugs, or—much more frequent and somehow more "acceptable" (especially in our LDS culture where it is okay to see a "real" doctor but not a counselor)—abuse of prescription medications to the point of physical addiction that requires hospitalization for withdrawal.

We need not condemn these individuals; all are suffering tremendous pain that has not yet been recognized for what it is. Is it any wonder that they seek relief, even temporarily? (And recall that depression, the "great masquerader," may manifest itself in physical difficulties.) Any major change in a person's functioning may arise from depression. The mother who is no longer able to cope with her kids, who cannot keep up with the housework, who may spend hours in bed, or who becomes the child abuser may be the end product. Realizing that depression does exist will ultimately help us understand our own and others' periods of vulnerability or lessened function.

Causes of Depression

The causes of depression are multiple. Certain personality traits may make us prone to difficulties, yet on the surface these same traits all appear to be admirable—like the ideal Mormon woman: ambitious, hard working, highly goal oriented, a perfectionist, conscientious, highly aware of expectations, getting many jobs done, tending to be hard on oneself, tending toward rigidity. None of these traits on its own would be likely to precipitate a depression; however, any one of them, when combined with a more specific cause, would be experienced as an additional dysfunctional part of our life, a stressor.

The specific causes of depression are a little easier to define. Perhaps we may dismiss some 5 to 10 percent as resulting from miscellaneous causes: (1) Physical illness (hypothyroidism, diabetes, certain forms of heart disease, glandular problems, and more "exotic" problems) might appear to be depression or might accompany the symptoms of depression. (2) The phenomena of postpartum depressions, depressions during pregnancy, menopausal depressions, and even our "mini-swings" once a month are all very real physical phenomena that are the result of major hormonal shifts in the body (and therefore in the head). These depressions might occur with more regularity in persons already prone to depression, yet they are real and will often respond to appropriate treatment, whether that be through antidepressants or the administration of synthetic hormones. (The depressions related to pregnancy will often resolve themselves.) (3) Certain medications may cause depressions. Birth-control pills are a prime offender. Specific blood-pressure medications, certain forms of steroids, and others may produce the classic symptoms. Of course, in these cases we are lucky: when we withdraw the offending medication, the depression goes away.

Many depressions are physically based—those that are referred to as "endogenous" depressions, meaning simply "from within." In these cases of depression (and most experts would describe at least 50 to 75 percent of all cases as endogenous) the individual experiences imbalances of chemicals in the brain that affect his entire physical system in such a way as to produce a major depression with all its concomitant symptoms. This type is thought to be hereditary, for in nearly all individuals, as long as you remember to ask, there will be a history in the family of other persons with problems of depression, "baby blues," suicides, "nervous breakdowns," or alcoholism—a genetic tie for which the reasons are not clear. Typically, these depressions will be precipitated by stress, but there are cases in which no such stressor can be identified; in fact, the depression seems "out of the blue."

The important point to remember concerning endogenous depressions is that they have absolutely nothing to do with whether you are a good Mormon living the commandments. A person with this type of depression has an illness, just as we have any other physical illnesses. Such depression can be treated with medications called antidepressants, whose only function is to correct the chemical imbalances that have brought on the symptoms. These are not tranquilizers, and they are not addicting. An individual treated for this type of depression may have one episode in his life, perhaps one every ten years, or perhaps several times a year. (I have this type myself and feel it is good for people to know that because we often equate "mental illness" with not functioning.) In all cases the medications may be used effectively. In extreme cases, other physical methods may be necessary. The analogy I use with my patients is that as insulin is for the diabetic, so an antidepressant may be for depressions. There is no difference—one is just as real as the other. How sad that many people may go for years and years without the benefit of whatever helps mankind now has available.

And yet how many good, well-meaning, strong members of the Church will respond to such an illness in themselves or others by saying that it is only the result of sin, that they must do more, that they are being punished. Such persons would never wince while using the medication prescribed by a "regular" doctor, believing, of course, that these things are meant to be used. Why is it that they cannot conceive of forms of emotional illness that are just as real, have just as much a physical cause, and have just as many means available for overcoming them? Does it make any sense to believe that we are meant to "gut it out," to avoid the helps that are available, to overcome this "obstacle" in our life only through fasting and prayer?

Surely my own depressions do not indicate to me that I am wicked, sinful, or bad. Rather, I choose to look upon this as one more fact that I have learned about my own body, and because of this knowledge I can then choose to do something about it and control the problem. Yes, I have needed to overcome it—but it did not happen until I used all modalities that were necessary. So many Latter-day Saints have problems with this concept. When it comes to emotional difficulties, we too often view them as weaknesses, defects, or a result of some other negative trait. For myself, I know that God provided all the knowledge, all the tools. To say that antidepressant medications should not be used because they are "of this world" makes no sense to me, for I know that all knowledge comes from God as we are ready to receive it.

In a documentary on a public television station not long ago, a group of researchers were discussing the discovery of antidepressants and similar medications. None of these people were Mormon. In fact, many were not sure of any belief. But all indicated that the "accidents" that led to the discoveries occurred "almost as if we were being led." Now you and I know that these were no accidents. God gives us knowledge continually—knowledge that we are meant to use, make sense of, and not keep hidden under our bushel.

The final major cause of depression is defined most often as being of a "reactive" nature. This type is what most people think of when they think of any form of depression, that is, the depression that results from responses or reactions to some life event, usually some form of loss. Losses may be of many different types, and the loss need not be an actual, tangible thing. Losses may be as varied as the death of a loved one, sending one's son or daughter on a mission, losing a business position or promotion, or the like. In fact, in the Church the intangible losses are much more often our major source of difficulty—such things as losing our self-esteem, feeling a loss as we recognize that gap between what we expect of ourselves (or others), and what we see ourselves (or others) actually doing. We may feel an acute loss if we are not living up to the standards of the Church. We may even feel a loss of the control of our lives if, in our misinterpretation of church teachings, we feel that our individuality and unique ways of doing things must be submerged in total obedience to the least of church doctrines. These types of losses are just as real as any death or tangible difficulty; in fact, they may be much harder to overcome because we do not see before us specific problems we can tackle. In any case, losses produce stress or depression.

Treatment consists of what most of us call therapy. It is important to know that there are many different approaches and many different types of professionals who can provide assistance to the individual. Because people vary so much, it is not necessary to feel that any one approach to therapy is the only way. What will ultimately be of the greatest importance will be to work with someone with whom you may feel comfortable, can develop trust, and who will allow himself some flexibility with you along the way. Some bishops are excellent counselors; many family doctors will take the extra time to work with a depressed patient. Usually these individuals will sense when a problem is beyond their capacity to handle and will refer it elsewhere. However, if this does not happen, or if a specific professional counselor does not seem to be meeting our needs, let us never forget that here, as in any other aspect of our life, we have free agency, the right to change, to pursue church lines of authority to our satisfaction in order to obtain the help we need.

There will commonly be some overlap between reactive and endogenous forms of depression. Thus, most persons with a known heredity of depressive illness will seek therapy in conjunction with appropriate physical treatment. After all, insofar as we have stresses in our lives and may have learned ineffectual patterns of response or behavior, and insofar as these may precipitate the biological swing, it is worth the effort to learn how to cope with stress and to unlearn those difficulties that may be leaving us more open to depression.

As women in the Church, we are probably subject to some special forms of vulnerability to stress and depression. Part of this vulnerability results from the simple fact that we are women, which, of course, means the problem is not restricted to our church. Nevertheless, in the Mormon culture, with our usual prescription of roles and models for functioning and thinking about ourselves, which in many cases are perceived as rigid and unbending, we become increasingly vulnerable. This cultural vulnerability is probably most closely bound with ways in which we learn to define ourselves as we grow and with the sorts of things we may come to expect or want for ourselves and those about us. A recent book by Silvano Arieti (Severe and Mild Depression, New York: Basic Books, 1978) perhaps gives us our clearest treatment of the problem as it explores how people may spend their lives living for what he calls a "dominant other." A dominant other may be your husband, your job, or a set of things you believe you should be doing, and if you find yourself not living in harmony with this dominant other, you lose this measure with which to define yourself.

Perhaps we may consider a graphic, unfortunately common illustration of how such a vulnerability might come about. Let us postulate a prospective Patti Perfect. Patti Jr. has been born and raised in Tinytown, Utah. Her father is the bishop of her ward, her mother is the Relief Society president, and her uncle down the block is the stake president. Patti's small town is approximately 98 percent Mormon, and she has never really learned to understand that there are other people on this earth who exist without the influence of the gospel in their lives. Patti has been raised to believe that anything a bishop, stake president, even a Relief Society board member, may say (on any subject, mind you) is absolute gospel truth. Patti's entire life plan has been made for her since at least the age of three when she first learned to say "celestial." She will graduate from high school and will have a husband in the wings or, in lieu thereof, will continue on at BYU (not particularly to learn or develop a talent or career, but to find the elusive returned missionary who will take her to the temple, place her on a pedestal, and provide her total security in life). She will marry, have six children, and carry at least four high positions in the Church. And she will live happily ever after. Now you can imagine in this plan what innumerable pitfalls and traps have been set. Patti has learned to define herself and her life in terms of attributes or events totally outside her control. Patti believes that if she does not marry, she must be unworthy and a failure. If she marries, has her six children, but then feels unhappy, she will experience a major loss in terms of unfulfilled expectations; she will, however, worsen her own situation by believing that because she feels this, she is guilty. The "Church" has promised her that these things will make her happy, and surely if she is not, the fault is hers; an underlying sin must be preventing her progression. Patti has been taught to regard herself as worthwhile only insofar as she is as a mother, a wife, and an active church participant, and certainly only insofar as she approaches the status of a senior Patti Perfect.

But what about those of us who may not marry in this life? What of those wives who find they are unable to bear children? What of the countless numbers in our midst who really try to do the 150 or more things each day, only to find themselves unappreciated, neglected, or unhappy? These are individuals whose very existence is not of their own making. And what if they have never learned to define themselves solely in terms of their own intrinsic worth? What a tragedy—especially when we find it in our Church, for we have the perfect perspectives and teachings to show us the foolhardy nature of such assumptions. We alone, in the Church, have a sure knowledge of the true plan of salvation. No other people on earth can better comprehend our place in the premortal existence, our choice to come to this earth, the risks we promised to take by living, and our sense that despite it all, we may live confidently and patiently no matter what our trial. If we truly adhere to the things we learn through the Church, none of us should lose our hold on the iron rod.

"I am a child of God." "I have intrinsic worth." "I have a track record already—I was not one of the third that perished before the world began." I am a good person." How is it that these concepts, so easily accepted and acted upon by us as children, somehow shift as we become adults? You have seen the little five-year-old girl in her new lace dress, looking the picture of innocence and openness. To this little human being you may say, "You look so nice today" and she will respond, "I know!" How horrified we would be if this experience were repeated with an adult! Somewhere in our lives we seem to learn that it is not okay to have good feelings about ourselves, to accept compliments readily from those around us, or to say "I am good; I do that well." We brand that as conceit, pride, or vanity. We have forgotten somehow that we do have that intrinsic worth and not only can but should develop and grow for ourselves, not for another person or an outside cause. If we plan our lives according to the latter framework, our reward will be only disappointment and depression. To spend our lives doing what we do for another person is to make certain our vulnerability to loss, to disappointment, to depression. People outside ourselves are not predictable—that is one thing that is predictable! (The sole exception to this rule is the Lord, Jesus Christ. His expectations for us will never lead us astray and will never vary.)

We have looked at expectations and at the resulting imbalance. We have mentioned the kinds of losses we may experience. However, I believe that our greatest vulnerability in the Church results from our tendency to apply doctrinal issues to our lives without ever really thinking about them. The result is a mass of confusion and misinterpretation that true study of gospel principles could have prevented. Perhaps the classic example of this point is to be found in this tired assertion, "If you're good, you'll have blessings. If you're bad, you won't." In the eternities, in the course of our eternal lives, the argument is absolutely valid; but no one with the authority to do so has ever said that if we are good today we will have blessings today, or that if we are good we will not have sorrow. How amazed I am to find this an overriding belief among a sad majority of Church members. But they have set the traps themselves, for somehow they convert the general principle to these ideas: (1) If this bad thing happens to me, it means that I have been bad and am being punished. (2) If things are going well for me, it means that I must be doing right. (3) As long as I do well, I will never have real cause for sorrow and bad things will not befall me. Perhaps the most fundamental doctrine of our Church is the concept of free agency—yet all these assumptions would seek to negate this principle, to take away experiences that ultimately may be the source of our greatest growth and progression.

I was in a Relief Society meeting when one sister told of an experience with a leader who said, "Women who get depressed just do not have a testimony." Once my blood cools, I can only hope to find this leader, vicariously at least, to confront her with the absolute incompatibility of her statement with church teachings. If I could talk with such a person, I would go back to the beginning and talk about the premortal existence in this way: "Back in the preexistence there were two plans. In the first plan we were told that we would have the opportunity to live on earth, that we would have no choice, and that we would have essentially instant feedback on all that we did—good would immediately beget good, bad bad. In this plan we might have a comfortable life, but surely we would experience no challenge nor any opportunity to grow. The second plan gave mankind the choice to live this life. We were told that our lives might not always be pleasant but that we would be expected to 'roll with the punches.' We would know the essence of sorrow because we know its opposite—joy. And we were told that we would not be left without direction, but that to obtain it we would have to initiate the contact." Then I would ask said individual, "Which plan do you think your ideas sound more like?"

Our friend might be taken aback, but her notions are consistent with the idea of instant feedback. Perhaps she would be harder to convince. The next conversation would then go: "You believe that President Kimball is a prophet, right? That on earth he is the closest thing we have to a man living in a state of perfection, being spiritually in tune, and holding his life in obedience to the will of the Father? Well, what you are saying is that deep underneath, in the depths of his soul, President Kimball is a wicked and sinful man!" How could I say this to her? Many of us have read the prophet's biography. We are aware of his many trials—the loss of parents, severe illnesses when young, the attacks of Bell's palsy, the throat cancer, the heart attacks, and the problems with the subdurals. Yet this individual at my side would have me believe that for those difficulties to befall the prophet he must be a wicked man, that otherwise he would be "living in a bed of roses."

How many other day-to-day examples can we think of that are merely outgrowths of our rigid friend's assumptions? In the KSL program, one woman (a bishop's wife, no less) told how she was not helped by the nurse who said, "Oh, if you had only read your scriptures more, this wouldn't have happened." Why are we so hard to convince when the principles are so fundamental? I might be living every commandment of the gospel to the very best of my ability, but if I experience an episode of endogenous depression, I could do little to end it—except to recognize it and get help. In depression, the person already feels guilty, so how can it help to heap extra guilt upon ourselves by accepting the idea that our depression results from our actions? This cycle will only lead the individual to despair.

Another graphic example of how we as members should not approach a brother or sister in distress or pain is in the book of Job. Job, who is in a deep clinical depression (he describes his sense of hopelessness, helplessness, his constant suicidal thoughts, his loss of appetite, his poor sleep), is visited by three well-meaning friends, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, who seek to comfort him by lecturing and trying to justify his fallen state. In the responses of these three individuals, we can see every fallacy that so many would seek to use in "helping" others cope with depression: (1) You must not have been living in tune with the Lord despite all your outside appearances. Surely you know that no good or innocent person would ever be punished. Your best course will be to go, confess your sins, and expect the Lord's miracle to you. (See Job 4.) (2) Really, you should not express these negative feelings at all. Remember that we are to "rejoice in all things." If a man truly has God as part of his life, he will continually be filled with laughter and shouts of joy. (See Job 8.) (3) There must be a secret sin in your life. God is doubtless punishing you far less than you deserve. (See Job 11.) (4) Your pride has brought you low. "Pride cometh before the fall." (See job 15.) (5) You just don't know God. Otherwise you could accept and understand all these things. (See Job 18.) (6) God has finally caught up with you for your past. (See Job 20.) (7) The feelings that you are expressing only prove that you "have had it coming." You really have been a hypocrite all along. (See Job 22.) (8) You have not lived your life in total dependence on God. You have not realized that you cannot function in your own strengths but must depend completely upon God. (See Job 25.)

These ideas are, of course, all paraphrased, and I am indebted for their emphasis to a nameless Christian pastor whose radio broadcast I heard by accident. But the point is that at the last God rebukes the three "friends," telling them that they have not represented him correctly, nor his teachings or his ways of dealing with mankind. (See Job 42.) I doubt that we could find a more straightforward message addressing the hurtful effects of individual misinterpretation.

An additional immense source of vulnerability for us has to do with the problems of anger. There exists a wonderful organization to which I belong, called the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists (AMCAP). Our membership consists of counselors and other professionals who meet at least twice each year in conjunction with general conference. In our October meetings I had the opportunity to work with an individual, Burton Kelly, of the Counseling Center at BYU, who gave an enormously helpful workshop on the use of the scriptures as an adjunct in therapy. Following his workshop, I spent some time with him requesting additional scriptural references that deal with the problems of anger. I could find numerous examples of males becoming angry, but I was not sufficiently expert in the scriptures to know of examples for females.

Not having received a reply since that time, I was dismayed to open my February 1980 Ensign to a four-page article called "The Case Against Anger," written by this same good brother. All the points made in his article are valid, but they are valid for perhaps one-third of all the reasons for which individuals become angry and not for the other two-thirds. The trouble with this sort of approach is that people such as Patti Jr., from Tinytown, Utah, will read the article, and believe that anything published in the Ensign represents the gospel truth from month to month, and never thereafter ponder its content or really stop to think of its implications for themselves. If Patti Jr. had come to one of my workshops and begun to feel a little better about anger, she would now just as easily feel, "Well, I heard Sister Hirsh, but I guess what she told us is not true—and anyway, she doesn't have the priesthood, so it all must have been a pack of lies!" And that is too bad. The points of the article are valid; appropriate treatments are suggested for the times when anger is not necessary or may not be a useful response. Unfortunately, though, these points will be drowned out by the overshadowing message that all anger results from sin and that all anger results in sin. But is this really true? What about anger that results from such day-to-day feelings as disappointments, lost expectations, not seeing ourselves live up to our thoughts? Brother Kelly defines anger as arising only when one is judging another person or comparing himself, this negates all of the kinds of anger that most of us in the Church (and in the world in general) experience the most.

In the Church we seem to have an exceedingly difficult time with our anger; we have the unspoken message that anger is something one should never feel, show, or acknowledge in any way. Unfortunately, a significant group of those who become depressed do so because buried within them is so much anger that they have never been able to express. Anger is, in addition to an emotion, a real physical, chemical response, and that energy must be dissipated in some way. If it is not, the individual may turn it against himself in the form of emotional difficulty or even of physical illness. Why is this such a difficult concept for us in the Church? in trying to address the problem of anger, I tend to pull out of my hat such questions as, "Remember the flood?" or what of Christ in the temple as he drove out the money changers? I do not imagine that at that time Christ was in a state of meekness and peace; rather, I suspect he must have been feeling immense anger at these people and hurt to see them defile his Father's house. Joseph Smith, as he spent his hours in Liberty jail, became angry at God, saying in effect, "I can take no more of this! How long must it go on? Can't you give the people a break?" (See D&C 121.) (Note that in response to Joseph's anger, God filled him with words of comfort and patience that no doubt were of great benefit to Joseph.) I submit to us all: If God and Christ and Joseph Smith can be angry, does it make any sense to say that we cannot? In Brother Kelly's article, he deals with this issue by saying that they were not angry, that what they were feeling was probably something "higher" that we in our human frailty cannot understand but choose to call anger.

Now, I am not the final authority on the gospel. Each of us will have to receive his own witness of these things. But as far as I am concerned, an important part of the ministry of Christ and of all our teachers is to show us their humanness—to show us that they have these feelings and can use them constructively. Because Christ used his anger wisely, he was able to avert the stoning of the adulterous woman. I believe God must have been very angry at the time he caused the flood—probably feeling as torn up and frustrated as any father toward his children.

For persons who may be having a struggle with this, there is a way out that I use commonly in therapy, especially with couples and families. This alternative is based on the fact that anger is a superficial emotion. It is always a secondary response, although we seldom acknowledge this fact. It is the result of other feelings, and we would be using our efforts more constructively if we were attempting to define what feelings lie beneath the anger—feelings such as hurt, rejection, disappointment, and defeat. (We might speculate that Christ had such feelings as dismay and disappointment or hurt for his Father as he saw the people not understanding his truths.)

Consider, for example, the tired wife who is greeted by her husband who comes in the door, throws his briefcase down in the hall, and heads for the living room to read the evening paper and put his feet up. The wife has two ways of responding. If she comes up with something like, "You never come home to see me. You never help me in the kitchen. You always have to be selfish and read the paper," she will only put her husband on the defensive, and she will feel out of control. She will not have told him what she needed; all she will have done is to vent the secondary response of anger. How much more useful it would be for her to say, "You know, honey, when you come home from work and go to the living room that way, it really hurts me. I feel that you must not even care enough about me to ask about my day. It makes me feel neglected. Could you spend more time with me when you first come home? Probably both of us have had a hard day and could use each other's support." What a breakthrough! Here the wife has vented her true feelings. Neither party will feel hurt in this exchange; instead each has the opportunity to grow closer to the other. Anger is a real feeling. It must not be buried, but it can be used to accomplish constructive ends. If we bury it, we are only asking for difficulty and increasing our vulnerability.

By now it should be obvious that the concept of there being only one way to do things is not always productive. Stemming from this are the questions, "What happens when we overdo in our church roles?" and "How do we say no?" I have seen blackboards filled with lists of what Mormon women thought they should be doing. But what happens when we reach our saturation point? When should we say no, and how do we deal with this? Many of us then feel guilty; yet if we do not, we end up feeling swamped, put upon, and eventually depressed. If we do not deal evenly and thoughtfully with problems such as this, we lose our balance.

Maintaining Balance

We have looked at depression, what it is like, our vulnerabilities, and the ways that we can get help. We can to some degree avoid depression, or at least cope with it. The determining factor is how we keep balance in our lives—and this will be the focus for the remainder of my discussion. We have a great many ways in which we can be of help to ourselves. The number of books, lay articles, and the like produced in recent years is truly gratifying, and I am always happy to provide individuals with such references as they desire. Brother Kelly provided us a marvelous handout at the same AMCAP conference last fall listing basic therapy principles found in the scriptures. (See p. 180.) How wonderful it is to took at these concepts and to see that, contrary to what many Latter-day Saints feel about psychotherapy (that it is just one step up from witchcraft), the teachings and principles have been with us all along. Much time must be spent in virtually all therapy situations helping the individual to learn to love and feel good about himself—an attitude that so many persons see as sinful and selfish. Yet Christ taught us to love our neighbor as ourselves, not before, instead of, or after. I doubt that it is possible for any of us to love another person openly and fully unless we first believe in ourselves, love ourselves, and have the conviction of our own worth.

But what must we Latter-day Saints do to maintain our balance or to help ourselves if we are having the emotional difficulties and illnesses we have described? Are there things that we may do to keep ourselves from falling in the first place? For me, balance in the Church has several facets. The first, I feel, is to understand who and what we are. In that same fall AMCAP conference, we had an exceptional workshop given by Dr. Sterling Ellsworth, a psychologist practicing in Eugene, Oregon. In this workshop Dr. Ellsworth introduced to us the concept of the two selves that exist in all of us. This idea is not new. Freud spoke of the base, undisciplined id and the strict superego, and today we hear of the OK and not OK selves. Yet taken in the gospel context, this concept makes wonderful sense and can really help us conceptualize many things that may have confused us. These two selves consist, first, of our true self, which is obviously our spirit self. This part of each of us, which is positive, smart, and open, is what we are given when we are born. The child, who comes into the world pure in spirit, is unblemished and uncluttered and has not yet learned the fallacies and mixed messages so typical of the world. What then is our negative self? This is the accumulation of all those unproductive things that we learn by default as we grow in this life, those parts of us we recognize as "clutter" or our "garbage piles."

The messages we get from this part of us are: "You aren't worth it. You shouldn't think good things about yourself. You must and you can meet all of your needs only from outside yourself." These responses are all learned and, of course, are authored by the father of all lies. It is these aspects of our negative self, not our true spirit self, that create in us our problems and our inabilities to cope.

Think about this—it clarifies so many doctrines that otherwise might be incomprehensible. Take, for example, the concept of unconditional love. Do you ever find it impossible to get up in front of hundreds of people and say, so that you mean it, "I love all of you"? I have this problem. I might not even know the majority of the people. How then can I love them? But when I realize that we are kindred spirits and have known and cared for each other all along, I can say that I love them all. I may not be able to say that I like what they do, but my spirit can reach out to love all of their spirits. In this context I can also catch some glimpse of what God's unconditional love for each of us is like, and I can be more open to experience human examples that illustrate this for me. Let me use a personal experience to illustrate how I was able to comprehend this principle. This incident occurred while I was working with my own therapist at a time when I was dealing with some particularly difficult issues in my life. I had finally trusted this one individual enough to try to talk with him concerning things that I had never before really been able to tell anyone and had carried about as part of my own personal "garbage pile" for years. Then, as I talked and was somehow feeling that I would never really be able to look this person in the eye again, I heard sniffing. Looking up, I saw this wonderful person with eyes red and face flushed. Incredulous, I could only whisper, "Are you crying?" When I received an affirmative answer and asked how this could be, he responded, "It hurts me to see you feeling so bad and then being so hard on yourself." Ever since then, I think I have been able to imagine how God must feel when we sin. I don't think that he sits up there being angry with us; probably he looks down and feels very sad—and hurts for us because of how we hurt ourselves.

For me, balance within the Church entails understanding how the Church really does give us a working frame of reference in which we may sensibly build our lives. In the Church we are truly blessed. We have Christ, and our special understanding of him gives us all the focus we need for our existence. Christ is no doubt the best psychotherapist who ever lived, because he represents all those qualities and the empathic approach that bring out the best in people.

In that same AMCAP conference, Stephen R. Covey spoke on how keeping Christ as the center of our lives helps us focus our attention properly and how everything else then falls into place. According to Brother Covey, Christ provides all the dimensions needed to maximize our human growth and understanding. The first dimension is security. Insofar as Christ gives us that—because he provides us with our knowledge of self and supports our individual uniqueness—we need never fall into despair. Knowing that we are children of God and that we are worth something can give each of us perhaps the greatest single source of hope for surviving any problem that befalls us in this life. The second dimension is guidance. Christ, the scriptures, and the gospel teachings (the real ones—not individual interpretations) give us the very best standards for dealing with ourselves and others. (In searching for references for this talk I found a book titled "Bible Therapy." It was written by a Christian minister, but the basic principles are correct. Maybe we as Latter-day Saints need no longer be afraid to take a look at our problems and admit that we are human. Then such books will come from our own!) Third, Christ's wisdom provides the perfect model of balance. Christ acknowledged his own weaknesses and did not shrink from wrestling with them. In the Garden of Gethsemane Christ was anguished, feeling fear and uncertainty as he contemplated the suffering to come. But by acknowledging this weakness and by praying with all his might for help and strength, he was able to say calmly, "Nevertheless, not my will, but thine." Given the example of Christ, who are we to say we cannot admit to weakness? Finally, Christ gives us power in our lives. We have this power from knowing of his very real love and support for us, and we may use this power as we teach and try to be an influence for good among others.

Now, in real-life, practical terms, what will keep us in balance? Here are the things I have come up with. Many of you will want to add your own.

In summary, let us each do our best to maintain some balance and perspective in our life. You may have seen the newspaper captions called "in the Mind's Eye." My favorite shows an enormous tree that has been toppled in a storm, and the caption reads, "Handle problems as they come. Even a large tree is easily moved one piece at a time." May we all try to keep this in mind. I leave with you my testimony that this church affords us the greatest opportunity for achieving balance and serenity in our lives.

Successfully Coping with Stress: Solutions from the Scriptures

Chapter 12 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Marilyn Arnold was graduated with highest honors from Brigham Young University and received a Ph.D. in American literature from the University of Wisconsin. She is dean of the Graduate School at BYU.
