No specific author, Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1986)

Reading and Loving Literature

Marilyn Arnold [^1]

A stanza in a poem called "Miniver Cheevy" by Edwin Arlington Robinson goes like this: "Miniver scorned the gold he sought,/But sore annoyed he was without it./Miniver thought, and thought,/And thought, and thought about it." [^2] I know how he feels. I have thought, and thought, and thought about this assignment, trying to decide how academic or personal to make it. I decided finally to go the personal route, realizing that I cannot really persuade you to love literature by arguing you into it. I can only tell you how I feel about it, read to you a few of the things that I love, and hope that something will be stirred within you that will result in a greater appreciation for literature.

Thoreau said in the beginning of Walden, "In most books, the 'I' or first person is omitted; in this it will be retained; that in respect to egotism, is the main difference. We commonly do not remember that it is, after all, always the first person that is speaking. I should not talk so much about myself if there were anybody else whom I knew as well." [^3] So I'm borrowing Thoreau's rationale: I would talk about someone else and someone else's loves if I knew as much about them as I do about my own.

We literature teachers are often asked questions like this: "Why should we take this class?" "Why should we read this book?" "Why should we trouble ourselves over poetry?" "Of what possible use is it?" What our questioners are really asking is, "How will appreciating literature help me get that second car or that job in the bank?" We tend to think of things as being useful only if they have some kind of economic value. For me, the most valuable things in this world do not have price tags; they cannot be assigned material value. They are things that speak to the heart and the mind and the spirit and that do something for us in ways we cannot measure. Literature is one of those things.

We commonly say that the thing that separates the lower animals from human beings is that human beings have an innate capacity for reason. I think there is another distinction just as important—and just as innate. I call it, for lack of a better term, the aesthetic sense. Have you ever seen a cow get excited about a sunset? Or a dog go into ecstasy over a flower or a painting? Willa Cather said once that she had never been able to impress a cow in a Nebraska pasture with one of her sonnets yet, and she did not expect ever to be able to. Animals do have feelings, of course, and an appreciation for movement. I skied to school yesterday, and a young German shepherd decided to accompany me. He rollicked and frolicked through all the deepest drifts, obviously having a marvelous time; but I could have recited a poem to him and he would not have been impressed at all, I am sure.

We remember that the Savior told us he came to earth so that we might have life "more abundantly." I do not believe that he was interpreting the abundant life in terms of recreational vehicles, boats, or color television sets. Knowing the kind of value system that he represented, we can assume that he was talking about a more abundant spiritual life, intellectual life, and emotional life. I believe that artists—musicians, painters, writers—are no accident. They are created to bless our lives.

Now I would like to make some general suggestions about reading literature. First, when you approach a piece of literature, simply love it for its own sake. Do not try to find uses for it—just relish it. Let the words and the rhythm have their way with you, and let the work fill your mind with the richness of its language, the wonder of its conception. Here are a few examples of beauty that is, as Emerson says, "Its own excuse for being." This first one is from a Shakespearean play, Antony and Cleopatra. It contains a marvelous scene in which Cleopatra is described as she arrives by barge on the river. She is adorned voluptuously—she would have to be—in magnificent trappings. This is how Enobarbus, one of the characters in the play, describes her:

The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne, Burn'd on the water: The poop was beaten gold; Purple the sails, and so perfumed that The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver, Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke and made The water which they beat to follow faster, As amorous of their strokes. For her own person, It beggar'd all description: she did lie In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold tissue, O'er-picturing that Venus where we see The fancy outwork nature: on each side her Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids, With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool, And what they undid did. Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides, So many mermaids, tender her i' the eyes, And made their bends adornings: at the helm A seeming mermaid steers: the silken tackle Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands, That yarely frame the office. From the barge A strange invisible perfume hits the sense Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast Her people out upon her; and Antony, Enthron'd i' the market-place, did sit alone, Whistling to the air; which, but for vacancy, Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too, And made a gap in nature. [^4]

Another example of this kind of writing is found in a passage from Death Comes for the Archbishop, by Willa Cather. This is a novel about a French priest who has been sent to the desolate New Mexico territory to establish the church on firm footing there. He is a cultured, refined man, and it was expected that he would return to France when he retired. But during his final visit to France before his retirement, something happens to him. He decides that he cannot stay in France. He must live out his life on the desert. (Those of you who love the desert as I do will understand his need.) Cather describes his feelings:

In the Old World he found himself homesick for the New. It was a feeling he could not explain; a feeling that old age did not weigh so heavily on a man in New Mexico as in the Puy-de-DÃ´me.

He loved the towering peaks of his native mountains, the comeliness of the villages, the cleanness of the country-side. . . . When the summer wind stirred the lilacs in the old gardens and shook down the blooms of the horse-chestnuts, he sometimes closed his eyes and thought of the high song the wind was singing in the straight, striped pine trees up in the Navajo forests.

During the day his nostalgia wore off, and by dinnertime it was quite gone. He enjoyed his dinner and his wine, and the company of cultivated men, and usually retired in good spirits. It was in the early morning that he felt the ache in his breast; it had something to do with waking in the early morning. It seemed to him that the grey dawn lasted so long here, the country was a long time in coming to life. The gardens and the fields were damp, heavy mists hung in the valley and obscured the mountains; hours went by before the sun could disperse those vapours and warm and purify the villages.

In New Mexico he always awoke a young man; not until he rose and began to shave did he realize that he was growing older. His first consciousness was a sense of the light dry wind blowing in through the windows, with the fragrance of hot sun and sage-brush and sweet clover; a wind that made one's body feet light and one's heart cry "To-day, to-day," like a child's.

Beautiful surroundings, the society of learned men, the charm of noble women, the graces of art, could not make up to him for the loss of those light-hearted mornings of the desert, for that wind that made one a boy again. . . .

That air would disappear from the whole earth in time, perhaps; but long after his day. He did not know just when it had become so necessary to him, but he had come back to die in exile for the sake of it. Something soft and wild and free, something that whispered to the ear on the pillow, lightened the heart, softly, softly picked the lock, slid the bolts, and released the prisoned spirit of man into the wind, into the blue and gold, into the morning, into the morning! [^5]

That is just pure poetry, isn't it? Again, let the words have their way with you.

My second suggestion is that you learn to distinguish between true art and cheap substitutes. Let me say, now and forever, that rhyme does not a poem make. Rhyme may make a verse, but it does not make a poem. Rhyme is a part of many poems, but we do not make a poem by merely rhyming an idea. Literary art is the product of a gifted, creative, disciplined mind encountering experience and interpreting it through language. There is a perversity in many of us that makes us think that the best film or the best book is the one that makes us cry the most. For some reason we like the cathartic experience of tears, so we tend to think, "That was a marvelous book; I wept all the way through it." Some good books do have that effect on us, but that is not necessarily what makes them good. Some writers, some third-rate writers, know how to push certain buttons and get certain responses from us. They know we will weep if they talk about a poor, lost child or about a bad man who turns good and dies. But we should not go to books just for their tear-evoking power.

Mark Twain particularly despised sentimentalism in literature, and he had a great deal of fun attacking it in Huckleberry Finn. You might remember the occasion when Huck and Jim have been separated by an accident on the river, and Huck is rescued by the Grangerford family, who are true Southern nobility. They do everything proper—except that they have feuds and kill their neighbors, a minor consideration because they observe all the established conventions. Well, they had a daughter named Emmeline, now deceased, who was on hand at every death with a tear-jerking poem. It was said that when somebody died, the doctor arrived first, then Emmeline, and then the undertaker. But Huck explained that one time the undertaker arrived before Emmeline did—she was hung up on some difficult rhyme. After that she just pined away to an early death. Emmeline was also a painter, and here is Huck's description of some of Emmeline's paintings:

They was different from any pictures I ever see before; blacker mostly, than is common. One was a woman in a slim black dress, belted small under the armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with black veil, and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and very wee black slippers, like a chisel, and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on her right elbow, under a weeping willow, and her other hand hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule, and underneath the picture it said "Shall I Never See Thee More, Alas."

Here is another one Huck describes:

A young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair back, and she was crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with its heels up, and underneath the picture it said "I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chirrup More Alas." There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon, and tears running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it, and she was mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and underneath the picture it said "And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas." These was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn't somehow take to them, because if ever I was down a little, they always give me the fan-tods. Everybody was sorry she died, because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do, and a body could see by what she had done what they had lost. But I reckoned that with her disposition, she was having a better time in the graveyard.

Then Huck quotes one of Emmeline's deathbed poems. The title is "Ode to Stephen Dowling Bots, Deceased":

And did young Stephen sicken, And did young Stephen die? And did the sad hearts thicken, And did the mourners cry? No; such was not the fate of Young Stephen Dowling Bots; Though sad hearts round him thicken, 'Twas not from sickness' shots. No whooping-cough did rack his frame, Nor measles drear, with spots; Not these impaired the sacred name Of Stephen Dowling Bots. Despised love struck not with woe That head of curly knots, Nor stomach troubles laid him low, Young Stephen Dowling Bots. Oh no. Then list with tearful eye, Whilst I his fate do tell, His soul did from this cold world fly, By falling down a well. They got him out and emptied him; Alas it was too late; His spirit was gone for to sport aloft In the realms of the good and great. [^6]

A third-rate writer is likely to take a very legitimate subject and then cheapen it by taking the meaning out of it. There are a lot of sentimental poems in print. One that comes to mind is called "The Well-Aimed Tear." Picture, if you will, the writer of this poem writing and weeping, aiming his tear so that it will blend with somebody else's tear on a grave. He makes his calculations, takes aim, and drops the tear. There are too many poems of this sort; you know them too well. One problem with the sentimental in literature is that instead of re-creating experience in which we can participate, it simply pushes the buttons to call up experience we are already supposed to have had. An honest piece of literature brings us to emotion by taking us through experience.

By way of contrast with the sentimental pieces we just noted, let me read a few passages from Shakespeare's King Lear. In this play the emotion is earned. You may very well feel like crying, but if you do, it is because you have lived with the characters and seen them struggling. You remember that King Lear is an imperious old king, proud, haughty, not always very wise. He decides when he reaches his eighties that he is tired of all the responsibilities of being king and that he should divide his kingdom among his three daughters. He wants all the privileges and trappings of kingship, but he does not want the responsibilities anymore. He determines to make the division according to the degree of love his daughters profess for him. The two older daughters flatter him, telling him that they love him immensely, but Cordelia, the younger daughter (who has a streak of her father's stubbornness in her, I suspect) will not play that game, although she genuinely loves him. She simply says, "I love you as a daughter loves a father." He gets terribly angry, divides the kingdom between the two wicked daughters, and banishes Cordelia. As it turns out, the wicked daughters strip him of his knights, his retinue, and the trappings of kingship, and finally drive him out onto the heath one terribly stormy night. He is dispossessed of everything. He undergoes great suffering, and even though he begins losing his mind, he arrives at new wisdom.

As the play moves toward its close, a battle ensues between Cordelia's forces (she has married the king of France) and the forces of the wicked daughters. Cordelia and Lear come together again in a highly emotional moment. Lear, by this time, is almost out of his mind; he is not even sure that he knows who she is. Her first words to him when she sees him are: "How does my royal Lord? How fares your Majesty?" (4.7.44). Here is this man in shreds, half mad, stripped of everything, and what does she call him? "My royal Lord" and "your Majesty." She still speaks to him as if he were king. He responds, "Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?" (4.7-52). As he tries to sort things out, he kneels before her. Imagine this old king on his knees, a man who would not have knelt to anybody at the beginning of the play. We realize how far he has come. She cannot bear to see him in such humiliation. She cries,

O, look upon me, sir, And hold your hands in benediction o'er me. No, sir, you must not kneel. (Act IV, vii, 57-58)

To this King Lear responds,

Pray, do not mock me: I am a very foolish fond old man. (IV, vii, 59-60)

What kind of an admission is that for him to make? He then continues:

Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less; And, to deal plainly, I fear I am not in my perfect mind. (IV, vii, 61-63)

That kind of admission would have been impossible for him earlier. Then he says:

Do not laugh at me; For, as I am a man, I think this lady To be my child Cordelia. (IV, vii, 68-70)

He has a sudden glimpse of recognition, and she replies, "And so I am, I am." (IV, vii, 70.) This is a marvelously moving scene. Then Lear says,

Be your tears wet? yes, faith. I pray weep not: If you have poison for me, I will drink it. I know you do not love me; for your sisters Have, as I do remember, done me wrong: You have some cause, they have not. (IV, vii, 71-75)

And her broken reply is, "No cause, no cause." (IV, vii, 75.) How lovely is this coming together of father and daughter after so many years of wrongful separation.

The battle goes on, and the tides turn. Cordelia's forces are losing, and she and Lear are both taken prisoners. She is angry and impatient, eager to right the wrongs that have been done to Lear. But he is not interested in retribution right now. He has his beloved daughter back, and that is the most important thing to him now. He says,

No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison: We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage: When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down And ask of thee forgiveness: so we'll live, And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too Who loses and who wins, who's in, who's out; And take upon's the mystery of things, As if we were God's spies: and we'll wear out, In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones That ebb and flow by the moon. (V, iii, 8-19)

He says, essentially, that it is enough for him for them to be together, even if they are in prison. Lear has come a long way since the opening scenes.

Then the tide turns again. Cordelia's forces begin winning, but her execution has already been ordered. And before that order can be reversed, she is hanged. Lear enters, carrying her in his arms, crying,

Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones: Had I your tongues and eyes, I'd use them so That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever! I know when one is dead and when one lives; She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking glass; If that her breath will mist or stain the stone, Why, then she lives. (V, iii, 257-63)

But he cannot quite accept her death. Even though he knows she is dead, he still must hope. As Lear is dying, he cries,

And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life! Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life, And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more, Never, never, never, never, never! (V, iii, 306-9)

Then, just before he dies, hope glimmers again:

Do you see this? Look on her! look! her lips! Look there, look there! (V, iii, 311-12)

At that moment he dies, thinking she may have been restored and indeed may be alive. Now that is earned emotion. What you feel as you read those lines is real.

My third suggestion is that when you are reading literature, you should seek its intellectual and spiritual illumination. That does not mean that we can look in literature for easy answers and soothing philosophies. The best literature does not contain very many easy answers, but it can lead us to a discovery of life's critical questions. The basic questions of human experience are questions like "Who am I?" "What is my relationship with God and the world?" and "What is my relationship with other human beings?"

In one of the classes I teach, we just read a book in which the character has made some very serious mistakes. He has chased after money and social position and a love that would bring these things with it. He wanders into a church and utters a very unusual prayer. One of the questions he asks in this prayer is, "What is it I have chosen?" All of us could ask that question about ourselves: "What is it I have chosen really? What is it I have worshipped?"

Let us turn for a moment to Emily Dickinson, who asks questions that appear to be very simple but that are, in fact, some of the hardest questions of all. Sometimes she asks them whimsically, as in this poem:

I'm nobody! Who are you? Are you nobody, too? Then there's a pair of us—don't tell! They'd banish us, you know. How dreary to be somebody! How public, like a frog To tell your name the livelong June To an admiring bog! [^7]

She knew something about problems of identity. Playful as she is at times, at other times she is deadly serious. Note the difficult issues she raises in this deceptively simple poem:

I never lost as much but twice, And that was in the sod; Twice have I stood a beggar Before the door of God! Angels, twice descending, Reimbursed my store. Burglar, banker, father, I am poor once more! [^8]

She says a great deal in just that one line: "Burglar, banker, father." Imagine the questions in Dickinson's mind. "Who is God? What is my relationship to him? Why does he take away? Why must my friends die?" In what sense is God both a burglar and a banker? He restores each time, and yet he takes away. And since he is also our Father, perhaps he loves us and cares about us. In those three words—"Burglar, banker, father"—Dickinson is pondering the roles of her Father in heaven and her relationship with him.

Emily Dickinson was terribly aware that in this life there are often no answers, or at least no simple answers, to many of our most difficult questions. Let me read another of her poems:

I heard a fly buzz when I died— The stillness in the room Was like the stillness in the air Between the heaves of storm. The eyes around had wrung them dry And breaths were gathering firm For that last onset when the King Be witnessed in the room. I will keep my keepsakes, signed away What portion of me be Assignable— And then it was there interposed a fly, With blue, uncertain, stumbling buzz, Between the light and me. And then the windows failed and then I could not see to see. [^9]

All of us expect that when the moment of transition to the hereafter comes, there will be light, illumination. We expect to understand the things we have not understood in this life. But Dickinson is suggesting that perhaps even then we will have no answers. Maybe there will interpose a fly between the light, or intelligence, and us. "And then the windows failed," the eyes closed, "and then I could not see to see." We may never know; how does one face that kind of possibility?

My fourth and final suggestion is that in literature we should seek for a revelation of human character. E. M. Forster, in a book called Aspects of the Novel, says that one reason we go to literature, one reason we enjoy it so much, is that we can know things about people in literature that we cannot know in real life. There are things about every one of us here that we have never told a soul. We all have our secret selves, selves perhaps even we do not understand, things that nobody knows but us. Forster says that the novelist tells us what a person is thinking, thereby revealing all of that person's characteristics. But, says Forster, "human intercourse, as soon as we look at it for its own sake and not as a social adjunct, is seen to be haunted by a spectre. We cannot understand each other, except in a rough and ready way; we cannot reveal ourselves, even when we want to; what we call intimacy is only a makeshift; perfect knowledge is an illusion. But in the novel we can know people perfectly." He says further that characters in novels "are people whose secret lives are visible or might be visible: we are people whose secret lives are invisible. And that is why novels, even when they are about wicked people, can solace us; they suggest a more comprehensible and thus a more manageable human race." [^10] We like to find somebody we can understand.

Let us look at three characters from fiction to illustrate the great delight we can experience in learning to know another human being. This is one of Melville's descriptions of crazy Captain Ahab in Moby Dick. This is the man, you remember, who was compelled to pursue the great white whale:

Socially, Ahab was inaccessible. Though nominally included in the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it. He lived in the world, as the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled Missouri. And as when the Spring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan of the woods, burying himself in the hollow of the tree, lived out the winter there, sucking his own paws, so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the sullen paws of its gloom! [^11]

Isn't that a magnificent figure of speech, comparing Ahab to an old bear who sits walled in, sustaining himself by sucking on his own paws? It is a remarkable characterization. Not all literature is as serious as Moby Dick, however. Those who have read Eudora Welty know how much fun she can be. In a little novel called The Ponder Heart, a character called Edna Earl Ponder tells the story. She runs the local hotel, and she is talking someone's ear off through the whole novel. This is what she says:

I was up there in my room, reading some directions. That's something I find I like to do when I have a few minutes to myself—I don't know about you. How to put on furniture polish, transfer patterns with a hot iron, take off corns, I don't care what it is. I don't have to do it. Sometimes I'd rather sit still a minute and read a good quiet set of directions through than any story you'd try to wish off on me. [^12]

I don't know about you, but I read cereal boxes in the morning.

Here is another marvelous example, this one from Flannery O'Connor's story "Good Country People." She is introducing Mrs. Freeman, one of the characters in the story:

Besides the neutral expression that she wore when she was alone, Mrs. Freeman had two others, forward and reverse, that she used for all her human dealings. Her forward expression was steady and driving like the advance of a heavy truck. Her eyes never swerved to left or right but turned as the story turned as if they followed a yellow line down the center of it. She seldom used the other expression because it was not often necessary for her to retract a statement, but when she did, her face came to a complete stop, there was an almost imperceptible movement of her black eyes, during which they seemed to be receding, and then the observer would see that Mrs. Freeman, though she might stand there as real as several grain sacks thrown on top of each other, was no longer there in spirit.

The woman Mrs. Freeman is talking with in the kitchen that day is almost her match. Her name is Mrs. Hopewell: "Mrs. Hopewell had no bad qualities of her own but she was able to use other people's in such a constructive way that she never felt the lack." This is how Mrs. Hopewell talks: "Nothing is perfect. This was one of Mrs. Hopewell's favorite sayings. Another was: That's life! And still another, the most important, was: Well, other people have their opinions too." [^13]

You would love Mrs. Hopewell's daughter. Mrs. Hopewell named her Joy, but she renamed herself Hulga. Hulga has a wooden leg, and in this story she decides that she is going to seduce a young Bible salesman who is nineteen years old. She has a Ph.D. In philosophy, she is in her early thirties, and she is a mean one. They arrange to go on a picnic together, she in her yellow sweatshirt, he with his satchel of Bibles. She manages to climb a ladder to the loft of a barn, and the two of them begin talking and hugging. She assumes he is terribly innocent, but when he opens the case that supposedly contains Bibles, we discover that it is full of whiskey and obscene playing cards. As it turns out, he is the one who intends to do the seducing. He sweet-talks her into letting him remove her wooden leg, and then he runs off with it. Hulga looks at him in stunned disbelief and says, "Aren't you just good country people?" He knows more about wickedness than she ever did.

The interesting thing about this story is that O'Connor said she just started writing this story about two women she knew, Mrs. Freeman with the neutral, forward, and reverse expressions, and Mrs. Hopewell. She claims that she did not even know that the Bible salesman was going to steal the wooden leg until ten lines before he did it. Then she said she realized that it was inevitable. Most certainly, writers work by inspiration and even whim.

In conclusion, let me stress that in art and literature lies the affirmation of ourselves as human beings. I really believe that the most important legacy that one generation leaves to succeeding generations is the legacy of art. It is our best artifact, isn't it? The finest that has been thought and felt throughout time—that is what literature is, as Matthew Arnold defined it. How much poorer we would be if Milton and Shakespeare and a host of others had never lived and never written. Too often we think of poverty only in economic terms. I suggest that there is such a thing as poverty of the spirit, and that kind of poverty strikes the rich as well as the poor.

Let me conclude with one last Dickinson poem:

He ate and drank the precious Words— His Spirit grew robust— He knew no more that he was poor, Nor that his frame was Dust— He danced along the dingy Days And this Bequest of Wings Was but a Book—What liberty A loosened spirit brings— [^14]

I pray that we may all find in books the liberty that a "loosened spirit" brings.

Chapter 13 Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Report Shows Women Still Suffer Discrimination at National and International Levels in Education, Government, and Private Industry" The advocacy of de facto marriage (i.e., actually existing without legal action). This address was given in July 1974 at the Lochinvar Club in New York City.
[^2] "Women Charge Discrimination in University Admission Policies and Scholarship Grants" The attempt to eliminate male domination in monogamous marriage. There are those who affirm that legally monogamous marriage is the most male-dominated institution of all, and is the only institution in which women are expected to work without receiving any stipulated wage, as well as without having fixed working hours. Belle S. Spafford served as general president of the Relief Society for twenty-nine years and president of the National Council of Women for a three-year term. She received an honorary doctorate as well as the Exemplary Womanhood Award from Brigham Young University.
[^3] "Women Seek Ordination to the Ministry" The determination to "throttle" the overproduction of babies. One viewpoint declares, "It's not women's lib that is downgrading the motherhood role; it is the ever more visible fact of overpopulation, and a reduction in the occupation of motherhood is now mandatory."
[^4] "Women Students Urged to Reach for Training in Traditionally Male Dominated Fields" The efforts to curb the existing excessive voluntary service by women. The position of the advocates of this is that the volunteer worker robs another woman, who needs paid employment, of a job opportunity.
[^5] "Give Women Credit Where Credit Is Due" (referring to purchasing credit)
[^6] "Women Emerging as New Breed of Political Activists"
[^7] 7. Emily Dickinson, The Complete Work of Emily Dickinson, Thomas H. Johnson, ed. (London: Faber and Faber Limited, 1960), p. 658.
[^8] 8. Dickinson, pp. 1012-13.
[^9] 9. Dickinson, p. 1019.
[^10] 10. E. M. Forster, Aspects of the Novel (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1965), pp. 62-65.
[^11] 11. Herman Melville, Moby Dick (New York: Franklin Watts), pp. 214, 215.
[^12] 12. Eudora Welty, The Ponder Heart (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1954), pp. 52-53.
[^13] 13. Flannery O'Connor, The Complete Stories (New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1971), pp. 271-74.
[^14] 14. Emily Dickinson, The Poems of Emily Dickinson (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press, 1955), p. 64.
