No specific author, Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1986)

Appendix

The American Woman's Movement [^1]

Belle S. Spafford [^2]

The intensity of activity in recent years on the part of certain women's groups, as well as on the part of some individual women, in behalf improving the status of women and removing what they regard as injustices, has been called by one editorial writer "the sensation of the hour." The goals women's groups seek and the general interest of the public in what is happening are reflected in numerous newspaper and magazine articles, in bulletins, in radio and television programs, in editorials, in conference and seminar programs, and in other ways. For example, I assembled at random seventeen headlines from newspapers, magazines, and bulletins that were close at hand as I began preparation for this talk. To illustrate the nature of the articles, I cite a few headlines:

One brave man published an article entitled "Women Filling Men's Jobs." The writer inquired, "'What will this do to me and my ilk?"

Three major questions arise. First, are we in the midst of a new movement? Second, what has given rise to today's agitation? Third, what does it portend?

It is my opinion, based on some research and many years of identification with organized women, both nationally and internationally, that the current effort commonly referred to as "Women's Lib" is an offshoot of what began in the early part of the nineteenth century. Traditionally, the activity has been referred to as "The Woman's Movement."

As times have changed and progress has been made in the lot of women, new demands have come to the fore, and agitation that they be met has been intensified in recent years.

To review the rise of the American woman since the 1830s, which is generally conceded to have had its faint beginnings at that time, is to see her taking part in one of the great dramas of the ages. It is to see a tremendous force, which had been partially dormant, brought into active exercise in the great work of the world. She moved onto the stage of this great drama when there was need for her intuition and intelligent service.

In colonial days women had more rights socially and politically than in the days of the early republic. In the matter of the franchise, colonial women usually had the right to vote. It is doubtful, however, whether they made much use of the privilege. A few women, as individuals, did distinguish themselves in fields outside the home. The American Revolution produced women like Abigail Adams, whose letters and pamphlets, history tells us, "helped light the fires that blazed at Concord."

Following the Revolution, there was a dull interregnum in the life of the American woman. For almost half a century she seemed to have stood still. One historical writer declared that women were as silent as the tomb. They probably were held less important in the social scheme than they had ever been before or were destined ever to be again.

In 1833 there began faint stirrings. A silent revolution was beginning to take form insofar as woman and her privileges and her work were concerned. In the early part of the nineteenth century, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin. It revived the slumping institution of slavery, which was growing increasingly distasteful to many women, who by nature were endowed with humanitarian impulses. Weaving came out of the home, taking with it numbers of women to work at the industrial power looms. The industrial revolution was being born. This and the distaste for slavery are generally regarded as being behind the stirrings of the women for greater freedom of action and better opportunities for education. Education for women at that time was confined, in the main, to the three Rs.

In 1833 an American institution of higher learning, Oberlin College of Ohio, under pressure we are told, opened its doors to women. It established a kind of annex, a female department, entitled "Collegiate Institute." The announcement had its pathos, its humor, and its general touch of patronage. The reason given for the action was: "The elevation of the female character by bringing within the reach of the misguided and neglected sex the instruction privileges which had hitherto distinguished the leading sex from theirs." (Inez Haynes Irwin, Angels and Amazons [Doubleday and Doran Company, 1933], p. 39.) Fifteen women enrolled.

In 1833 there appeared the first women's club to which one might apply the term in its modern meaning, "The Ladies Association for the Education of Females" of Jacksonville, Illinois. Then came "The Female Anti-Slavery Society." Both organizations were short lived.

An interesting story is recorded in a book titled Angels and Amazons, by Inez H. Irwin, in reference to a world antislavery conference held in London in 1840. The United States sent delegates, among them William Lloyd Garrison, who was expected to make the great speech of the occasion. Henry B. Stanton took with him his bride, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and a few other women who were deputized as delegates, among them Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Peace. When the American women tried to take their seats, the conference denied them recognition. After a long and agitated discussion, the house compromised by deciding that the women might not take part in the proceedings, but might sit behind a screen in the gallery and listen. William Lloyd Garrison, arriving late, acted with characteristic justice and generosity. He promptly took his seat with his country's women and insisted on listening with them. He did not make his speech.

The event that perpetuates this conference in history, however, happened outside the hall and had nothing to do with black slavery. Hurt and righteously indignant, Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton walked down Great Queen Street that night, discussing the burning injustice of the day's proceedings. At home these two women had struggled against the handicap of having to keep silent. Now in England, which had already manumitted her black slaves, behind a screen they faced facts at last. They drew a logical conclusion that they should go back to America and begin agitation for women's rights. This was a highlight in the history of feminism. (Irwin, pp. 78-79.)

With the dawn of the 1840s there appears to have been a general awakening with regard to the power of organization and the need for it.

In 1842 a unique and significant event took place. A handful of women, members of a newly organized church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, residing in Nauvoo, Illinois (a western frontier town), approached the Prophet Joseph Smith, who presided over the Church. They appealed to him to organize them in order that they might more effectively serve the Church and the people generally. The response of the Prophet to the request was favorable. On March 17 of that year, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, now known as the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was organized according to parliamentary procedures. The major purposes of the organization were defined as education (with emphasis on religious education), the development of women, and benevolent service. (On the flyleaf of the first volume of a biography titled Life and Works of Susan B. Anthony, presented to the Relief Society, the author, Ida H. Harper, wrote this statement, "All honor to the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the first organized charity." It may be of interest to you that on the flyleaf of volume 2 of the same work, presented to the Relief Society, the author in her own handwriting states, "To the women who were loyal and helpful to Miss Anthony to the end of her great work.")

Orderly procedures were marked out for maintaining and conducting the affairs of the Society. Under the direction of the presiding priesthood of the Church, the women were "authorized to direct, control, and govern the affairs of the society . . . in the sphere assigned to it." (Bruce R. McConkie, Relief Society Magazine, March 1950, p. 150.)

Latter-day Saint women from the very beginning of the Church had held a position of dignity, trust, and responsibility. Their mental capacities were recognized, as was their right to develop their talents to the full. They had been given the religious vote almost with the founding of the Church in 1830. Elsewhere, this was at a time when few men and no women enjoyed this privilege. Now, these women had been given the unique recognition of having an organization of their own, a structure through which to advance themselves and give service.

At the third meeting of the Society, the Prophet Joseph Smith met with the women. In addressing them, he made this significant statement: "I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads."

I have already referred to the limited educational opportunities for women extant at that time. Insofar as the needy were concerned, there were few private agencies for the care of the dependent, and public provisions afforded but one type of treatment—custody only for the poor, the feebleminded, the insane, and the miscreant. Almshouse care was considered to be the most satisfactory method of providing for the poor.

As we consider our great systems of education today, as well as our vast private and public welfare systems, we must concede that this small group of organized women had listened that day to inspired words.

With reference to the words "turn the key" in behalf of women, to turn a key implies to open a door. Opening a door contemplates a structure built for some specific purpose, with doors through which people pass in using the structure for the purposes for which it was designed. It is my conviction that the words "turn the key" for women implied opening doors of opportunity and advancement for them through the structure of an organization. It is my further conviction, shared by others, that the key was turned not alone for Relief Society women, but for women worldwide.

For those of us who believe in the overruling power of a Supreme Being in the affairs of mankind, it does not seem inconsistent to accept the words "I now turn the key" as divine afflatus in relation to women; nor in the light of future events does it seem unreasonable to regard this action as the actual beginning of organized effort for woman's emancipation from restraints that for years had encumbered her full development and usefulness.

Today [1974] the Relief Society, founded in 1842 with a membership of eighteen women, is national and international in scope. It operates in seventy countries of the world and has on its rolls the names of approximately 1.5 million women eighteen years of age and over, representing many nationalities. Its membership includes non-Latter-day Saint women as well as Latter-day Saint women, for the Society maintains an open-door membership policy. Its programs and instructional materials are now translated into sixteen different languages. Insofar as we are able to determine, the Relief Society is the oldest national women's organization to continuously persist.

And now as to what followed: In 1848, six years after the founding of the Relief Society, what is regarded as the first women's rights convention was held in the little Wesleyan church in Seneca Falls, New York. It was practically a small assembly of neighbors, but it threshed out the first Declaration of Independence for Women, demanding for them educational, industrial, social, and political rights.

During the next forty years, organizations flourished in numbers. In 1888 the National Woman's Suffrage Association convened, in Washington, D.C., what is regarded by many women's organizations as the greatest women's convention ever held. It was called, so they announced, to observe the fortieth anniversary of the first public declaration of women's rights. The underlying purpose, however, was to further the cause of woman's suffrage.

Invitations to this convention were issued to seventy-seven women's organizations, selected as being either national in scope or of national value. Of this number, fifty-three accepted, among them the Relief Society. (It may be of interest to you to know that Utah women had been granted suffrage in 1870 and were conspicuous figures in the national woman's suffrage movement.) In addition to the delegates from the United States, there were in attendance representatives from England, France, Norway, Denmark, India, Finland, and Canada. Eighty speakers addressed the convention, but the central figure proved to be Susan B. Anthony. One of her biographers said of her, "In her black dress and pretty red silk shawl, with her gray-brown hair smoothly combed over a regal head, [she was] worthy of any statesman." (Ida Husted Harper, Life and Works of Susan B. Anthony, 1898, 2:638.)

In addressing the meeting preliminary to the convention, Susan B. Anthony, with all the earnestness of her strong nature and with her voice vibrating with emotion, set farsighted views with regard to the platform. Said Mrs. Anthony: "We have now come to another turning-point and, if it is necessary, I will fight forty years more to make our platform free for the Christian to stand upon whether she be a Catholic and counts her beads, or a Protestant of the straitest orthodox creed. . . . These are the principles I want you to maintain, that our platform may be kept as broad as the universe, that upon it may stand the representatives of all creeds and no creeds—Jew or Christian, Protestant or Catholic, Gentile or Mormon, pagan or atheist." (Harper, 2:631.)

The chief outcome of this convention was the formation of the National Council of Women of the United States, to be made up of national women's organizations or of organizations whose programs were of national import, and the formation of the International Council of Women, to be made up of national councils of the respective nations. Both organizations are active and influential today.

Dedicating themselves to the cause of suffrage, these organized women swung into vigorous action. It was not until 1920, however, that the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was adopted, granting to women of the U.S. the right to vote and to hold public office.

Women, however, appear to have been somewhat slow to expand their role in society, even after having been granted the franchise and other opportunities they had demanded in their own declaration of independence. This was due, I believe, to a recognition of their lack of adequate training and experience in public life.

We recall also that war had descended upon the world, World War I followed by World War II. The wars seemed to entice, if not force, women out of their homes and into the labor market. After World War II an interesting phenomenon occurred in the world of work. A good portion of the women who, as a patriotic duty during the war years, had taken jobs, many of which were traditionally uncommon to women, felt a new independence; they saw advantages in the paycheck, and many of them never went back to the home and the life of a full-time housewife.

The desire of women to remain in the labor market and upgrade their employment opportunities was soon accompanied by an intense desire for training and education to qualify them for better job opportunities and a wider variety of services. The effort to thus upgrade employment opportunities continues.

According to a study made by a staff of researchers at the Columbia Broadcasting System, more than fifteen million women in the United States today have at least some college training, more than twice as many as two decades ago. Concomitant with this training, there exist more and better work opportunities. In addition, the prevailing attitude toward smaller families, the rapid technological improvements affecting housework, together with economic need influenced by inflation, have pushed increasing numbers of married women into the work force.

With this there have developed new demands by women for greater recognition, a determination to stamp out job discrimination on the basis of their sex, and agitation for increased opportunities in the top policy and decision-making levels of public life. As I assess it, recently we have been passing through a period of upheaval. Agitation began with a few sporadic efforts by poorly structured groups, somewhat militant in character and extreme in viewpoints, gaining momentum until it has now become a national effort, commonly referred to as the Women's Liberation Movement. Presently there are a number of well-structured organizations with dedicated members and determined goals. Militancy has largely subsided, although, in my opinion, some extremism remains.

Among the big issues that appear to stand out are the demand for full equality with men in opportunities and rights, the determination to wipe out the traditional obeisance to the concept of male supremacy, and the intent to completely eradicate everything that tends toward denying woman full identity as a person or toward placing her in a position where she may be regarded as a second-class citizen.

The efforts to achieve these goals are being accompanied, in some instances, by shifts in some of the traditional values of life. Certain sacred patterns of life that have proved rewarding to both men and women and socially stabilizing, such as marriage laws and covenants, are feeling the impact. Certain new philosophies with regard to the character of home and family life are being aired that run counter to the time-tested traditional values. While the number of liberal advocates appears to be limited, their views are proving controversial. I cite a few of these views as examples:

Some pollsters find that women in large numbers prefer the job of wife and homemaker to that of the unmarried woman working and seeking fulfillment in man's competitive working world. They prefer the gratification of motherhood, the privileges of wifehood, the position generally accorded the woman in the home by family members, and the status conferred by society on the title Mrs. Some activists have openly stated that one of their big problems is the indifference of the average married woman to their efforts to liberate her from her traditional status of housewife.

The home and family are not alone in feeling the impact of new views and current demands. They are also being felt by business, education, and other institutions, along with government, as these institutions endeavor wisely to adapt to new concepts and new demands.

Withal, there are some things for which women are agitating that merit support: for example, equal pay for equal work and nondiscrimination in hiring practices when a male and a female applicant are equally qualified.

Personally, I am not in accord with those who believe that current problems and needs of women may best be answered by adoption of a constitutional amendment on equal rights. I am of the opinion that major advantages embodied in the proposed amendment could be achieved through regular channels of state and federal legislative action without raising questionable results. I believe further that by nature, men and women differ physically, biologically, and emotionally, and that the greatest good to the individual and society results where these differences are respected in the divisions of labor in the home as well as in community life.

Working with women in many countries of the world convinces me that there is no task to which woman may put her hand so broad and inspiring, so filled with interest, so demanding of intelligence and capability, so rewarding, as that of wife, mother, and homemaker. I regard this role as taking precedence over all others for women. In a well-ordered home, husband and wife approach their responsibilities as a joint endeavor. Together they safeguard the sanctity of the home. Their personal relationship is characterized by respect and enduring love. They cherish their children. In child rearing, I believe, there is no substitute for a caring mother.

A woman should feel free, however, to go into the marketplace and into community services on a paid or volunteer basis if she so desires, when her home and family circumstances allow her to do so without impairment to her family life. Women owe it to themselves to develop their full potential as women—to exercise their mental capacities, to enlarge upon their talents, and to increase their skills—in order that they may give to the world the best they have in a manner that will produce the most good, regardless of the paths their lives may take.

I deplore the far-out views that openly break with those practices and procedures whose tested values over generations of time have contributed to the decency, stability, well-being, and happiness of humankind. I accept the premise that moral right is that which is true, ethically good and proper, and in conformity with moral law. What was morally right based on truth must remain right regardless of changing times and circumstances. Truth—and right that is based on truth—is immutable. We cannot afford to allow national sensitivity to become dulled into a calm acceptance of degenerating values and their demoralizing effects on our nation and its people.

What of tomorrow? I ask.

May I submit a few opinions, not that I regard myself in the slightest degree as a seer, but merely from the point of view of trends as I observe them and as I draw upon the past as I have noted it.

Just as the pendulum swings to and fro under the combined action of gravity and momentum to regulate the movements of clockworks and machinery, and usually with the first push strikes hard at the far left and far right, moving somewhat irregularly, and then finds its level, thus assuring the proper functioning of the instrument—so I believe will the pendulum of the current woman's action program perform.

Furthermore, I believe that without doubt many of the repressions and injustices that are troubling women today will be resolved. Gratefully, this is already taking place. I cite such things as equal pay for equal work under similar circumstances, new legislation on such things as property rights, and nondiscriminating credit laws. This portends a better day ahead for women.

Borrowing words from Marvin Kalb, "We have no valid evidence that today's headlines will be tomorrow's wisdom." Undoubtedly some of the things for which women are clamoring today will be in the discard tomorrow.

Tomorrow we undoubtedly will hear less of woman's rights and more of her responsibilities and achievements. Legislation may make legal the total equality of the sexes, but it is my opinion that the different natures of man and woman will be the supreme law in dictating the divisions of labor to which each will be drawn in the work of the world.

It is my experience that life, the stern teacher and the great disciplinarian, is now forcing upon us a recognition of the importance of spiritual and moral values. I believe a new day will find us moving forward toward primal religious, spiritual, and moral values, with materialism taking a lesser position. Man cannot live by bread alone.

I am convinced that the home will stand, as it has stood during past generations, as the cornerstone of a good society and a happy citizenry. While old activity patterns within the home may be modified by the impact of change outside the home, the enduring values that cannot be measured in terms of their monetary worth, their power for good, the need of the human being for them (such values as peace, security, love, understanding) will not be sacrificed on the altar of new philosophies and new concepts. Countless men and women and even children who have tasted these fruits of home and family life will recognize new philosophies that create spoilage in them, and they will fend them off. It is in the home that the lasting values of life are best internalized in the individual. It is this that builds good citizens, and good citizens make good nations.

President Spencer W. Kimball of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has expressed the belief that the future of the nation, its success, and its development are based largely upon the strength of family life. I am confident there are tens of thousands of Americans, men and women, who share this belief.

Robert O'Brien, senior editor of Reader's Digest, had this to say in an address given in May 1974 at a conference of the American Mothers Committee, Inc., in New York City: "In our hearts, we all know that the home is the cornerstone of American democracy. . . . It's well that the nation recognize and remember it, and engrave it upon the tablets of her history." Throughout the ages children have needed mothers with their love and understanding guidance, men have needed wives, and women have needed husbands to share in the concerns and responsibilities of life. They have needed the happy, loving, and protective companionship of one another. It will ever be so.

There is an old saying, "Man must work while woman must wait." The waiting period for the wheels of progress to roll around in behalf of woman (a period during which woman herself has worked as well as waited) is now nearly over. We may now say to her, in the words of Solomon, the wise man of Israel, "Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates." (Proverbs 31:31.)

Appendix Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Report Shows Women Still Suffer Discrimination at National and International Levels in Education, Government, and Private Industry" The advocacy of de facto marriage (i.e., actually existing without legal action). This address was given in July 1974 at the Lochinvar Club in New York City.
[^2] "Women Charge Discrimination in University Admission Policies and Scholarship Grants" The attempt to eliminate male domination in monogamous marriage. There are those who affirm that legally monogamous marriage is the most male-dominated institution of all, and is the only institution in which women are expected to work without receiving any stipulated wage, as well as without having fixed working hours. Belle S. Spafford served as general president of the Relief Society for twenty-nine years and president of the National Council of Women for a three-year term. She received an honorary doctorate as well as the Exemplary Womanhood Award from Brigham Young University.
