Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

MICHAEL THE ARCHANGEL

Adam and Eve were the same kind of people we are. They looked like we do; they acted much as we do. They planted crops, as we do, and they ate the harvest of their fields. They had their flocks and herds, as we do, and lived a mortal existence like ours.

Adam and Eve had a preexistence, as we did. They lived before this earth was made. But in that preexistent life, who was Adam? Had he really achieved the rank of Deity, which some dissidents believe?

There is no scripture anywhere that indicates that Adam had done so, but there is abundant scripture that points to the contrary. He was an angel—a preexistent spirit like all the rest of us—except that he had reached high distinction, a place of importance and prestige; but he was an angel nevertheless.

However, Adam was an archangel. The scripture refers to him as the archangel. The definition of that prefix—arch—is chief, or preeminent. An added definition says: "most fully embodying the qualities of his kind."

Adam, then, was the chief angel, but not Deity. He embodied most fully the qualities of an angelic existence. He was preeminent among the angels. He was their leader, and his name at that time was Michael. But, we repeat, he was an angel.

The Prophet Joseph, speaking of the angels, said, "These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 168.)

On this same point, the Prophet also said: "The Father called all spirits before Him at the creation of man, and organized them. He (Adam) is the head, and was told to multiply." (Teachings, p. 158.)

In speaking of the priesthood, the Prophet said: "Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." (Teachings, p. 158.)

He referred also to the priesthood which is "after the order of the Son of God," later called the Melchizedek Priesthood to avoid the too-frequent use of the name of Deity. (Teachings, p. 167.)

Said the Prophet: "The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed. . . . He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living this day, and to him was given the dominion." (Teachings, p. 157.)

Another indication of the fact that Adam was the archangel, the leader of all the spirits in the pre-earth life—but always subservient to Jehovah, who was Christ—is that it was he, Michael, who led the armies of heaven in ejecting the rebellious Lucifer from the heavens when he chose to fight against God. Lucifer, it will be remembered, was also an "angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God." But he "rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father." (D&C 76:25.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith said this:

"In regard to the holding of the priesthood in pre-existence, I will say that there was an organization there just as well as an organization here, and men there held authority. Men chosen to positions of trust in the spirit world held priesthood. (Alma 13:3-9.)

"To Adam, after he was driven from the Garden of Eden, the plan of salvation was revealed, and upon him the fullness of the priesthood was conferred. As Michael, the prince, he holds the keys of all dispensations, which appointment he received under Jesus Christ, `Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life.' (See D&C 78:16.)

"Adam received the holy priesthood and was commanded by the Lord to teach his children the principles of the gospel. Moreover, Adam was baptized for the remission of his sins, for the same principles by which men are saved now were the principles by which men were saved in the beginning. In that day as many as repented and were baptized received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Adam made all these things known to his sons and daughters." (Doctrines of Salvation, Bookcraft, 1956, 3:81-82.)

Note here that Lucifer, like Michael, was an angel of God "who was in authority in the presence of God" before his rebellion. To this extent, Lucifer and Michael were similar, except that although Lucifer was an angel in great authority in the presence of God, it was Michael who was the chief or the arch angel, and not Lucifer.

Obviously they were both great spirits in that pre-earth life, both holding high authority there. But Lucifer turned traitor and allowed his ambition to blind him. Therefore he fought against God, and "was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning." (D&C 76:25-26.)

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon [Lucifer] fought and his angels,

"And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

"And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:7-9.)

So Michael, the general of the Lord's hosts, was triumphant. But keep in mind, he was an angel even as Lucifer had been, except that Michael was righteous and loyal to Jehovah. Nevertheless, he was an angel, the archangel. People who attempt to credit him with divinity simply do not know the scriptures.

In his capacity of archangel, Michael even yet has a great ministry related to the latter days. He will be a key figure in announcing the time for the dead to be resurrected. ". . . before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel [note that he will still be an archangel then], shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all." (D&C 29:26.)

Another great war will take place as part of the "winding-up scene." Says the scripture:

". . . Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years.

"And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies.

"And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

"And the devil shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

"And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all.

"For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb." (D&C 88:110-115. Italics added.)

To make even more clear the fact that Michael, as an angel, works under the direction of the Savior, Jesus Christ, who is Deity and who presides over Michael, or Adam, we have this: ". . . The Lord God, . . . Who hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One who is without beginning of days or end of life." (D&C 78:15-16. Italics added.)

Notice the distinction between Michael and the Holy One.

The Prophet Joseph also makes it clear that not only was Adam the archangel Michael, but that he was also the same being who is mentioned in the scripture as the Ancient of Days.

When Joseph and Sidney Rigdon visited Spring Hill, Missouri, the Prophet explained that "by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." (Teachings, p. 122.)

The Prophet said further on this point: "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as the head of the human family." (Teachings, p. 157.)

Then the Prophet speaks of a vision to him: "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation." (Teachings, p. 158.)

This evidently refers to a gathering of Adam's family that was held while he himself was still in mortality. In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph in August 1830, the Lord identified Adam as Michael in these words: "And also with Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days." (D&C 27:11.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "The statement, `And when he took a tabernacle it was begotten by his Father in heaven, after the same manner as the tabernacles of Cain, Abel, and the rest of the sons and daughters of Adam and Eve,' has reference to the body of Jesus Christ.

"Adam died as the Father said he would through partaking of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Adam's spirit and body were separated, and he did not get the resurrection until after the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Adam, when a spirit without the body, could not beget a body of flesh and bones, therefore, he could not be the Father of Jesus Christ in the flesh.

"Again, Adam was as dependent on Jesus Christ as we are for the resurrection which came through the fact that Jesus had life in himself as his Father did. Therefore, he had to have a Father who had a body of flesh and bones who was immortal, not a father who was a spirit with a body in the grave, whose body had turned to dust." (Doctrines of Salvation, Bookcraft, 1954, 1:105.)
