Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

ADAM WAS NOT DEITY

Adam was not Deity. He was the principal servant of Deity, being the archangel, the leader of the Lord's hosts, the general of the armies of heaven, and the first man. But he was not Deity.

Luke says he was the son of Deity, which is correct. (Luke 3:38.) President Brigham Young says that Adam was so close in his association with Deity that he was allowed to assist in the creation of the earth. But, as President Young also said, he nevertheless was Michael the archangel, and not Deity.

In discussing this, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: ". . . President Brigham Young definitely declares that Adam is Michael, the Archangel, the Ancient of Days, which indicates definitely that Adam is not Elohim, or the God whom we worship, who is the Father of Jesus Christ.

"Further, . . . President Young declared that Adam helped to make the earth. If he helped then he was subordinate to someone who was superior. In another paragraph in that same discourse, President Young said: `It is true that the earth was organized by three distinct characters, namely, Elohim, Jehovah, and Michael.' Here he places Adam, or Michael, third in the list, and hence the least important of the three mentioned, and this President Young understood perfectly. We believe that Adam, known as Michael, had authority in the heavens before the world was framed. He dwelt in the presence of the Father and the Son and was subject to their direction as the scriptures plainly indicate." (Doctrines of Salvation, Bookcraft, 1954, 1:96-97.)

Some dissidents would have us believe that Adam is our God and that we have nothing to do with any other God, which, on the face of it, is ridiculous. To say that Adam is God is, of course, opposed utterly and completely to the scriptures as well as to our Articles of Faith, in which we say: "We believe in God, the Eternal Father [meaning Elohim], and in His Son, Jesus Christ [meaning Jehovah], and in the Holy Ghost."

Adam is not so much as mentioned in that statement on the Godhead, not even by his primeval name Michael.

And to say that we have nothing to do with "any God but Adam," who is not a God but is the archangel, violates all the teachings of the gospel of Christ, who taught us to pray to the Father in the name of Christ, who himself provided for us all the gospel teachings, and on whose redemption we depend wholly and completely for eternal salvation, for there is none other name, under heaven, given among men whereby we may be saved. (See Acts 4:12.)

There is no such involvement with Adam, who gave us only mortality but not immortality, nor salvation, nor exaltation. These blessings come to us only through Jesus Christ the Lord.

As Peter told the people on the day of Pentecost: "Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." (Acts 2:36.) But not so with Adam.

At this point we might paraphrase the words of Paul to the Corinthians: "Is Christ divided? Was Adam crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in the name of Adam?" (1 Cor. 1:13.)

Don't we have everything to do with God our Eternal Father and with Jesus Christ our Savior? And the Holy Ghost—he is given to us as a companion, teacher, and revelator. That is why we as Church members have the gift of the Holy Ghost. To say we have nothing to do with the Trinity is contrary to all holy writ.

It is interesting to recall that the Book of Mormon says that Christ, not Adam, is the God of this land, even though Adam lived in what is now Missouri, USA. (See Ether 2:12.)

It is most appropriate here to quote President Joseph Fielding Smith in his classic statement: "If I ever say anything contrary to the scriptures, the scriptures prevail." This applies to all, even to Brigham Young.

In identifying Adam, President Young said: "The Lord sent forth his Gospel to the people; he said, I will give it to my son Adam, from whom Methuselah received it; and Noah received from Methuselah; and Melchizedek administered to Abraham." (Discourses of Brigham Young, Deseret Book, 1946, p. 105. Italics added.)

In a discourse in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on April 17, 1870, President Young said this: "The world may in vain ask the question: `Who are we?' But the Gospel tells us that we are the sons and daughters of that God whom we serve. Some say, `We are the children of Adam and Eve.' So we are, and they are the children of our Heavenly Father." (Journal of Discourses [JD], 13:311.)

In remarks also in Salt Lake City on July 8, 1863, President Young said: "We believe in God the Father and in Jesus Christ our elder brother. We believe that God is a person of tabernacle, possessing in an infinitely higher degree all the perfections and qualifications of his mortal children. We believe that he made Adam after his own image and likeness, as Moses testified. . . ." (JD, 10:230-31.)

At another time President Young said: "Adam was as conversant with his Father who placed him upon the earth as we are conversant with our earthly parents. The Father frequently came to visit his son Adam, and talked and walked with him; and the children of Adam were more or less acquainted with him. . . ." (JD, 9:148.)

On April 9, 1852, President Young said: "It is true that the earth was organized by three distinct characters, namely Elohim, Yahovah, and Michael, these three forming a quorum. . . ." (JD, 1:50.) Then could Adam possibly be Elohim, as some say? These were three distinct persons.

On November 6, 1864, President Young said: "Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all High Priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel." (JD, 10:355.)

Elder Charles C. Rich was not present on the day when President Young gave an address that was wrongly reported as saying Adam was our Father in heaven. (See JD 1:51.) The sermon was delivered April 9, 1852, and Elder Rich returned April 21. In a copy of the Journal of Discourses Elder Ben E. Rich, son of Elder Charles C. Rich, referred to the misquotation as it appears in the Journal of Discourses, and in his own hand corrected the statement to read as follows: "Jesus our Elder Brother, was begotten in the flesh by the same character who talked with Adam in the Garden of Eden, and who is our Father in heaven." In this same statement Ben E. Rich wrote "As corrected above is what Prest. Young said, as testified to me by my father, C. C. Rich." (This signed statement is in the hands of the Church Historical Department.)

Some of the reporters at the Tabernacle in those days were not so skilled as others, and admittedly made mistakes, such as the misquotation of President Young as above, which was corrected by Brother Rich and which has caused some persons in the Church to go astray.

On the face of it the mistake is obvious. We find in Gen. 2:15-16 and 3:8-9 that God walked and talked with Adam in the Garden of Eden.

That other errors were made by reporters who recorded sermons of the brethren of that day is well attested. As one case in point, we provide the following statement made on October 7, 1903, by President Joseph F. Smith:

"I want to call your attention to an important matter. There is being printed in circular form now by unauthorized persons a sermon delivered years ago by President Brigham Young on the question of High Priests and Seventies, that is not correct. When I was presiding over the British Mission some years ago, this sermon was printed in the Deseret News and when it came to Liverpool, Charles W. Nibley and Henry W. Naisbitt were laboring with me there assisting me in publishing the Millennial Star. They had the form set up ready to print and brought me the copy and I said, `That discourse cannot be printed in the Star.' `But,' said Brother Nibley, `is it not the sermon of President Brigham Young?' `Perhaps it is,' said I, `but it can not go in the Star.' Then these brethren took up a labor with me to convince me that I had no business to interfere with President's discourses. I said, `It makes no difference, that discourse is not true as it is before you, it does not state the truth, it is not true, it is contrary to the word of the Lord and it can not be put in the Star.' Next morning I heard a rap at the door and when I asked what was the matter, this was long before daylight, and when I went to see, lo and behold it was a cablegram from President Brigham Young, commanding me not to publish that discourse in the Millennial Star, and it never was printed, by the authority of President Brigham Young." (Quoted in Daily Journal of John M. Whitaker, p. 95, in files of Church Historical Department.)

"Note: The Millennial Star was first published by Joseph F. Smith on Monday, June 4, 1877 - Albert Carrington, in his last issue quoted from the May 1 issue of the Deseret News. From April 1 to the demise of President Brigham Young, there were in the Deseret News eight discourses of Brigham Young that were not printed in the Millennial Star:

(John M. Whitaker Journal, vol. 2, p. 566.)

This latter note itself is very significant. There was evidently good reason for these discourses not being published.

During the Reed Smoot investigation, President Charles W. Penrose was quizzed concerning the reliability of the Journal of Discourses, and he too admitted mistakes had been made by reporters, asserting that some of those volumes contain sermons "the authenticity of which has been disputed."

As taken from the official record, his testimony reads as follows. The lawyer questioning him was Robert W. Tayler.

"Mr. Tayler. There were publications known as the `Journal of Discourses?'

"Mr. Penrose. Yes.

"Mr. Tayler. They were published by the church?

"Mr. Penrose. I think they were published by George D. Watt and J.D. Long, originally, in Liverpool, England.

"Mr. Tayler. In the interest of the church?

"Mr. Penrose. Of course they were all supposed to be in the interest of the Church, but I don't think the Church published them. I am not sure about that.

"Mr. Tayler. Have you ever heard the authority of that publication questioned? . . .

"Mr. Penrose. In what way do you mean? . . .

"Mr. Tayler. Can you answer the question—the correctness of the publication?

"Mr. Penrose. Do you mean the correctness of its contents?

"Mr. Tayler. Yes.

"Mr. Penrose. Oh yes, there are some things in there that have been disputed.

"Mr. Tayler. That is, disputed by the persons who spoke them?

"Mr. Penrose. Oh, no; disputed by others. . . . We did not regard these books as authorities, only as works of reference, sometimes, to give the ideas that these men maintained on these subjects. . . . I may add to that, Mr. Tayler, if you will allow me, that there are some sermons published in the Journal of Discourses the authenticity of which has been disputed—for instance, some of the sermons attributed to Joseph Smith, the prophet. They were taken down at the time in longhand and have been published in the Journal of Discourses and there have been disputes as to their correctness." (Reed Smoot Investigation, vol. 2, Dec. 20, 1904, pp. 440-42. Italics added.)

President John Taylor was a close associate of the Prophet Joseph Smith and learned doctrine from him. He also was close to President Brigham Young in the ministry. Following are some quotations from sermons of President Taylor as provided in The Gospel Kingdom, a compilation of his work used as a textbook a few years ago in the priesthood quorums of the Church. (Bookcraft, 1964. Italics added.)

On page 91 of that book we read: "How did Adam get his information of the things of God? He got it through the gospel of Jesus Christ, and through this same priesthood of which we have been speaking. God came to him in the Garden and talked with him." This supports the correction by Charles C. Rich to which we have previously referred.

On page 96 we find this: "Adam and Eve both considered that they had gained, instead of suffered loss, through their disobedience to that law. . . . By pursuing the course they did, through the atonement, they would see God as they had done before."

On page 97: "When Adam and Eve ate of the forbidden fruit, the mercy of God was extended to them, and they perceived as Eve expressed it, that if there had been no fall, they would have had no posterity. . . ." Page 98: "And so Adam and Eve rejoiced in their hearts that God had provided the plan, and although they were fallen, yet in this life, through the atonement, they would have joy, and by and by they would return to their Father, and there rejoice exceedingly in the abundant mercy of God, and in the redemption wrought out for them by the Son of God."

It is plain to see here that President Taylor had no thought of Adam being God. Otherwise his remarks would not make sense. But they do reflect the correct teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

On page 102, President Taylor is quoted pertaining to the land of Adam-ondi-Ahman, "or in other words, the valley where God talked with Adam."

On page 218 of this same book we read from President Taylor: "When Adam was driven from the garden, an angel was placed with a flaming sword to guard the way of the tree of life, lest man should eat of it and become immortal in his degenerate state, and thus be incapable of obtaining that exaltation which he would be capable of enjoying through the redemption of Jesus Christ, and the power of the resurrection, with his renewed and glorified body. Having tasted of the nature of the fall, and having grappled with sin and misery, knowing, like the Gods, both good and evil, having, like Jesus, overcome the evil, and through the power of the atonement having conquered death, hell, and the grave, he regains that paradise from which he was banished, not in the capacity of ignorant man, unacquainted with evil, but like unto a God."

This is interesting—Adam, being saved through the atonement of the Savior, could become "like unto a God," which is true likewise of the rest of us who obey the gospel. He had come to know good and evil through the fall, and thus in this respect became "like the Gods," said President Taylor. But at no time does President Taylor say that Adam was God, for he was then and still is the archangel.

The scriptures are interesting on this point.

The King James Bible, speaking of the temptation, quotes the devil as saying to Eve: ". . . your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as the gods, knowing good and evil." (Gen. 3:5.)

And after the fall we read: "And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. . . ." (Gen. 3:22. Italics added.)

The Knox Catholic Bible reads: "He [the Lord] said, Here is Adam become like one of ourselves, with knowledge of good and evil."

The Moffatt version says: "Then said God the Eternal, man has become like one of us, he knows good and evil."

The Goodspeed Bible reads: "Then the Lord God said, See the man has become like one of us, in knowing good from evil."

The Pearl of Great Price says: "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten: Behold, the man is become as one of us to know good and evil. . . ." (Moses 4:28. Italics added.)

The latter version is most interesting and should refute any and all claims that Adam was the Father of Jesus Christ, or that he was Deity at all, for "the man" spoken of was Adam, fully separate and apart from the Father and the Son.

Note that the Almighty was with the Savior and spoke to him about Adam—a third party. He referred to Adam as the man—this third party—who now had achieved a likeness to the Father and the Son in that he now knew the difference between good and evil.

Any fair-minded person capable of reading ordinary English should recognize that Adam was a third party in this situation. The Father and the Son spoke to each other about this third party. Adam was not a party to the conversation. He was now a mortal being as a result of the fall, and he had just learned the difference between good and evil. The Eternal Father and the Son, Jehovah, already knew this difference from some previous unrecorded experience. It was Adam's first experience, his great discovery. And in this sense, what Satan said became a fact—he had become as the Gods, knowing good and evil. All of these scriptures show the separateness between Adam and the Deity.

When the Father spoke of his Beloved Son and said, "I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten: Behold, the man is become as one of us," he was in no manner referring to himself as being Adam, nor did he indicate that Adam was the Father. The whole mistaken Adam-God concept becomes a ridiculous contradiction in the light of this one single scripture.

President Wilford Woodruff, who was also taught by both the Prophet Joseph and Brigham Young and was a close associate of President Taylor, certainly knew the correct identity of Adam. In his journal of January 21, 1867, he wrote: "Who was Michael, the Archangel?" "He is Adam. . . ." (Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, Deseret News, 1909, p. 450.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote in a letter:

"President Brigham Young was thoroughly acquainted with the doctrine of the Church. He studied the Doctrine and Covenants and many times quoted from it, the particular passages concerning the relationship of Adam to Jesus Christ. He knew perfectly well that Adam had been placed at the head of the human family by commandment of the Father, and this doctrine he taught during the many years of his ministry."

President Smith also wrote: "This doctrine was taught by Joseph Smith, who said:

"`The Priesthood was first given to Adam. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. . . . The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority. . . . Christ is the Great High Priest, Adam next.'

"If the keys of salvation have been committed to the hands of Adam, under the direction of Jesus Christ, then is there anything out of place for President Brigham Young to declare that it is Adam with whom we have to do? And yet here is the acknowledgment of the superiority of Jesus Christ. This being true, then the human family is immediately subject to Adam and he to the Redeemer of the world. Again, to illustrate this point:

"In the Church we have a presiding officer whom we call the bishop; he has full charge in the ward over which he presides. This bishop is subject to the direction of the stake president, and he in turn to the Presidency of the Church. The only one, in the same sense, with whom the members have to do is the bishop, but he is not the superior officer by any means.

"In another revelation which President Young taught many times, we find the following:

"`Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given you a law which was temporal; neither any men, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.' [D&C 29:34. Italics added.]

"The doctrine taught by the Church in relation to Adam is clearly defined in the following taken from the 107th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants.

"`Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

"`And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

"`And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

"`And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.' [D&C 107:53-56.

"From these passages President Brigham Young could very properly say that we are subject to Adam; that he rules over his posterity, and he gives us commandment, even as he receives commandment from Jesus Christ who directs him in his ministry and will do so to the latest day of time. And this does not detract anything from the power, greatness and glory of God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ." (Personal correspondence.)
