Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

IS IT ALL A MYTH?

Is the story of Adam and Eve and the Garden of Eden and the fall all a myth, as atheists and higher critics claim?

What is a myth?

One of Webster's definitions reads: "a story invented as a veiled explanation of a truth." The dictionary also defines a myth as "a story that is usually of unknown origin and at least partially traditional, that ostensibly relates historical events usually of such character as to serve to explain some practice, belief, institution, or natural phenomenon, and that especially associated with religious rites and beliefs." Then it gives as synonyms: "legends, allegories, and sagas."

Those who say that the story of Adam and Eve is but a legend or myth must, of course, thereby declare it to be untrue. Hence they must brand as unreliable the source of the story, and its teller as a fabricator.

Likewise, all who relate the account of Adam and Eve as though it were true must be discredited then as persons perpetuating an untruth.

Does any Latter-day Saint who has any faith at all in God wish to class the story of Adam and Eve, and the account of their fall and subsequent dealings with God, as a falsehood? Is it an unfounded legend, the figment of someone's imagination?

We might well remember that it is the Bible that tells this story, and we believe the Bible to be the word of God.

The Book of Mormon sustains the same story and adds thereto. We believe it to be the word of God too.

The Pearl of Great Price goes into great detail concerning Adam, his creation, the fall, his subsequent dealings with God, his baptism, and his covenants with God. It relates that Adam lived and taught his family the truth about the gospel. We also believe the Pearl of Great Price to be the word of God. It tells the truth.

The Doctrine and Covenants is filled with references to Adam, the fall, the redemption from that fall, the bestowing of the priesthood, and the manner in which that priesthood was handed down from one generation to another. It goes to great lengths in affirming the atonement of Christ, who did indeed redeem us from the fall of Adam. That is no myth!

We most sincerely declare the Doctrine and Covenants to be the word of God. It tells the very truth about Adam and is divinely given.

The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke often concerning Adam and his mission. Likewise have all of the subsequent presidents of the Church whom we sustain as inspired prophets, seers, and revelators—men of truth, men of God, men of revelation. Did they teach myths? Did they mislead the people? Of course not. We have the testimony that what they taught was the word of God. The Almighty himself said so in these direct words:

". . . they shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost.

"And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:3-4.)

It is essential to say that the account of Adam, his fall, and his subsequent ministry is one of the basic foundation stones of our religion. It is vital and true. Without it we would have no gospel of Christ.

If we reject Adam, we must in all consistency likewise reject Christ, for it was Christ who atoned for Adam's sin. So if we reject the fall, we must also reject the redemption. And if we reject the fall, which brought death into the world, we must also deny the resurrection from the dead. But we cannot deny the resurrection, for thereby we would deny the Savior.

We also would reject the entire restoration of the gospel, for it was brought to earth by resurrected servants of God — Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter and James, who, with John, a translated person, ministered to Joseph Smith. Hence, if we reject Adam, we must reject Joseph Smith and all he stood for and taught. What true Latter-day Saint is prepared to do that?

There are scores of references in our modern scriptures to Adam and Eve, the fall, and the redemption. Note this from the Doctrine and Covenants:

"The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made.

"This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner:

"From Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years, and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam's) death, and received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth;

"Because he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age.

"Enos was ordained at the age of one hundred and thiry-four years and four months, by the hand of Adam.

"God called upon Cainan in the wilderness in the fortieth year of his age; and he met Adam in journeying to the place Shedolamak. He was eighty-seven years old when he received his ordination.

"Mahalaleel was four hundred and ninety-six years and seven days old when he was ordained by the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

"Jared was two hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

"Enoch was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam; and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him.

"And he saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face continually;and he walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years, making him four hundred and thirty years old when he was translated.

"Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam.

"Lamech was thirty-two years old when he was ordained under the hand of Seth.

"Noah was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of Methuselah.

"Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

"And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the price, the archangel.

"And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

"And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.

"These things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of in due time." (D&C 107:40-57.)

And read what the Doctrine and Covenants says in D&C 84 as it discusses the descent of the priesthood:

"Which Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah;

"And from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers;

"And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—

"Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years.

"And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God.

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest." (D&C 84: 14-20. Italics added.)

In numerous quotations from the Book of Mormon we learn that Adam indeed was a reality, a great high priest, the progenitor of all mankind in the flesh. No one reading the Book of Mormon can reasonably doubt the existence, the fall, and the mission of Adam and Eve.

As an example, ponder the following:

"And after Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth.

"And they have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth.

"And the days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh; wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time lengthened according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents.

"And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the Garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

"And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

"But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

"Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

"And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given.

"Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:19-27.)

The Pearl of Great Price tells details of the life of Adam and Eve, their creation, and ministry. It explains too how, before the world was made, the Christ was chosen as the Redeemer, to bring about the redemption upon which the whole plan of God is based, and that plan included the fall of Adam.

For man to progress, he had to become mortal. It was according to God's eternal plan. Mortality was accomplished through the fall of Adam. Hence Jesus, as Jehovah, in our preexistent state accepted the over-all plan of the Eternal Father, including the fall, volunteered himself as our Redeemer, and prepared even then to accomplish our redemption.

Of course Adam lived. So did his wife Eve. And of course there was a fall and a redemption. To reject all of this is to reject the entire plan of salvation and turn our backs upon the Lord.

All Bible readers love the fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians, wherein the Apostle Paul bears his testimony pertaining to both Adam and the Savior. There he affirms in all soberness the fact of the redemption. Note his words:

"Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?

"But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen:

"And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.

"Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.

"For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:

"And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

"Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

"But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:12-22.)
