Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

THE BIBLE CRITICS

The Bible has withstood many an onslaught. But it remains today the best seller of all books, and has been so for years. And why? Because there is a special power about the Bible. God has preserved it. God has put into the hearts of honest men and women a reverence for the Bible. They believe it. They have fought for it over the years. Some have died for it.

Think of William Tyndale, for example. It was a spiritually blind clergy and a stubborn, equally blind monarch who put him to death. It is no wonder that as he drew his last breath in martyrdom he cried out: "Lord, open the King of England's eyes." Death came after a cruel eighteen months imprisonment, forced upon him merely because he published the word of God!

Why did he thus sacrifice himself? Because he was inspired to do so — inspired to help break the shackles of ignorance that prevailed at that time, inspired to help open the way for the restoration of the gospel by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

And consider John Wycliffe, who was buffeted about in every conceivable and cruel manner for a similar reason. He too was inspired to bring to light the word of God, in an age of utter darkness, by putting the scriptures into the hands of the common people who needed them so much. And how blind were the clerics and the rulers who sought to crush that movement! In their ignorance they tried to douse the flame of genuine faith and the light of revelation found within the sacred pages of holy writ.

God knew what he was about. He preserved the Bible, first as it was being compiled, and then he brought it forth from darkness in preparation for the restoration of his gospel in these last days. It is the "book of the Lamb of God." Said Nephi concerning it:

"And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the book?

"And I said unto him: I know not.

"And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the plainness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God.

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

"And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the foundation of a great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

"And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

"Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God.

"And after these plain and precious things were taken away it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest—because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceeding great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them." (1 Ne. 13:21-29. Italics added.)

The Bible in and of itself is a divine miracle. The preservation of the Bible and its survival to our day is likewise a miracle. The fact that it has endured the merciless onslaughts of blinded clerics, ignorant and prejudiced kings and governors, not to mention the later attacks of a misguided intelligentsia, is also a miracle. In spite of its losses as described by Nephi, it is still a pillar for God in these last days, and contains his true word "as far as it is translated correctly."

But we do not need to worry too much about those words—"as far as it is translated correctly" —for now, in a time when there are literally scores of translations, these new versions firmly declare the existence of God, the mission and atonement of the Savior, and the story of Adam and Eve, given as fact, not fiction.

So the Bible declares the word of God. It teaches all who will hear the truth of the gospel and specifically says that there was a fall in the Garden of Eden, and that there was and is a redemption by the Son of God, Jesus the Christ.

The Book of Mormon sustains the Bible as the word of God.

The Doctrine of Covenants sustains the Bible as the word of God.

The Prophet Joseph sustained the Bible as the word of God.

And so must we!

As Latter-day Saints we must ask ourselves whether we shall align ourselves with the critics of the Bible who denounce the story of Adam and Eve, or whether we shall accept the scriptures as fact and as the revealed word of the Lord. To the faithful, there can be but one choice. It is a case of the wisdom of man vs. the wisdom of God, and according to the Lord, the wisdom of man is foolishness to him. (1 Cor. 3:19.)

The integrity of the Bible is without successful challenge. Like the Jewish race, it has been preserved for the purposes of the Lord, and as one writer has said: "Without the Bible it is impossible to imagine that the Jews could have survived as a distinctive people or as a religious fellowship for so many centuries and through so many vicissitudes." (Nathan Ausubel, in The Book of Jewish Knowledge, New York: Crown Publishers, 1964, p. 38.)

The truth of the Bible, as a whole, is a testimony also of its contents, which provide the account of Adam and Eve and the closely related subject of the atonement of the Savior.

The combined weight of evidence for the Bible is so much greater than the evidence against it (which is largely conjecture and hypothesis) that the opposition hardly deserves serious consideration. Especially is this true so far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, for in modern revelation the Lord himself sustains it.

Bible archaeology in recent years has opened a new door to increased faith in this sacred word. The discoveries of actual places and the confirmation of actual events related in the Bible are now coming forth in great number. The discovery of ancient libraries of historical writings alone has been extensive. These help to confirm the Bible. No one any longer need be a victim of vicious and often unscholarly criticism of holy writ.

While critics seek to discredit the Bible, the champions of this inspired volume strike back in words far more understandable and forceful. Can any of those critics be considered as great as the defenders named below?

Consider just a few of their comments:

The scripture was so important to George Washington, the first president of the United States, that he said: "It is impossible to rightly govern the world without God and the Bible."

William Gladstone said: "I have known ninety-five of the world's great men in my time, and of these, eight-seven were followers of the Bible. The Bible is stamped with a Specialty of Origin and an immeasurable distance separates it from all competitors."

Abraham Lincoln said: "I believe the Bible is the best gift God has ever given to man. All the good from the Saviour of the world is communicated to us through this book."

And Thomas Carlyle: "The Bible is the truest utterance that ever came by alphabetic letters from the soul of man, through which, as through a window divinely opened, all men can look into the stillness of eternity and discern in glimpses their far-distant, long-forgotten home."

The German philosopher Immanuel Kant said: "The existence of the Bible as a book for the people is the greatest benefit which the human race has ever experienced. Every attempt to belittle it is a crime against humanity."

John Quincy Adams, sixth president of the United States, said: "I have made it a practice for several years to read the Bible through in the course of every year. I usually devote to this reading the first hour after I rise every morning."

Horace Greeley said: "It is impossible to mentally or socially enslave a Bible-reading people."

Dwight L. Moody made this interesting comment: "I know the Bible is inspired because it inspires me."

(All of the above comments are from Emerson Roy West, Vital Quotations, Bookcraft, 1968, pp. 22-23.)
