Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

ADAM NEXT TO CHRIST

How do we explain "cave man" and "early man" and "stone age man"? They are simply a result of deterioration and retrogression. They fell away from a better life, that which was known to the first man, Adam.

There are "stone age" people living in the world right now in several areas, as reported by newspapers and magazines. How did they lapse into their present state? Are we going to say that they are only now evolving into humans who someday may become advanced like ourselves? What about the "pre-men" and early cultures?

Retrogression is the only dependable explanation. See what scripture has to say about the true first man:

"And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." (Moses 2:27.) His image certainly was not to be found in apes or missing links or worms or amoebas!

Think for a moment about the Only Begotten Son of God. He was Jesus the Christ—Creator, Redeemer, and Savior. How did he appear to men? Remember that we were made after his image. He was the pattern of our existence. He was our physical prototype as well as our great spiritual example, the model for our lives.

We were born on earth as babies, just as he was. We shall go to the grave as he did. We shall be in the likeness of his resurrection. In every way he is our physical prototype, from beginning to end. And God is the Father of us all.

The Almighty, in creating various forms of life, commanded all to reproduce after their own kind. Man also was commanded to reproduce himself. He could bring forth only after his kind according to the law of God, and he was "after the kind" or order of his Eternal Father in heaven. No lower forms were involved.

When the Almighty spoke of lower forms of life that he created, he said this: "And it became a living soul also. . . . for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man." (Moses 3:9. Italics added.)

This is interesting in view of the previous scripture in which all life was commanded to reproduce only after its own kind. Now he says that all forms of life remained in the sphere in which he created them. There was no transfer from one species to another.

This also is interesting:

"And out of the ground I, the Lord God, formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and commanded that they should come unto Adam, to see what he would call them; and they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life, and commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.

"And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field. . . ." (Moses 3:19-20.)

Experts in the life sciences know that such a task would require great intelligence. No "pre-man" could do that.

The scripture goes on: ". . . Adam began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I the Lord had commanded him. And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him." (Moses 5:1.)

Then when did agriculture begin? It was not an evolution at all, as some anthropologists have written. Agriculture began with the first man, simultaneously with his expulsion from the Garden of Eden, simultaneously with his transition from what Dr. James E. Talmage calls an immortal state (not subject to death) to mortality. Actually, a type of agriculture began before Adam's fall, for "the Lord God, took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it." (Moses 3:15.) So Adam was a farmer to begin with.

Man had to eat, and now, being mortal, he had to do so by the sweat of his brow. He had to work, till the ground, and domesticate animals so that some of them would work also. That was in the very beginning and was not part of some later development, as is claimed.

Not only did Adam and Eve become farmers, but they taught their sons likewise, and they also became farmers and stockmen. Note the scripture: "Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground." (Moses 5:17.) It was to obtain the flocks of Abel that Cain slew his brother, for he said: ". . . surely the flocks of my brother falleth into my hands." (Moses 5:33.)

So the first men knew agriculture. Adam had a numerous posterity. Would they not earn their living much as he did?

Now, who was Adam?

"And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many." (Moses 1:34.)

Keep in mind that although this information is taken from the writings of Moses, it was not given to Joseph Smith by manuscript nor by translation of some ancient record. It was given to him by the Lord as modern revelation. So it is fact, not mythology in any sense.

In other revelations given to Joseph Smith we have the same information. When the Lord traced the line of the priesthood, he said: "And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother [the Cain and Abel story therefore was likewise true and not fable], who received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—Which priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years." (D&C 84:16-17. Italics added.)

Let us face it. This is modern revelation. This is God speaking, and he is thus telling us so that "we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness"—or, as the revised version of the Bible says, "after the wiles of error." (Eph. 4:14.)

As Adam was the first man, so Eve was the first woman; and by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we have the fact that she was the "first of all women." In the fourth chapter of the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price, we find the following: "And Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many." (Moses 4:26.)

So we readily see, then, by actual revelation from God to Joseph Smith that not only was she the first woman, but she was also "the mother of all living" human beings. Inasmuch as we are given this great fact by revelation, it should clarify many important questions in our minds and eliminate uncertainties that arise from the teachings of uninspired men.

Adam and his family lived very much as people do today. They worked for a living. They had their good times and their bad times. Some of their children were obedient; others were not. As Adam taught them the gospel, Satan came also and influenced some of them contrariwise. But:

". . . Adam hearkened unto the voice of God, and called upon his sons to repent.

"And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord blessed them;

"And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration;

"And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled." (Moses 6:1, 4-6.)

And what was more, these early men—highly intelligent and taught by inspiration of God—became genealogists also. This was one of the important duties that the Lord laid upon them; and not only did they write genealogy and family history (their book of remembrance), but they even kept a careful record of their ordinations.

"Now this prophecy Adam spake as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and a genealogy was kept of the children of God. And this was the book of the generations of Adam. . . ." (Moses 6:8.)

Said President Joseph Fielding Smith: "Adam was placed here, not a wild, half-civilized savage, but a perfectly developed man, with wonderful intelligence, for he helped to create this earth. He was chosen in pre-existence to be the first man upon the earth and the father of the human race, and he will preside over his posterity forever.

"Now, the Lord did not choose a being that had just developed from the lower forms of life, to be a prince, an archangel, to preside over the human race forever! Adam, as Michael, was one of the greatest intelligences in the spirit world and he stands next to Jesus Christ. When he came upon the earth, the Lord gave him a perfect form of government.

"The first man placed upon this earth was an intelligent being, created in the image of God, possessed of wisdom and knowledge, with power to communicate his thoughts in a language, both oral and written, which was superior to anything to be found on the earth today. This may sound very sweeping and dogmatic to those who hold to the other view, but it is not any more so than their statements to the contrary. Moreover, I do not say it of myself, but merely repeat what the Lord has said; and surely the Creator, above all others, ought to know!

"The first man was instructed by the best teacher man ever had, for he was taught of God, and spoke the language of the Most High, in which angels conversed. This language he taught to his children. It is true that he was left to work out, through the use of his faculties, many of nature's great secrets; but the Lord did not leave him helpless, but instructed him, and he was inspired by the Spirit of the Lord.

"The Lord gave him commandments after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden, revealed to him the plan of salvation, and he taught his children, and he set up a government. It was a perfect government, for Adam listened to the counsels of the Almighty, his Father, and our Father. He taught his children principles of divine truth and endeavored to establish them in the knowledge and understanding of the things of the kingdom of God.

"Some people have the idea that the Ten Commandments were first given by Moses when he directed the children of Israel and formulated their code of laws. This is not the case. These great commandments are from the beginning and were understood in righteous communities in the days of Adam. They are, in fact, fundamental parts of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the gospel in its fulness was first given to Adam." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:94-96.)

The anthropologists tell us that religion among early men evolved from superstitions. But how far afield they are! Religion was revealed by God to the very first man, whom he ordained to be a high priest and to whom he gave the First Presidency! First Presidency of what? Why, of the Church of Jesus Christ, the only organization in which there is a true First Presidency, with the divine keys and powers thereof. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 157.)

The Prophet Joseph says that "the Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity. . . . The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority."

And why?

Because Adam stands next to Christ in authority and was the first man to receive the keys of the First Presidency. (Teachings, pp. 157-58.)

The Prophet, again speaking of Adam as the first man, said that he "is spoken of in Daniel as being the `Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and the oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed." (Teachings, p. 167.)

So not only were Adam and his family intelligent persons, but they were given the revelations of God, who taught them. The Church was organized among them, and the priesthood was bestowed upon them to give validity to all they did.

The genealogy of the Savior as provided in Luke calls Adam a son of God. (Luke 3:38.) So does the revelation given to Joseph Smith: "And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed. And they were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men." (Moses 6:22-23.)

We need to understand the true concept of the first man, Adam. He was next to Christ in authority in the creation; he still is. He directs all dispensations of the gospel ever given to mankind, as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught.

He was a preacher of righteousness to his family. Holding the keys of the First Presidency, he presided over the Church of Christ in his day, for the Church was organized among his descendants. He was taught the gospel from the beginning of his mortality. He was baptized, even as we are, and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, even as we do:

"And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water.

"And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man.

"And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever." (Moses 6:64-68.)

Here is an important point. Note these words, "This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever." The Father and the Son here bore record that Adam, who was a third party and who in the preexistence was Michael, but now in mortality was Adam, was baptized for the remission of the sin he committed in the Garden of Eden. Verse 53 of that chapter specifically says that in baptism Adam received a remission of his sin:

"And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." (Italics added.)

This is a remarkable statement. Baptism now gave to Adam freedom from blame for the fall. But it did not remove the penalty of his sin, which was mortality and eventual death. The resurrection of the Savior was provided to overcome death and turn mortality into immortality. Baptism does not do that. But it was baptism that cleansed Adam of guilt, so that again he could commune freely with the Lord.

This leads us to some serious questions: Some say that Adam was God the Eternal Father. Yet Adam sinned. Does God sin? Would our God and Father require baptism to free him from sin? Shall we say that God the Father could—or did—sin? If God were to sin, would he not cease to be God?

So again the Adam-God fable is shown to be a ridiculous contradiction.

The name of Christ was revealed to Adam as he was given the gospel, and the plan of redemption was made known to him. Note again the record of scripture:

"But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.

"And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

"And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

"And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

"Hence came the saying abroad among the people, That the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world." (Moses 6:50-54.)

The original sin of Adam was one thing, but the sins that we individually commit are something else again. We must assume the full responsibility for our own acts. If we sin, we do so as free agents. As one of our Articles of Faith says: "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

Without free agency there could be no gospel of Christ. The character development provided by the gospel will lead us to the perfection of which the Savior spoke in the Sermon on the Mount only if we elect to live the gospel. Otherwise we can never receive of its benefits. (Alma 12:18.) That right of election—that right of free agency—must ever be preserved. If a man commits sin, he must have the liberty to turn from his ways and repent, and thus come under the purview of the gospel.

Hence the gospel is called the "perfect law of liberty" (James 1:25), and those who are blessed by it enjoy the "glorious liberty of the children of God" (Rom. 8:21).

When Paul addressed the Corinthians he said: ". . . where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." (2 Cor. 3:17.) This was reflected in the Book of Mormon statement that "the Spirit of God . . . is also the Spirit of freedom." (Alma 61:15.) Isaiah predicted that freedom would characterize the labors of the Savior, who confirmed it as he ministered in Palestine. (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18.)

Understanding the importance of free agency, and knowing that his children would have the opportunity of choosing right from wrong, Adam preached repentance in his day. Free agency was cherished by his family. It was preserved by the Lord himself, who said:

"And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment.

"Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

"Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying:

"That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

"For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

"Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

"And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time." (Moses 6:56-62.)

These scriptures answer every speculation of the anthropologists who say that all religion evolved, that even Judaism evolved, and that eventually Christianity did likewise.

The gospel was first preached to us in our preexistent life. There the plan of salvation was unfolded. Christ was chosen as the Redeemer in that pristine period, and as we accepted him there, all the hosts of heaven shouted for joy. (Job 38.) The program of the Lord was fully explained to us at that time, for we were intelligent people as pre-earth spirits, and we were organized there before the world was. Then we were transferred from one intelligent existence (pre-earth) to another (mortality) here on earth.

We have this interesting information:

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

"And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

"And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him." (Abr. 3:22-28.)

Further light is given in Moses:

"And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.

"But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me — Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.

"Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

"And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." (Moses 4:1-4.)

We need to see the true picture of Adam and his family, and of the Lord and his plan for us.

All was prepared in the beginning. There was no slow development of human beings on earth. They were placed here suddenly in the form of Adam and Eve. Let us realize that these two people were among the chief intelligences and most advanced children of God in the pre-earth life. Jesus was chosen as the Redeemer, but Adam stands next to him.

Adam, this first man, was a chosen instrument of God and has been from the eternities. When it came time for God to populate this earth, he sent the one great and significant being who stood next in line to Jehovah as the one to come here first. He was no groveling cave man or pre-man or missing link. He stood next to God. He was the Archangel among all the hosts of heaven. He was highly intelligent, taught by God, guided by God, and ordained of God.

The Church of Jesus Christ was organized among his family, and Adam was made the earthly head of it. He is still the next officer in the church — for all eternity — under Christ. As Joseph Smith said, Adam presides over all the dispensations, and whenever dispensations of the gospel have been given to the earth by the Savior, it has been done through Adam and by the authority given to Adam by the Savior.

Adam was and is a tremendous individual. He has been grossly misunderstood. Even by the religionists he has been downgraded and minimized.

Jesus himself is often misunderstood, being referred to as only the babe of Bethlehem who commenced his career as a child born in a stable, later becoming an itinerant preacher in Palestine.

Adam is similarly misunderstood, being berated for his original sin, and equated with cave men and missing links, or still worse, with some primordial worm or microbe.

Christ is God — the Creator — and with his Father is the greatest of all. But Adam stands next to him, and never let that be forgotten.
