Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

THE ORIGINAL SIN

A misunderstanding of the original sin of Adam has caused no end of anguish on the part of parents who have lost little children who were not sprinkled in so-called baptism. It has caused mental distress likewise on the part of many others who have seen the inconsistency of the creeds usually taught in sectarian churches on this subject.

The doctrine of original sin goes back to the Council of Carthage of the Catholic Church, held in 418 A.D. It was stressed again at the Council of Orange in 529 and at the Council of Trent in 1546.

Although the doctrine is primarily a Catholic one, it has found its way into the creeds of some of the Protestant churches as well. A number of the Protestant churches baptize infants by sprinkling, but others reject baptism altogether, infant or adult, not regarding it as necessary for salvation.

Methodists are in the middle of the situation, as are the Presbyterians. Both are willing to allow baptism, by either sprinkling, pouring, or immersion, and they do baptize infants when the parents desire it. But both say that baptism is not really necessary.

The clearest definition of "original sin" in the context of sectarian churches of course comes from the Roman Catholics. The book Catholic Belief, as revised by Canon Joseph Cartmell, D.D., written under the imprimatur of the Roman church, and published in Great Britain in 1957, says of original sin: "The Church teaches . . . that all men, naturally descended from Adam (Our Lady alone excepted) [it is the belief of that church that Mary the mother of Christ was exempt from original sin], have contracted the guilt of original sin; in other words, that they come into this world deprived of the sanctity and justice which God intended them to have. . . . Original sin is a state of sin which we inherit." (London: Burns Oates and Washbourne, Ltd., 1957, p. 7.)

The Question Box, published by the Roman church to answer questions raised by Protestants, says of original sin: "It was a grievous sin, because Adam could easily have avoided it, as there was in him neither ignorance nor concupiscence [a strong or ardent desire], and he certainly knew, as head of the race, what terrible consequences would follow for all mankind." (P. 219.)

Baptism is mistakenly declared to be the means of escape from the blemish of original sin.

It is appalling how greatly the sectarian people misunderstand the fall of Adam. As previously quoted, the Book of Mormon makes it abundantly clear that the fall was part of the divine plan, a necessity, and that without it there would have been no human race, for Adam and Eve were physically unable to have children in their paradisiacal condition.

Not only is the sectarian view of original sin based on a complete misunderstanding of the true doctrine concerning the fall, but it is equally a mistake to suppose that baptism was provided to remove the effects of the original sin.

The scripture is very clear in stating that if Adam and Eve were to partake of the forbidden fruit, death would result. Therefore, death was the penalty for the original sin, and baptism does not overcome death. The Savior's resurrection did that.

". . . in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die," says the King James Bible (Gen. 2:17), in explaining the sin of Adam and Eve.

Or as the Torah of the Jews expresses it: "Of every tree of the garden you are free to eat, but as for the tree of knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat of it, for as soon as you eat of it, you shall die."

The Jerusalem Bible, a recent Catholic version, has this rendering of the passage in question: "You may eat indeed of all the trees in the garden. Nevertheless of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you are not to eat, for on the day you eat it you shall most surely die."

The Complete Bible, An American Translation, by Smith and Goodspeed, reads: "From every tree in the garden you are free to eat; but from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you must not eat; for the day that you eat of it, you shall certainly die."

Another Roman Catholic Bible, translated by Mons. Knox, using the Vulgate as a base after comparisons with Hebrew and Greek texts, and published in England in 1955, reads: "Thou mayest eat thy fill of all the trees in the garden except the tree which brings knowledge of good and evil; if ever thou eatest of this, thy doom is death."

The Living Bible, Billy Graham Crusade Edition, reads: "You may eat any fruit in the garden except from the Tree of Conscience—for its fruit will open your eyes to make you aware of right and wrong, good and bad. If you eat its fruit, you will be doomed to die."

Other new translations might be quoted on this text, but all agree: death was the penalty for eating from that tree.

The book of Moses, which was given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith and therefore was not subject to any mistakes in translation, reads:

"And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Moses 3:16-17.)

This is all confirmed by what Eve said as the devil tempted her to violate the command of God. Says the King James Version:

"Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

"And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:

"But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

"And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

"For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as the gods, knowing good and evil." (Gen. 3:1-5.)

The Jerusalem Bible reads:

"The serpent was the most subtle of all the wild beast that Yahweh God had made. It asked the woman, `Did God really say you were not to eat from any trees in the garden?'

"The woman answered the serpent, `We may eat the fruit of the trees in the garden.

"`But of the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden God said, "You must not eat it, nor touch it, under pain of death."'

"Then the serpent said to the woman, `No! You will not die! God knows in fact that on the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like the gods, knowing good and evil."

An American Translation by Smith and Goodspeed reads:

"Now the serpent was the most clever of all the wild beasts that the Lord God had made.

"`And so God has said that you are not to eat from any tree of the garden?' he said to the woman.

"`From the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat,' the woman said to the serpent; `it is only concerning the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden that God has said, "You may not eat of it, nor touch it, lest you die."'

"But the serpent said to the woman,

"`You would not die at all; for God knows that the very day you eat of it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like gods who know good from evil.'"

The Knox Catholic Bible reads:

"Of all the beasts which the Lord God had made, there was none that could match the serpent in cunning. It was he who said to the woman, What is this command God has given you, not to eat the fruit of any tree in the garden?

"To which the woman answered, We can eat the fruit of any tree in the garden except the tree in the middle of it; it is this God has forbidden us to eat or even touch, on pain of death.

"And the serpent said to her, What is this talk of death? God knows well that as soon as you eat this fruit your eyes will be opened, and you yourselves will be like gods, knowing good and evil."

And Billy Graham's Bible says:

"The serpent was the craftiest of all the creatures the Lord God had made. So the serpent came to the woman. `Really?' he asked. `None of the fruit in the garden? God says you mustn't eat any of it?'

"`Of course we may eat it,' the woman told him. `It's only the fruit from the tree at the center of the garden that we are not to eat. God says we mustn't eat it or even touch it, or we will die.'

"`That's a lie!' the serpent hissed. `You'll not die! God knows very well that the instant you eat it you will become like him, for your eyes will be opened — you will be able to distinguish good from evil.'"

Other modern translations follow the identical line. All say that death was the result of the fall.

Our book of Moses, again by revelation, says:

"And now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which I, the Lord God, had made.

"And Satan put it into the heart of the serpent, (for he had drawn away many after him,) and he sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God, wherefore he sought to destroy the world.

"And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said — Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? (And he spake by the mouth of the serpent.)

"And the woman said unto the serpent: We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden;

"But of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said — Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

"And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die;

"For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Moses 4:5-11.)

With the facts before us, as contained in the various versions of the scriptures, and particularly in the revelation known as the book of Moses in our Pearl of Great Price, can anyone fail to see that it is death which resulted from the fall?

And what removes death? Baptism? Hardly.

It was Christ's atonement and resurrection that overcame death. Baptism had nothing to do with it. All people, baptized or not, Christian or not, Jewish or not, gentile or not, will be resurrected by the power of Christ.

Paul expressed it: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

Paul also discoursed on the relationship of Adam to Christ, and of the fall to the redemption, and said:

"Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?

"But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen;

"And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.

"Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.

"For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:

"And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

"Then they also which are falleth asleep in Christ are perished.

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

"But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:12-22.)

It is obvious, then, how widely the churches of the world have strayed from the truth with regard to Adam, the fall, Christ and the resurrection, and the true doctrine of baptism for the remission of sins. Baptism was given to remit our personal sins as well as to grant us admission into the Church. It has nothing to do with either Adam's sin or death or the resurrection.

Our second Article of Faith is directed to this point: "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

No stain is left upon any of us because of Adam's sin. We are born pure and innocent before God. In fact, he regards us as being unaccountable for sins until we reach the age of eight years. This is a far cry from infant baptism and its alleged purpose.

Note what the Lord says in modern revelation:

"But behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through Mine Only Begotten;

"Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." (D&C 29:46-47.)

"But little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ; and this is what the scriptures mean." (D&C 74:7.)

The Lord also said: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (D&C 93:38.)

And then he said:

"And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

"And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:25-28.)

Adam served the purpose of God in his capacity, even as did Christ in his vital role. It was all in the plan of the Lord.

Regarding the fall, President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

"Before partaking of the fruit Adam could have lived forever; therefore, his status was one of immortality. When he ate, he became subject to death, and therefore he became mortal. This was a transgression of the law, but not a sin in the strict sense, for it was something that Adam and Eve had to do!

"I am sure that neither Adam nor Eve looked upon it as a sin, when they learned the consequences, and this is discovered in their words after they learned the consequences.

"Adam said: `Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.'

"Eve said: `Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.' [Moses 5:10-11.

"We can hardly look upon anything resulting in such benefits as being a sin, in the sense in which we consider sin." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:115.)

President Smith also said:

"The gospel teaches us that if Adam and Eve had not partaken of that fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they would have remained in the Garden of Eden in that same condition prevailing before the fall. Under those conditions they would have had no seed. `Adam fell that men might be' as it was decreed in the heavens before the world was. Lehi has given us a very clear and comprehensive view of the mission of Adam and of the atonement of Jesus Christ, and the Book of Mormon is very explicit in teaching these fundamental doctrines. In regard to the pre-mortal condition of Adam and the entire earth, Lehi has stated the following:

"`And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.' [2 Ne. 2:19-26.

"Is not this statement plain enough? Whom are you going to believe, the Lord, or men?

"The Lord did not intend the earth to stay in that condition. Lehi further says: `But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.' This earth was prepared for the advancement of the children of God. We came from the pre-existence to receive tabernacles of flesh and bones and to pass through mortality. It was decreed in the heavens that men should die after coming into this probation and learning the pains and tribulations of mortality as well as its joys and happiness. Jesus Christ is spoken of in the scriptures as the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. [Rev. 13:8. Peter says we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, `Who verily was forordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you.' [1 Pet. 1:20. So the plan of salvation was all understood in the world of spirits, and we were taught the purpose of mortal life which Adam should bring into the earth.

"By revelation we are well informed that Adam was not subject to death when he was placed in the Garden of Eden, nor was there any death upon the earth. The Lord has not seen fit to tell us definitely just how Adam came for we are not ready to receive that truth. He did not come here a resurrected being to die again for we are taught most clearly that those who pass through the resurrection receive immortality, and can die no more.

"It is sufficient for us to know, until the Lord reveals more about it, that Adam was not subject to death but had the power, through transgressing the law, to become subject to death and to cause the same curse to come upon the earth and all life upon it. For this earth, once pronounced good, was cursed after the fall. It is passing through its mortal probation as well as the life which is upon it, and will eventually receive the resurrection and a place of exaltation which is decreed in the heavens for it." (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:109-10.)
