Mark E. Petersen, Adam: Who Is He? ( 1976)

THE HOLY TRINITY

Brigham Young taught that Adam, or Michael, assisted the Deity in the creation of the world. He said: "It is true that the earth was organized by three distinct characters, namely, Elohim, Yahovah and Michael, these three forming a quorum." Then he distinguished these three from the Holy Trinity, as he spoke in the same paragraph defining "the Deity as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." (JD, 1:51.)

Those who endeavor to say that Adam in reality was Elohim have here the words of the very man they so love to quote — President Young — to the effect that Elohim, Yahovah, and Michael were "three distinct characters," completely refuting the claim that Elohim and Michael (Adam) were one and the same being.

This great pioneer prophet-leader clearly distinguishes between the three who made the earth and the Deity whom he defines as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who make up the Holy Trinity.

We do not know what part Michael played in the creation of this earth. President Young did not make it clear. But that he did take part, President Young declares with certainty. The very fact that he did, the very fact that Elohim and Jehovah did likewise, the three working in a "quorum capacity," as President Young explains, again clears the air so far as Michael being Deity is concerned. He was not Deity. He was the Archangel working with Deity.

Modern revelation emphatically states: "Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days." (D&C 27:11.)

It is this same Michael — still an angel, never identified as Deity, but rather as the angel or servant of Deity—who shall sound the trump at the beginning of the resurrection: "But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all." (D&C 29:26.)

It therefore becomes clear beyond all question that the three who organized the earth were a separate "quorum," a different triumvirate, apart from the Holy Trinity. The entire Trinity is identified by President Young as Deity, but not so with the group that organized the earth, for one of them, Michael, was not Deity—he was still an angel, although the head of the angels.

It is interesting that President Young would speak of Adam, as Michael, assisting in the creation of the earth. It was really most appropriate that Michael should help form the earth which he was to occupy as the first man, and which would become a home for his descendants. And since the Savior, as Jehovah, was to come to this same earth to bring about the atonement for the first sin to be committed here, it likewise was most appropriate that he also take part in this earth's creation.

So both worked together in the creation, Jehovah and Michael, under the direction of the Eternal Father, Elohim. And both worked together in the over-all plan of salvation for mankind, Adam providing mortality without which we could not be tried and tested in the Lord's plan, and Jesus providing the redemption, both from mortality and its ultimate end — death — and from sin, which likewise was part of our mortal experience.

How remarkable that we learn that these two great beings—Christ, the Son of God, and Michael, his chief servant—worked so closely and in such unity to make possible the eternal progress of human kind. As servants of the Eternal Father, they truly became the principle instruments in the Almighty's hands for bringing to pass the mortality, immortality, and eternal life of man.

It is easily understood, then, as the Prophet Joseph said, that Adam stands next to Christ in authority. (Teachings, p. 158.)

We do not know what part the Holy Ghost may have taken in the creation. The King James Version of the Bible says: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters." (Gen. 1:1-2. Italics added.)

The Jerusalem Bible says: ". . . And God's spirit hovered over the water."

The Smith-Goodspeed American version does not mention it, and neither does the Torah. However, the "Holy Scriptures" according to the masoretic text, a publication of the Jewish Publication Society of America, reads: ". . . and the Spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters."

Billy Graham's version reads: ". . . the earth was at first a shapeless, chaotic mass, with the Spirit of God brooding over the dark vapors."

Our book of Moses says: "I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God; by mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest. And the earth was without form, and void; and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep; and my Spirit moved upon the face of the water, for I am God." (Moses 2:1-2.)

The book of Abraham says: ". . . they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth. . . . and darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters." (Abr. 4:1-2.)

In his Articles of Faith, Dr. James E. Talmage says this:

"The Holy Ghost is associated with the Father and the Son in the Godhead. In the light of revelation, we are instructed as to the distinct personality of the Holy Ghost. He is a being endowed with the attributes and powers of Deity, and not a mere force, or essence. The term Holy Ghost and its common synonyms, Spirit of God, Spirit of the Lord, or simply, Spirit, Comforter, and Spirit of Truth, occur in the scriptures with plainly different meanings, referring in some cases to the person of God the Holy Ghost, and in other instances to the power or authority of this great Personage, or to the agencies through which He ministers. The context of such passages show which of these significations applies." (P. 159.)

And then Dr. Talmage goes on to say:

"Much of the confusion existing in human conceptions concerning the nature of the Holy Ghost arises from the common failure to segregate His person and powers. Plainly, such expressions as being filled with the Holy Ghost, and His falling upon persons, have reference to the powers and influences that emanate from God, and which are characteristic of Him; for the Holy Ghost may in this way operate simultaneously upon many persons even though they be widely separated, whereas the actual person of the Holy Ghost cannot be in more than one place at a time. Yet we read that through the power of the Spirit, the Father and the Son operate in their creative acts and in their general dealings with the human family. The Holy Ghost may be regarded as the minister of the Godhead, carrying into effect the decision of the Supreme Council.

"In the execution of these great purposes, the Holy Ghost directs and controls the varied forces of nature, of which indeed a few, and these perhaps of minor order wonderful as even the least of them appears to man, have thus far been investigated by mortals. Gravitation, sound, heat, light, and the still more mysterious and seemingly supernatural power of electricity, are but the common servants of the Holy Ghost in His operations. No earnest thinker, no sincere investigator supposes that he has yet learned of all the forces existing in and operating upon matter; indeed, the observed phenomena of nature, yet wholly inexplicable to him, far outnumber those for which he has devised even a partial explanation. There are powers and forces at the command of God, compared with which electricity is as the pack-horse to the locomotive, the foot messenger to the telegraph, the raft of logs to the ocean steamer. With all his scientific knowledge man knows but little respecting the enginery of creation; and yet the few forces known to him have brought about miracles and wonders, which but for their actual realization would be beyond belief. These mighty agencies, and the mightier ones still to man unknown, and many, perhaps, to the present condition of the human mind unknowable, do not constitute the Holy Ghost, but are the agencies ordained to serve His purposes." (Pages 160-61.)

As Dr. Talmage explains, there is a difference between the personage of the Holy Ghost and the power that he directs and by which such great things are accomplished.

Certainly the Spirit of God was operative in some way in the creation. Some verses in D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants are interesting in this regard. After the Lord refers to the Holy Spirit or the Comforter, he speaks of the truth which shineth: "This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

"As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

"As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

"And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand. . . .

"Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

"The light which is in all things, which giveth light to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." (D&C 88:7-10, 12-13.)

And then he says:

"All kingdoms have a law given,

And there are many kingdoms, for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom, and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

"And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." (D&C 88:36-38.)
