Do you remember the story of Adam and Eve? When they left the Garden of Eden, they became the parents of the first family on earth. Adam and Eve had sons and daughters and taught them the gospel (see Moses 5:12). They experienced the challenges and also the great joy of family life (see 2 Ne. 2:23).

Since then, through Heavenly Father’s plan, each of us has come to earth as part of a family. Each family is different—there may be two parents or one parent, lots of children or few children; sometimes there are cousins or grandparents also living in the home. It is important for family members to love each other and do their part to have a happy home.

Learning and living My Gospel Standards (see Faith in God guidebook, back cover) can help you do your part to build a happy home and have an eternal family. As you choose the right—by being baptized, paying tithing, repenting, keeping the Sabbath day holy, helping Mom and Dad, taking the sacrament, praying, reading the scriptures, and living worthy to go to the temple—you are learning righteous family traditions.

As we do our part to build an eternal family by learning and living the gospel of Jesus Christ, we will rejoice in Heavenly Father’s plan for us.

Cut a small branch off a tree or bush, and secure it in a vase or cup (be sure to ask for an adult’s help and permission). Or draw a picture of a tree on a large sheet of paper. The pictures on page F4 show ways you can help strengthen your family. Cut out the frames, and punch holes at the top of each one. In the blank frames, write or draw your own ideas of ways to help and show love for your family. With string or yarn, hang the frames on the tree.

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed out from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.

1.  For older children: Many of the prophets in the Book of Mormon were good examples of honoring parents and strengthening family. Divide children into groups, and give each group one of the following scripture references and a word cut up into letters: obedience, 1 Ne. 3:2–8; prayer, Enos 1:4–5; work, Mosiah 6:7; repentance, Mosiah 27:8–14, 32; faith, Alma 53:18–22; 56:44–48; scriptures, Morm. 8:1–5. Have each group read the story in the scripture reference, unscramble the word to identify the principle taught and lived by parents and children, and decide how to honor parents by living the principle today. Invite each group to share briefly the scripture story and application. Sing songs or hymns to reinforce these principles.

2.  For younger children: Using Primary packet pictures 4-5 (Lehi’s family fleeing), 4-8 (Nephi delivering the brass plates), and 4-16 (Nephi and the broken bow), involve the children as you tell stories of Nephi’s obedience to his parents. Invite the children to act out ways they can obey their parents as you sing songs and hymns.
