Can you imagine what it must have been like for Jesus Christ’s disciples to see their resurrected Savior?

While the New Testament doesn’t give us details on what the disciples felt when they saw Him again, we know what they did after. Their unshakable faith in Jesus Christ motivated them to be witnesses of Him “unto the uttermost part of the earth” (Acts 1:8), and some even died rather than deny what they knew.

Even though we may not see the same miracles those New Testament disciples witnessed, we can still “stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places” (Mosiah 18:9).

Here are a few ways to do that:

When Jesus Christ appeared to the people in the Americas, He commanded them to “write these sayings after I am gone.” Why? So that others “may be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer” (3 Nephi 16:4).

Writing down your testimony is a powerful way to be a witness of Christ. You could do that by starting a journal to record evidence of God’s hand in your life. Or you could write a letter to a loved one telling them how the Savior’s Atonement and Resurrection have blessed you.

Your written spiritual experiences can uplift others who read them, and they can also bless you when you need to be reminded of your most important spiritual experiences.

Christ’s Resurrection means that life after death is not only possible but also guaranteed for all of us. As we participate in ordinances of salvation and exaltation in the temple, we bear witness of our belief in the Savior’s redeeming power, both for the living and for the dead.

In the temple, we may also act as witnesses for baptism and sealing ordinances. Doing this allows us to take part in the Lord’s pattern of witnesses (see Doctrine and Covenants 6:28). Our temple service bears witness of and honors the Savior’s gift of resurrection.

After Mary Magdalene saw and spoke to the risen Savior, she didn’t hesitate to share her testimony. She “came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord” (John 20:18).

When you have experiences that testify of the truth of Christ’s life, Atonement, and Resurrection, you can share those experiences with others. This can be in a more formal setting, like fast and testimony meeting, but it doesn’t have to be limited to that. You can share your testimony with family, with friends, and online.

When we take the sacrament, we witness to God that we are willing to take the name of Jesus Christ upon ourselves, always remember Him, and keep His commandments (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:77).

While most of these suggestions are about being witnesses to the people around you, being reverent, thoughtful, and intentional when you take the sacrament is a witness to God that you are keeping your covenants with Him and the Savior. You reaffirm that you are trying to do Their work on the earth.

The disciples bore powerful testimonies because of what they saw. But as Jesus said to Thomas, “Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed” (John 20:29).

We likely won’t see the Savior in this life. But we can learn of Him, read the words of His modern-day prophets and apostles (His special witnesses on the earth), and be witnesses of what we believe.

We’ll have His power with us as we do.
