[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170329371" id="p_ryGsh">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

After the Savior raised Lazarus from the dead, the most powerful Jewish leaders convened a council to decide how to deal with Jesus. They feared His popularity with the people because He performed many miracles. (See John 11:47.)

Caiaphas led this council as the presiding high priest and leader of the Sanhedrin, the governing body of Jews during Roman occupation. As high priest, he oversaw temple ordinances that were intended to point to Christ.

But when Christ came, he did not recognize the Savior. Even worse, he conspired to kill Him. It’s one of the great ironies recorded in the New Testament.

Despite his prominent role, little is known about Caiaphas. He’s mentioned only nine times in the New Testament. He acted as a liaison between the Jews and Romans. He was a Sadducee, a Jewish sect at the time of Christ that did not believe in resurrection (see Acts 23:8).

Caiaphas spoke at the council after Christ raised Lazarus from the dead, a miracle that would have troubled him and other Sadducees due to their beliefs.

The council theorized that if they did nothing in response to this well-known miracle, people would believe that Jesus was the Messiah, the King of the Jews, “and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation” (John 11:48).

“Ye know nothing at all,” Caiaphas responded, “nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not” (John 11:49–50).

The Apostle John notes that Caiaphas spoke “not of himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation;

“And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad” (John 11:51–52).

Caiaphas’s name appears again in the New Testament when Christ is questioned before His Crucifixion.

“And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God” (Matthew 26:63).

Jesus affirmed that He was: “Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven” (Matthew 26:64). In response to this, Caiaphas again disavowed the Savior. “Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy” (Matthew 26:65).

Although in the presence of the Savior of the world, the one foreordained to atone for the sins of all humankind and suffer all pains, sorrows, and afflictions, Caiaphas did not recognize that Jesus was the Christ, and he condemned Him.

Caiaphas is mentioned again in the Bible in Acts 4. The record tells of how the Apostle Peter healed a man who was lame from birth (see Acts 3:1–8). Then, as he and John were preaching of Christ’s Resurrection, they were arrested under the authority of the Sanhedrin. They were imprisoned overnight and brought before a council that included Caiaphas and his father-in-law, Annas, the former high priest. (See Acts 4:1–6; see also John 18:13.)

When asked by what authority they had healed the man, Peter answered: “Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole” (Acts 4:10).

This was the last recorded opportunity Caiaphas had to accept Christ. Instead, the council threatened Peter and John. But their threats did not change the truth that Christ lives. (See Acts 4:13–22.)

Through Jesus Christ’s power and authority, Peter healed the lame man. Likewise, miracles can happen today through Christ’s restored priesthood and through faith on His name. The lesson we can learn from Caiaphas is simple. He did not accept Jesus as the Christ, the Son of God, but we can. When we believe in Him, signs, wonders, and miracles will follow (see Mark 16:17–18).
