As neighbors, Maritza and I met when we were young. Though she was a few years older, we became great friends and were very close.

When I was 19 and especially in need of direction, she introduced me to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ through the full-time missionaries. I already knew a little about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints through my uncle and grandmother. They were pioneer members of the Church in my family.

Maritza was with me throughout my conversion, helped me develop my testimony of the Savior and His gospel, and took me by the hand each time I needed her.

I learned from her the joy of living the gospel with simplicity and determination. I admired her sociability, way of uniting family and friends, and perseverance in achieving temporal and spiritual goals. I learned from her that when we encounter the truth, we must put what we learn into practice, keeping the commandments and applying the teachings of the gospel in our lives and families. To remain faithful, we must be courageous in our testimony and strive to hold fast to our faith, despite adversity.

In 2010, Maritza died in a car accident. It was a sad moment for me, but I know that through the plan of salvation and the Atonement of Jesus Christ, I will see her again. I know she continues where she is now with the same cheerful attitude and drive that characterized her here on earth.

I know that this “probationary state” (Alma 12:24) is not all there is. I know we see our family and friends again on the other side of the veil. We will see them, greet them, and be together again. We will experience the same feelings of love we had for each other on earth (see Doctrine and Covenants 130:2). My family members are there. I know Maritza is there too.

Maritza cheerfully spoke with everyone about the gospel here on earth. I’m sure she’s doing the same thing in the spirit world (see Doctrine and Covenants 138:57). She’s teaching about the Savior’s infinite Atonement and the joyful news that because of Him and through the ordinances of the temple, we can return to His and the Father’s presence to live as families for eternity.
