When I was 18 years old, my grandfather on my mother’s side passed away. At that point in my life, I had not lost anyone close to me. I knew it would happen someday, but I did not expect it to happen so suddenly.

My grandpa was in good health, but without warning, he suffered a stroke. My grandma quickly took him to the hospital, but he passed away four days later.

Losing someone so suddenly for the first time hurt. It was strange to have my grandpa attend every important event in my life and then have him disappear.

After the funeral, I found a way to honor the memory of my grandpa and our time together. He loved to work on his truck and do other projects. In fact, when he suffered his stroke, he was in his garage holding a wrench in one of his calloused hands, working as usual.

I decided I would work on cars too. Doing so helps me to feel close to him. I also turned to prayer and the scriptures, where I found peace to move forward with faith and hope in his absence.

“There is a resurrection,” the prophet Abinadi reminded me, “therefore the grave hath no victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ” (Mosiah 16:8).

My grandfather’s death helped me gain a perspective that made the Atonement of Jesus Christ even more meaningful in my life. Just as I honored my grandpa by working on cars, I realized we honor Jesus Christ—and can feel close to Him—as we strive to live as He lived, studying His words, sharing His gospel, and doing “the works of [His] Father” (John 10:37). Doing so gives deeper meaning to the Savior’s Atonement and increases our trust in Him.

“When we cry out in grief or joy, Jesus Christ understands perfectly,” Elder Gerrit W. Gong of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught. “He can be present in the moments when we most need eternity’s great gifts: Jesus Christ’s Atonement, Resurrection, restoration.”

Jesus Christ has turned my grief into joy. Because of Him and His Atonement, I know I will see my grandpa again.
