Our Heavenly Father loves and cares about all of us. He wants each of us to safely return to Him, to have the kind of life He has, known as eternal life, which is the greatest gift He can bestow (see Doctrine and Covenants 14:7). He revealed His will for us as He taught Moses, “Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man’’ (Moses 1:39), and He has prepared the way for us to receive these blessings in our lives.

The pathway for us to return safely and successfully to Him is to be obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Those who live these principles become sons and daughters of God and disciples of Jesus Christ (see 3 Nephi 9:17).

When a person chooses to be baptized and steps onto the covenant path, he or she is connected to God in a special relationship, with access to His covenant love.

I will never forget my personal experience as a child, how excited and happy I always was when my Primary leaders and teachers taught us of the temple through music (see Children’s Songbook, 95,), told us stories and showed us the pictures of the house of the Lord. They invited us to make the house of the Lord our house, our place of worship, and our priority. I also learned these lessons in our home during family scripture study and family home evening.

As a child, I understood what the house of the Lord was but did not fully understand the why of the house of the Lord in my life. Now I understand why and why I must worship regularly in the temple as I make the house of the Lord my place of prayers, worship, and revelation.

Through the ordinances and covenants made in the name of Jesus Christ in His house, our Heavenly Father provides greater access to His power as we make and keep our covenants with Him.

We all need this gift of His power in our life as disciples of Jesus Christ. This power brings protection, healing, comfort, assurance, protection, guidance when we have to make important decisions, healing and strength as we face the trials of this mortal life, and eternal perspective of our true identity and potential to return and live with our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, again.

We learn in the scriptures that in the last days, “all things shall be in commotion” and “fear shall come upon all people” (Doctrine and Covenants 88:91). Confusion will abound. The world is indeed in commotion, and there is fear and distraction around us.

Despite what is happening in the world, the Lord promised that there would be a covenant people, a people eagerly awaiting His return, a people who stand in holy places and will not be moved (see Doctrine and Covenants 87:8). His righteous people resist all deceptions of the adversary and press forward with steadfastness in Christ, “having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men” (2 Nephi 31:20). His covenant people think celestial, participate in the work of salvation and exaltation, and prepare for the Second Coming of the Savior Jesus Christ.

As disciples of Jesus Christ, we should not fear and be distracted. Our commitment to keep our covenants should not be conditional or vary with the changing circumstances of our lives.

What should we do to qualify for and receive this gift of the power of God and His Son, Jesus Christ, in our life?

We learn in the fourth article of faith that “the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.”

Following our commitment to strive to live according to the principles and receive these ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we have to endure to the end, continuing to nourish our faith in Jesus Christ as we pray and study the scriptures daily, repent daily, partake of the sacrament weekly, assume the responsibility for our own testimony, pay our tithing, obey the Word of Wisdom, obey the law of chastity, minister to others, serve in the Church, and be worthy of a temple recommend to make additional covenants in the house of God. These additional covenants are made as we receive our endowment and are sealed as husband and wife and as an eternal family.

“The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity; to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant, and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation, that the earth may be made ready to receive her King—the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation, a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions.”

The decision to receive the endowment is personal and should be made prayerfully. The endowment is a blessing of power and revelation to all who prepare to receive it. To receive our own endowment, we should meet all of the following conditions:

1.  Hold a current temple recommend.

2.  Be at least 18 years old.

3.  Have completed or are no longer attending high school, secondary school, or the equivalent.

4.  One full year has passed since baptism and confirmation.

5.  Have a desire to receive and honor sacred temple covenants throughout our lives.

After receiving your own endowment, you may be united with your spouse and sealed in marriage for eternity. The Lord has said, “All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead” (Doctrine and Covenants 132:7).

Now, regarding our eternal relationship in temple marriage, President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994) has taught us: “The family [is] the most important organization in time and all eternity; . . . the preservation of family life in time and eternity takes precedence above all other interests. . . . Because of this confidence in the perpetuity of the home and family into the eternities, we build our most elaborate and expensive structures—temples of God … so that man, woman, and their children may be bound together by covenant in an everlasting union which will transcend all the limitations of this mortal sphere.”

In the October 2021 general conference President Russell M. Nelson (1924–2025) taught:

“If it were possible for me to speak one-on-one with every young adult, I would plead with you to seek a companion with whom you can be sealed in the temple. You may wonder what difference this will make in your life. I promise it will make all the difference! As you marry in the temple and return repeatedly, you will be strengthened and guided in your decisions.

“If I could speak with each husband and wife who have still not been sealed in the temple, I would plead with you to take the necessary steps to receive that crowning, life-changing ordinance. Will it make a difference? Only if you want to progress forever and be together forever. Wishing to be together forever will not make it so. No other ceremony or contract will make it so.

“If I could speak to each man or woman who longs for marriage but has not yet found his or her eternal companion, I would urge you not to wait until marriage to be endowed in the house of the Lord. Begin now to learn and experience what it means to be armed with priesthood power.

“And to each of you who has made temple covenants, I plead with you to seek—prayerfully and consistently—to understand temple covenants and ordinances. Spiritual doors will open. You will learn how to part the veil between heaven and earth, how to ask for God’s angels to attend you, and how better to receive direction from heaven. Your diligent efforts to do so will reinforce and strengthen your spiritual foundation.”

Let us prepare ourselves for the blessings of the house of the Lord. Receiving these blessings is not a check box or a one-time thing.

President Nelson also taught: “If you don’t yet love to attend the temple, go more often—not less. Let the Lord, through His Spirit, teach and inspire you there. I promise you that over time, the temple will become a place of safety, solace, and revelation.”

As Isaiah taught, I also invite you saying: Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob (see Isaiah 2:2–3) and make of the house of the Lord our house, our place of prayers and worship.

My beloved brothers and sisters, I plead with you, if you are able and have not already increased your attendance in the temple, please find more time to regularly worship in the house of the Lord. “Regularly” means as often as your time allows. Make it a priority.

I promise you as you come worthily and prayerfully to His holy house, you will be armed with His power, His name will be upon you, His angels will have charge over you, and you will grow up in the blessing of the Holy Ghost (see (Doctrine and Covenants 109:15).
