Our Heavenly Father is love; He loves all His children unconditionally. He wants each and every soul to be valued and cared for equally so that none is lost.

New converts need love; they need someone to take care of them. They need someone who can help them understand the doctrines of the gospel.

They can be compared to a seed that is planted. It is essential that the soil is well prepared, and that manure is added to fertilize the soil before planting. After the soil has been prepared and supplemented with manure, the seed is planted, and care is taken to ensure that the seed grows properly by watering and making sure that the sun shines on it each day. We also make sure that bad weeds are not growing in the soil to prevent the seed from growing properly.

New converts also need our kindness and our care. They need to be nurtured with the gospel after their baptism to strengthen them so they do not fail when faced with things or people that might shake their faith.

The simple fact of spotting a new face in the congregation and showing interest in that person is very important and shows that we are truly converted and humble. These simple acts that seem insignificant in our eyes may have significant impact and be remembered by new converts in our midst.

I remember a sister who was baptized in Kasavubu Ward where I was a member about 20 years ago. One day, while attending one of the sisters’ activities, I was surprised to hear her giving her testimony saying that it was thanks to me that she became strong in the Church because of my warm welcome and consideration for her.

Since I couldn’t remember exactly what I had done, I began to reflect on this very touching testimony. My conclusion is that we do not have to wait until we can do great things for the new people we meet among us. We can do the simple, friendly things.

Let us be open to the gentle promptings of the Holy Ghost that will guide us to act in very simple ways. That sometimes may be a smile, a welcome or a consideration for others.

Let us work towards being truly born again, that the Spirit of God may dwell in us in such a way as to cause a deep change in our hearts so that we no longer want to do wrong but rather to seek for things pertaining to God.

This change of heart will help us to become a more humble, more loving, and more friendly people. We will be willing to immediately welcome new members into the Church.

New members need the right people to give them the support they need. They were confirmed members of the Church by the laying on of hands and by receiving the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost can then bring and confirm the teachings and doctrines of the gospel into their hearts in such a way that they may remain faithful.

As a new convert, I chose to stand firm, to repent, and to stay in the covenant path. These are two scriptures out of many that have helped me understand the will of God for me: Mosiah 4:9–15 and Psalm 104:33–34.

Sister Kabongo Angelique Tarr was born in Mwene-Ditu, Kasai-Oriental, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. She and her husband are the parents of five children. She was called as an Area Organization Advisor in July 2021.
