Do you attend a CTR class in Primary? Do you have a CTR ring? Our CTR ring reminds us to choose the right. Maybe you attend a Valiant class in Primary. Do you know what it means to be valiant? To be valiant means to be strong, faithful, and brave. Have you ever had to be valiant or brave when choosing the right? As a young boy, Joseph Smith learned that choosing the right is not always easy.

When Joseph was 14, he was confused about which church to join. Joseph read that people could ask God (see James 1:5).

Joseph Smith went to a grove and knelt in prayer. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ came to Joseph Smith and told him that he “must join none of [the churches]” (see JS—H 1:16–19).

Joseph went home and told his mother what had happened, and she believed him. However, when Joseph related his experience to the leaders of different churches, none of them believed him.

But Joseph was valiant in telling the truth. He said, “Though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true” (JS—H 1:25).

As we celebrate the 200th birthday of Joseph Smith this year, we can remember him and follow his example in choosing the right.

On page F4 write a sentence or draw a picture on each of the balloons that tells or shows ways you are choosing the right.

1.  Refer to Primary 5, lesson 36, and teach the story of the Prophet Joseph Smith writing the Articles of Faith. Repeat the first line of the thirteenth article of faith: “We believe in being honest.” Tell of the persecution suffered by Joseph Smith as he told the truth regarding the First Vision. Refer to JS—H 1:21–26. In JS—H 1:33, Moroni said Joseph’s name “should be had for good and evil among all nations.” How might our own names “be had for good and evil” because of our membership in the Church? Prepare four or five case studies in which children must choose to be honest. Divide the children into groups, and have each group dramatize a case study. At the point where a choice must be made, invite other children to help choose the outcome. Discuss how their name might “be had for good and evil” because of their choice, acknowledging that being honest is not always easy.

2.  Understanding the purpose of the family in Heavenly Father’s plan can help us choose the right. Read two sentences from the family proclamation, beginning with “Happiness in family life” and ending with “wholesome recreational activities” (see Liahona, Oct. 2004, 49). Prepare wordstrips with one of the following on each strip: faith, prayer, repentance, forgiveness, respect, love, compassion, work, and wholesome recreational activities. Post them on the board to resemble one foundation. Prepare nine bags, each including: (1) a copy of a song or hymn that teaches about one of the wordstrips, (2) a piece of paper for each child in the group, and (3) crayons or markers. Divide the children into nine groups, and give each group a bag. Ask them to read the words to the song. Have the children draw one thing they can do to increase happiness in their own families. Invite each group to describe the pictures and post them on top of the foundation while all the children sing the group’s song.
