After the Church released The Scriptures: CD-ROM Edition 1.0 in 2001, members were able to read and search the scriptures at the click of a button. With the recent release of The Scriptures: CD-ROM Edition 1.1, not only are members better able to search specific information, but they can also do it in more languages and with only one CD.

The 1.0 edition included a standard edition and a resource edition of the scriptures on two separate discs. The 1.1 edition includes both the standard edition and the resource edition on the same disc.

While edition 1.0 allowed basic searches and text comparisons between English and any of the other four languages on the disc, edition 1.1 allows users to search for things such as the frequency of words used in the text and allows up to eight language comparisons to be on the screen simultaneously.

The five languages on edition 1.0 included the complete standard works in English, and the triple combination in French, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish. Edition 1.1 includes these languages as well as the triple combination and study aids in Cebuano, Finnish, German, Ilokano, Norwegian, Romanian, and Tagalog.

In addition to these languages, the new disc also contains the Old Testament in Hebrew and the New Testament in Greek.

Kai Andersen, secretary to the Scriptures Coordination Committee, said the purpose of creating the new edition was “to make another tool available for the study of the scriptures.” He said that the new 1.1 edition expanded the number of languages to better serve more members.

While the standard edition is more useful for a casual read, by clicking on the resource edition, users have several options that can allow them to delve deeper into the scriptures. The resource edition allows users to bookmark and highlight pages, write notes in the margins, and navigate easy-to-follow lessons that explain the features of the disc.

The Scriptures: CD-ROM Edition 1.1 (item no. 50315) may be purchased at Church distribution centers or ordered online at www.ldscatalog.com. Those in the United States and Canada may order by phone by calling 1-800-537-5971.
