Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Foreword

For some time I have had on my desk a small sign that simply says "DO IT."

As I look at this slogan, I often think of Elder Thomas S. Monson, one of my colleagues among the General Authorities, for to me he is truly a "do it" man.

I have come to know Elder Monson intimately since he was called to the Council of the Twelve in 1963, and I regard him as one of the Lord's most able servants. He has exemplified through his years of service a steady devotion to the Lord's work that is worthy of emulation.

It seems appropriate that this volume of his messages and teachings should be titled Be Your Best Self, for I believe that is the message of Elder Monson's ministry. He travels the world in behalf of the Church, and wherever he goes he is able to bring out the best in people. He is an effective leader because he has this ability to develop and cultivate the best in others.

As an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, Elder Monson is filled with the pure love of Christ, and he radiates this to others. People love him because he loves them. His witness to the world is one of love and understanding.

As a community and business leader, Elder Monson has helped many others to achieve. His career before becoming a General Authority was one of personal achievement as well as motivating others to excel. His guiding hand is still felt in numerous community and business endeavors, and thus he continues to make a valuable contribution to the lives of people, members and nonmembers alike.

As a husband and father, he is also making great contributions, for his children are growing and maturing in responsible ways. He has inspired them to do their best at home, in the Church, and in their careers.

Elder Monson is a remarkable human being. The Lord has called him to great service in the Church, and he is truly giving of his best. I earnestly hope that this compilation of his wisdom and teachings will help you, the reader, to reach your maximum potential and to be your best self!

President Spencer W. Kimball
