Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Love the Temple, Touch the Temple, Attend the Temple

The newly remodeled and rededicated temple at Logan, Utah, is a stately building. It prompts memories and kindles faith. My first experience regarding Logan took place when I was a boy of twelve. The Aaronic Priesthood of our ward made a trek to the Clarkston, Utah, cemetery and a visit to the grounds of the Logan Temple as we commemorated the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. Since that early time, I have returned frequently to these two historic sites and again have felt the reverence and awe experienced during that first visit.

At the Clarkston cemetery, most of our time was devoted to learning about Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, whose body rests in this peaceful cemetery. No doubt he is the cemetery's most illustrious occupant. However, I strolled beyond the granite shaft bearing Martin Harris's name and read tombstone inscriptions of others less prominent but equally as faithful. Some of the ancient tombstones contained interesting reminders, such as "We will meet again," or "Gone to a better place." One that I still remember read: "A light from our household is gone; a voice we loved is stilled. A spot is vacant in our hearts that never can be filled."

Our next stop was the temple grounds. As boys are inclined to do on a spring day, we would lie on the lawn and gaze at the temple spires, which vaulted to the blue sky, and note the silky, wispy white clouds as they hurried by. I thought of the pioneers buried in that small cemetery. As a result of the sacred ordinances performed in the holy house of God, no light need be permanently extinguished, no voice permanently stilled, no place in our heart permanently left vacant. Oh, how those early pioneers loved the temple!

May we also love the temple. One who did so was a devoted and faithful elderly Tahitian named Tahauri Hutihuti. Brother Hutihuti was a pearl diver from the island of Takaroa in the Taumotu Island group. Oh, how he longed to go to the temple of God! How he loved his wife! How he honored and loved his children! But the temple was beyond his reach. At that time there was no temple in the South Pacific. Then came the glorious news that a temple would be constructed in New Zealand. Carefully Brother Hutihuti prepared himself spiritually for that day. His wife did the same, as well as the children. When the time came that the New Zealand Temple was to be dedicated, old Tahauri reached beneath his bed and retrieved six hundred dollars—his life's savings accumulated throughout his forty years as a pearl diver—and gave all, that he might take his wife and his children to the temple of God in New Zealand. No sacrifice was too great. He loved the temple.

May I urge that each of us appreciate the significance of our temples and develop a love for them. President Spencer W. Kimball has long urged that in the bedroom of each Latter-day Saint child there grace the wall a picture of the temple. As prayers are spoken, a sermon is before that boy, that girl—a gentle reminder from mother as the picture is viewed: "Here you will marry."

Recently our two-year-old granddaughter was reciting for Sister Monson and me her vocabulary—all of it. Gleefully she pointed to a picture of a lion, then a bear, then a horse, and identified each. Can you appreciate our joy as grandparents when her tiny finger pointed to a picture of the temple, and she repeated those sacred words, "the temple"?

The late Matthew Cowley once recounted the Saturday afternoon experience of a grandfather as hand-in-hand he took his small granddaughter on a birthday visit—not to the zoo, nor to the movies, but to the temple grounds. With permission of the groundskeeper, the two walked to the large doors of the temple. He suggested that she place her hand on the sturdy wall and then on the massive door. Tenderly he said to her, "Remember that this day you touched the temple. One day you will enter this door." His gift to the little one was not candy or ice cream, but an experience far more significant and everlasting—an appreciation of the house of the Lord. She had touched the temple, and the temple had touched her.

There is no better way to let the temple touch our lives, nor to demonstrate our love for such a sacred edifice, than to attend the temple. Some years ago when I served as a bishop, a member of our high council, Brother William H. Prince, was chairman of our stake genealogy committee. I shall ever remember when he and Sister Prince came to our ward conference and spoke to us about the importance of attending the temple of God.

They indicated that for a number of years they were workers in the St. George Temple. They described how every Tuesday and Thursday, right after work, the little suitcase would be packed with their temple clothing, and to the temple mother and dad would go. One night, however, heavy rain had come to St. George, turning the red soil to red mud. As the mother, with the little bag in her hand, ran to the car, she slipped. The clasp on the bag opened, and the beautiful white temple clothing was strewn amidst the rain-drenched red soil of St. George. She rather quickly placed the clothing back in the suitcase as Brother Prince urged, "Come along, Mother. We can obtain other clothing at the temple." They hurried to the temple, not wishing to be late for their appointed session. As they came to the clothing desk, the young lady there said, "I'm surprised that you need clothing. You usually bring your own." Then Sister Prince explained what had happened. She said, "Maybe there's one article of our clothing or perhaps two that may not be covered with St. George mud, but that would be all. Let me check, and then I will know what clothing we will require." She opened the suitcase and took from the little bag the temple clothing for her and her husband. The clothing was spotlessly white. Not a trace of the St. George red soil remained on their precious temple clothing.

I learned from that message that we, when we attend the temple, can be entitled to the blessings of Almighty God.

As we love the temple, touch the temple, and attend the temple, our lives will reflect our faith. As we come to these holy houses of God, as we remember the covenants we make within, we shall be able to bear every trial and overcome each temptation. The temple provides purpose for our lives.
