Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

I Love You

Do we understand fully the responsibility to bridge the communications gap that often separates parents from their children? The challenge is complex and varied.

For some this is the minor task of closing a narrow fissure, while for others it consists of crossing a chasm as wide as a canyon. All of us are active participants; none escapes. For the challenge to communicate is the dilemma of our age—even the opportunity of our generation.

If occasionally our generations have not been communicating on the same wavelength, and there has been too much static in the air, it seems to me that this is due not so much to a difference in years as to a fundamental difference in times.

The world has changed more in the period since World War II than in all the previous millennia of recorded history. We have witnessed a population explosion of newly independent nations, an epidemic of international conflicts, and the steadily increasing role of government in society. We have observed the first glimpses of man's ultimate control over his environment: the unleashing of thermonuclear forces, the extension of the electron to virtually every human activity, the exploratory probings into the secrets of life, the reaching out to the moon and planets.

We have observed in recent years the accelerating erosion of many of the restraints upon human conduct that have guided the lives of past generations. There are those who declare chastity to be a state of mind rather than a physical condition. Integrity, which was once a fixed and absolute quality, has taken on a new flexibility; some seem to have accepted as their philosophy Oscar Wilde's dictum that the best way to get rid of temptation is to give in to it.

In such turbulent times, when falsehood is embraced and truth is scorned, do we have the wisdom to turn from the way of the world and follow safely the steps of the Savior? Our period of history is identified by global travel, interplanetary exploration, and international cooperation; yet we need to be reminded that communication, like charity, begins at home.

WHAT IS HOME? A roof to keep out the rain. Four walls to keep out the wind. Floors to keep out the cold. Yes, but home is more than that: It is the laugh of a baby, the song of a mother, the strength of a father, Warmth of loving hearts, light from happy eyes, kindness, loyalty, comradeship. Home is the first school, and the first church for young ones; Where they learn what is right, what is good, and what is kind. Where they go for comfort when they are hurt or sick, Where joy is shared and sorrow eased. Where fathers and mothers are respected and loved. Where children are wanted. Where money is not so important as loving kindness. That is Home. God bless it. —MADAME ERNESTINE SCHUMANN-HEINK

Unfortunately, some homes have leaky roofs and drafty windows. Healthy families don't stay healthy when the rains of sin and the winds of temptation are thus permitted to enter.

Recently an anonymous questionnaire was given to one thousand high school sophomores. Two of the questions asked were:

Ninety-three percent checked "yes" to the first question. Only fifty-one percent checked "yes" to the second question. The students were asked, "Can you help us to understand this difference between ninety-three percent and fifty-one percent?"

One girl's response covers most of the answers: "Sure, I love my parents. They mean well, but . . . when I was in a social club at school, I came home one day and told my mother that our club was going to have its overnight party at our house. Mother turned pale. I told her that chaperones were no longer 'in,' and she turned paler. I hoped she would say, 'No, you aren't' and get me out of it, because I didn't have the courage to say no to the others. But no; she called the parents of the other girls and asked them what she should do. They wanted us girls to be popular. They didn't want to seem 'kooks' to others. They decided, 'Let's say yes this time.' In short, my mother discovered her values—and mine—by a telephone survey."

As Latter-day Saints, we need not turn to telephone surveys to determine our decisions. From the Holy Scriptures there rings in our ears: "They shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:28.) "Be thou an example of the believers." (1 Timothy 4:12.) "Live together in love." (D&C 42:45.) "Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed." (3 Nephi 18:21.)

When we listen carefully and obey fully we come to appreciate that the fabric of family strength is woven with the durable fibers of revealed truth and abiding love. Truth and love are two of the most powerful principles in the world, and when they are found together, modern miracles occur. To illustrate, may I turn to family situations.

First, may I introduce to you the Jacobsen family. Turn back the clock of time fifteen years. Gentle, soft-spoken "Mother Jacobsen" had passed away. She left to her stalwart sons and lovely daughters no fortune of finance, but rather a heritage of wealth in example, in sacrifice, in obedience.

The funeral eulogies had been spoken. The sad trek to the cemetery had been made. The grown family now sorted through the meager possessions the mother had left. A son, Louis, discovered a note and also a key. The note instructed: "In the corner bedroom, in the bottom drawer of the dresser, is a tiny box. It holds the treasure of my heart. This key will open the box." Another son asked, "What could Mother have of sufficient value to be placed under lock and key?" A sister commented, "Dad has been gone all these years, and Mother has had precious little of this world's goods."

The box was removed from its resting place in the dresser drawer and opened carefully with the aid of the provided key. What did it contain? No money, no deed, no precious rings or valuable jewels. Louis took from the box a faded photograph of his father. It contained the penned message, "My dear husband and I were sealed together for time and all eternity in the House of the Lord, at Salt Lake City, December 12, 1891." Next there emerged an individual photo of each child which contained his name and birth date. Finally, Louis held to the light a home-made valentine. In crude, childlike penmanship, which he recognized as his own, Louis read the words he had written sixty years before: "Dear Mother, I love you." Hearts were tender, voices soft, eyes moist. Mother's treasure was her eternal family. Its strength rested on the bedrock foundation of "I love you."

Second, may we look in on the Stauffer family. Perhaps if we glimpse yesterday's turmoil we can better appreciate today's tranquillity. Ross Stauffer, age sixty-one, had little time for God. Business affairs dominated his life. Oh, in his youth he had been active in the Church—even ordained an elder. Only occasionally did Ross remember his promise to Virginia that they would one day enter the temple.

Two splendid children had graced their home—a boy and a girl. Robert and Barbara followed their mother's example. They learned to pray, they followed God's teachings, but somehow the circle was not complete without Dad. The subject of religion became taboo as a conversation piece. When mentioned, an argument would develop, or at times Dad would simply leave the room. The dream of a united and eternal family seemed so remote. Then came a day of change. A wise and understanding bishop sensed a duty to the Stauffer family. Quietly, and without pretense, he drew Ross aside and told him of a need for his talents in the work of the Lord. "You don't need a smoking elder," was the reply.

"No," responded the bishop, "but we need you. You see, Ross, the Lord loves you and has blessed you with a choice family. This assignment will provide a way for you to demonstrate your love for Him."

Ross answered, "Don't tell Virginia and the kids, Bishop, but let me see if I can straighten up."

Now Ross had a goal. It was not to be attained without effort. Fear of failure plagued him and prompted his decision to wage this personal fight without the aid of his family. He relied, however, on the help of God. Ross began to pray. He licked the tobacco habit. He commenced to pay his tithing. He accepted the assignment as assistant ward clerk.

Then came that momentous occasion in Virginia Stauffer's life. Shall we let her provide the account in her own words:

"We were attending a testimony meeting of ward officers. Without warning, the bishop asked Ross if he would like to bear his testimony. Knowing that he had never before responded to this opportunity, I feared the outcome. Calmly he stood and almost as though the two of us were the only ones present, he turned to me and asked, 'Virginia, I want to invite you to a night out next Wednesday. I have in my hand a recommend to the temple. I've been interviewed by the stake president, and he has signed it. I love you, Virginia, and I love our children. Will you and the children come with me on Wednesday to the temple of God?' I couldn't hold back the tears. I embraced Ross and answered, 'Yes, yes, yes!' The smile on our bishop's face revealed his knowledge of this sacred secret. Friends thronged to our side. Our date became a ward excursion."

Thus ended Virginia's account. I wonder if the bishop hadn't read Edwin Markham's poem "Outwitted."

He drew a circle that shut me out— Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout; But love and I had the wit to win: We drew a circle that took him in!

Which is the word? What is the key? The answer: I Love You.

"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) In what more convincing manner could our Heavenly Fathe say to us, "I love you."

Ours is the responsibility to love Him and to demonstrate by our obedience to His commandments the sincerity of our love. Then, as taught by Jesus Himself, we have the privilege to love our neighbors as ourselves. Such is the way to exaltation. Included are our families, our friends, our neighbors—yes, all of our Heavenly Father's children.
