Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Great Is the Worth of Souls

A number of years ago, a very wise man, a noble ruler, King David, king of all Israel, asked a question of the Lord—and this same question has been asked time and time again down through the centuries of time. He said, as recorded in the eighth Psalm, "O Lord, . . . when I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" (Psalm 8:3-4.)

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" The Lord Himself chose to give an answer to King David when, in the 18th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, he made a declaration that rings down through the years: "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.)

Counted among those precious souls are today's youth. One of the greatest problems that our young people must cope with today is the feeling of being all alone, of being unwanted, feeling that no one cares, that no one loves Mary or John. The answer to that feeling and that concern can be found in a simple hymn that was sung a generation or two ago. One verse taught:

Yes, Jesus loves me; yes, Jesus loves me. Yes, Jesus loves me. The Bible tells me so.

Our message to the world is that the Bible does tell our young people that God, our Eternal Father, loves them; that not only the Bible, but the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price also are testimonies to the youth of this great church that Jesus does love them. Jesus loves them so much that they have received from their Heavenly Father a gift that is priceless above all other gifts. That gift is known as free agency.

When our Heavenly Father instructed Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden and pointed out the fruit of the tree of which they might not partake, He then said, as recorded in Moses: "Nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee." (Moses 3:17.) Isn't that a beautiful thought? Our young people may choose for themselves, for it is given unto them by our Heavenly Father.

Young people may choose their friends; they may choose their vocations; they may choose to honor and obey God, or choose to disobey. It has been given unto them by our Heavenly Father. But with this great gift comes a great responsibility, for with the gift of choice comes the responsibility for choices. No one has more beautifully portrayed the meaning of free agency than did William Clegg in his immortal poem:

Know this, that every soul is free To choose his life and what he'll be, For this eternal truth is given That God will force no man to heaven. He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love, and light, In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind.

We have our free agency! For youth, this is a time of preparation, a time of foundation building, a priceless time in life.

"Time is precious, life is priceless." In building their foundations, it is important for each to build well, that the foundation of life might support the superstructure it will bear.

During the construction of the Church Office Building, I walked by the building's excavation. I looked and saw what had taken place in that excavation. I observed tons of steel and thousands of yards of concrete, all having been put into that project in the foundation, and many hundreds of thousands of skilled man hours, all for the purpose of building a foundation. When we go to such expense, and when we go to such effort to build a foundation for a lovely building, isn't it important that we go to even more effort and even greater expense, if necessary, to build a foundation for the lives of our young people? I feel confident that it is.

For youth, this is a time of preparation. Such is true with respect to life's work. Years ago when one would apply for work through a foreman or through a farmer who might own a piece of property, he would go to him and say, "I will work hard." And that foreman or that farmer would say, "Wonderful. That is just what I want. You're hired, young man." But today, that foreman or farmer has been replaced by a man known as a personnel director, and that personnel director assumes that an employee will work hard. He turns and says, "What skills do you have?" This is the question that is asked of our young people today as they enter the labor market. "What skills do you have?"

I talked to the personnel director of one large company who told me that for every job of common labor available on today's market, there are twenty-five applicants. One man receives a job; twenty-four are turned away because they do not have the skills. On the other hand, if that same person who is applying for work with this company in Salt Lake City has a college degree in a technical field, he can take his pick of any three jobs, and if he is in the top fifty percent of his class, he can take his pick of twenty-five or thirty jobs. For youth, it is important that they receive an education, so that they can qualify for their places in life.

Let me remind each of us, however, that education doesn't simply mean that we attend school. Education means that we learn to think. Henry Ford put it in words when he said, "An educated man is not one who has trained his mind to remember a few dates in history. He is one who can accomplish things. If a man cannot think, he is not an educated man, regardless of how many college degrees he may have attained. Thinking is the hardest work a man can do, which is probably the reason we have so few thinkers."

May our youth prepare for their roles in life. May they choose and prepare for a mission in their future. May they choose and prepare for marriage in the house of God. May they choose to honor father and mother. May they choose to serve the Lord in accordance with His great gift of free agency.

The Lord provided the counsel: "For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil." (Moroni 7:16-17.)

This is the key that will unlock the treasure chest of knowledge and inspiration to every young man and to every young woman. May youth of the noble birthright ever choose the Lord's way!

As parents, we have the responsibility of setting before our young people, our children, a proper example. Sometimes our children will bring to us frustrations. I know this; you know it. One housewife, after having a particularly harrowing day, exclaimed to her neighbor, "Martha, I have come to the conclusion that insanity is hereditary. We get it from our children!" And then, that evening, that same mother understood anew the truth of the statement that the most powerful combination of human emotions in the world is not called out by any grand cosmic event, nor accounts found in history books or in a novel, but merely by a parent gazing down upon a sleeping child. When a parent gazes upon a sleeping child, that parent remembers the thought: "A newborn child is a sweet new blossom of humanity, fresh fallen from God's own home to flower upon earth." These are our children. Our home is the place where we teach them. And in the great home teaching program we have as our theme the statement from the First Presidency of the Church: "The home is the basis for the righteous life, and no other institution can take its place nor fulfill its essential functions." When we put our homes in order, we put in order our lives and help also to put in order the world.

We remember the account of the little boy who came up to his father as Dad sat in the large overstuffed chair and prepared to read the sports page. He had just come home from work and was tired. Little Johnny said, "Daddy, tell me a story," as he tugged his father's pant leg. But you and I know what we tell little Johnny. Dad said, "Johnny, you run on for a little while, and after I have read the sports page you come back and then I'll tell you a story." You don't get rid of little Johnny that way. He tugged again: "Daddy, tell me a story—now."

Dad looked down at Johnny and wondered what in the world he could do to shake him just for a few minutes. Then he looked on the end table, and there was a magazine. He had an idea: on the front cover of the magazine was a picture of the world, similar to the unisphere design of the New York World's Fair. He tore the cover off that magazine and shredded it into about sixteen pieces. He handed it to little Johnny and said, "Johnny, let's play a game. You take these pieces and go in the other room and get the sticky tape and put this world together; and when you have put it together properly, I'll tell you a story."

Johnny accepted the challenge and off he ran. Dad settled back, very pleased with himself. He knew that he could now read the sports page. But only a moment had passed and here was Johnny again, tugging at his pant leg.

"Daddy," said Johnny, "I have put it together."

Dad looked down and saw those sixteen pieces, each one in its proper place; and he felt that he had a genius in the household. He turned to his son and said, "John, my boy, how did you do it?" Johnny sort of ducked his head and said, "Well, it wasn't too hard, Dad. Turn the picture of the world over." As Dad turned the magazine cover over, Johnny said, "You see, on the back of the cover is the picture of a home. I just put the home together, and the world took care of itself."

When we put our homes together, the world will largely take care of itself. Fathers, we may be the head of the home—but mothers are the heart of the home, and the heart of the home is where the pulse of the home is.

Recently as I was traveling on a plane, I read an article in a prominent ladies magazine wherein the author declared that the women of America were tired of their role as homemakers, that mothers were tired of being Joey's mother, John's wife. This image was an old-fashioned image, and the article seemed to indicate that the popular thing today was to rear our children until they are in school and then leave the responsibility of their instruction to the classroom teachers. Such was the tenor of this article.

Mothers, may I declare that your children need you. They have questions to ask. I think of the little boy just four years of age. It is a spring day, early in the morning. He is out in the garden and sees a bumblebee buzzing in the lilac blooms, or perhaps he notices the tiny ant making its tedious way across the hot pavement. In his own little childlike way he urges, "Mother, Mother, come quickly and see what I have found." Is Mother at home to answer his call?

A little ten-year-old girl, having successfully competed in a hopscotch tournament, fairly flies home from school. As she bursts into the kitchen, she shouts, "Mother, Mother, I won, I won!" Is Mother at home to share her joy?

Mothers and fathers, do we realize that we are making the pattern into which the lives of our youngsters will be cast? To teach our children, we must be close to our children, and the place to get close to them is in the home. We have a responsibility to set before them the proper example. I have never read a more scathing denunciation by the Lord than that which is found in Jacob in the Book of Mormon, wherein the Lord said: "Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them." (Jacob 2:35.)

If our Heavenly Father would give unto us such a denunciation for a poor example, isn't it logical to assume that He would give us His approbation as we set before our children a proper example? Then we can look back as did John, when he declared: "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth." (3 John 1:4.)

Now may I direct a thought to us as leaders, leaders of the youth of this great church. The youth will follow when leaders lead. A home-teaching theme declares: "Our central task is to produce an individual who walks uprightly before the Lord." This is our responsibility. You and I—we are not teaching Boy Scouts simply how to tie knots. We are not simply teaching Beehive girls a lesson in homemaking. We, as leaders, are teaching our boys and our girls, that they might have the strength, the knowledge, and the inspiration to make the decisions in life which will surely be theirs to make. We have a profound influence upon their lives. The poet demonstrated such when he said:

Who touches a boy by the Master's plan Is shaping the course of a future man; Is dealing with one who is human seed Who may be the man whom the world will need.

We have this challenge; we have this responsibility. I read a note written by a Protestant minister, printed in a national magazine: "Try to fill posts of leadership in any church with nondrinkers and still get capable people. You just can't do it." A week later, in the "Letters to the Editor" section, a person wrote: "The pastor who made this statement must be unaware of the leaders of the Mormon Church throughout the world." I am so pleased we have this reputation—a reputation of setting before our young people the proper example.

Leaders of youth, may we choose the Lord's way! Youth, parents of youth, and leaders of youth, let us remember always that the worth of souls is great in the sight of God.

This is the answer to King David's question: "What is man that thou art mindful of him?" (Psalm 8:4.) We are the sons and daughters of God, our Eternal Father. Our thoughts, our actions, our very lives should reflect this sacred knowledge.
