Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Meeting Today's Challenge

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. . . . And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1:1, 26-27.)

This is a fundamental doctrine, a foundation scripture, an eternal truth. To have been created in the image of God brings to each of us a sense of profound humility, and a very real responsibility toward our birthright.

As Church leaders we have been given the precious privilege to bring the young men and the young women of the Church to an awareness that they actually have been created in the image of God. When we succeed in this endeavor our youth will have a firm foundation upon which they may safely build their lives.

As we welcome the twelve-year-old boy or girl to the youth program of the Church, can we help but notice that keen anticipation, the divine hope, the smile of confidence that flashes to our view? Our solemn duty is more clearly defined when we realize that to our care, loving parents have entrusted their boys, their girls, that we might help them prepare for the race of life.

Parents are worried and very much concerned by the dangers and frustrations that youth the world over face daily, even hourly. With all their hearts, mothers and fathers fervently pray that you and I will be able to win the confidence of their children, merit their love, and guide them from the cunningly prepared and carefully camouflaged pitfalls that Lucifer has designed and, rather, take them by the hand and successfully lead them in their quest for eternal life.

Is there justification for this worry on the part of parents? Is the danger actually this real? Is temptation so close?

Recently, in my own neighborhood, a thirteen-year-old youth labored in shock for most of the night, suffering from acute intoxication. He had gulped down nearly half a fifth of whiskey—more than a fatal dose—in one long swallow. The boy was given the whiskey by a friend. He gulped it down as a lark.

Another account revealed that sheriff's deputies in Salt Lake County broke up two teenage parties—one in a local canyon, the other at one of the beaches. The youths had been drinking, their conduct was rowdy, their resistance to even greater sin destroyed.

An editorial from the San Francisco Examiner of January 18, 1965, described the conditions we face by asking the question: "What has happened to our national morals? (1) An educator speaks out in favor of free love; (2) movies sell sex as a commercial commodity; (3) book stores and cigar stands peddle pornography; (4) magazines and newspapers publish pictures and articles that flagrantly violate the bounds of good taste." The editorial continues: "Look around you. These things are happening in your America. In two decades since the end of World War II we have seen our national standards of morality lowered again and again. Today we have a higher percentage of youth in jail . . . in reformatories, on probation and in trouble than ever before. Study the statistics on illegitimate births . . . on broken marriages . . . on juvenile crimes . . . on school dropouts . . . on crimes of passion. The figures are higher than ever. And going higher. Parents, thoughtful citizens in all walks of life, are deeply disturbed. They should be, for we of the older generation are responsible. Our youngsters are no better and no worse than we were at the same age. Generally, they are wiser. But—they have more temptations than we had. They have more cars. They have more money. They have more opportunities for getting into trouble.

"We opened doors for them that were denied to us. We encouraged permissiveness. We indulged them. We granted maximum freedoms. And we asked for a minimum in respect . . . and in responsibility."

One cannot help but compare our situation today with conditions at the time of Belshazzar, the king of the Chaldeans. The prophet Daniel rebuked Belshazzar: "And thou . . . O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart . . . But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified." He then interpreted the writing on the wall: "God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. . . . Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting." (Daniel 5:22-23, 26-27.)

Too many of us have been screaming ever louder for more and more of the things we cannot take with us and paying less and less attention to the real sources of the very happiness we seek. We have been measuring our fellowmen more by balance sheets and less by moral standards. We have developed frightening physical power and fallen into pathetic spiritual weakness. We have become so concerned over the growth of our earning capacity that we have neglected the growth of our character.

As we view the disillusionment that engulfs countless thousands today, we are learning the hard way what an ancient prophet wrote out for us three thousand years ago: "He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase." (Ecclesiastes 5:10.)

Yet, amidst it all, a young lady, not of our faith—a college freshman—speaks out in a "Letter to the Editor" of a prominent national magazine:

"I am old-fashioned enough to believe in God. Our generation has been exposed, through every means of communication, to major and minor fears—the little threat of not finding a mate if one does not use a certain mouthwash, or fear of non-acceptance if one does not succumb to a low moral standard because it is 'the nature of the beast.'

"Many of us accept the premises that 'You can't fight city hall,' 'Live life to its fullest now,' so 'Eat, drink and make merry'—for tomorrow we will be destroyed by nuclear war.

"I am old-fashioned enough to believe in God, to believe in the dignity and potential of His creature—man—and I am realistic, not idealistic enough to know that I am not alone in these feelings.

"Some say that, unlike other generations, we have no threat to our freedom, no cause to propagate, no mission in life—everything has been handed to us. We have not been pampered, but spiritually impoverished. I don't want to live in the poverty of affluence—and I cannot live alone." (Look, January 12, 1965.)

Speaking of this affluence, one youngster said: "Kids are caught between the values given them as desirable by their churches, schools, and parents on one hand and on the other the spectacle of mothers and fathers both working with great concentration to get 'things.'"

With these dangers lurking on every hand, threatening to engulf our youth, our mission and our calling as leaders become even more vital than ever before. And where might we begin?

First, I would suggest that we teach youth by our own example the importance of acquiring good habits. Bad habits can be such fatal pitfalls. First we could break them if we would, then we would break them if we could. "Ill habits," said John Dryden, "gather by unseen degrees, as brooks make rivers, and rivers run to seas." Good habits, on the other hand, are the soul's muscles; the more you use them, the stronger they grow.

Second, I plead that each of us will learn his duty and act in the office in which he is appointed in all diligence.

This is no time for "summer soldiers or sunshine patriots." For life is a sea on which the proud are humbled, the shirker is exposed, and the leader revealed. During wartime the penalty for shirkers on guard duty is most severe—sometimes death. This is because the shirker's negligence has placed human life in jeopardy. To us has been given not only the protection of human life, but even eternal life—the very destiny of those whom we serve.

Finally, I would suggest that the greatest gift, the most lasting lesson that we could provide these precious young men and women would be to aid them in their personal search for a true testimony concerning Jesus of Nazareth and the knowledge that can come to them through Him. In the words of the Prophet Joseph, "Knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven." (History of the Church 5:389.)

The King of kings and Lord of lords, the Savior of mankind, extends an invitation to listening youth and wise leaders: "Come . . . learn of me; . . . and ye shall find rest unto your souls." (Matthew 11:28-29.) As we make room for the Lord in our homes and in our hearts, He will be a welcome companion and guest. He will be by our side. He will teach us the way of truth.
