Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Successful Leadership

When a member of your bishopric stopped by your home and asked that you serve the Lord as a Scoutmaster, a teacher of a Beehive class, or perhaps a secretary or executive in the Sunday School, did you actually stop and contemplate the true meaning of your acceptance? Did you look upon your assignment in terms of twenty-four Boy Scouts, or twelve Beehive girls, or perhaps an obligation to devote two hours each Sunday morning? Or did you reflect upon the real meaning of your opportunity as the words of the Lord found lodgment in your heart: "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.) If so, you were humbled as you became aware that God, our Eternal Father, and His Beloved Son had chosen you to play a vital role in a glorious cause. "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

It was then that you determined to become the leader whose service would be pleasing to our Heavenly Father and whose example could be implicitly followed by His precious youth as they seriously lived a game played in their boyhood and girlhood days called "Follow the Leader."

What are the traits of a successful leader? How may we recognize him? Why is he different from many others? May we consider what I have chosen to call the six identifying traits of a successful leader. These traits provide a blueprint that points the way toward success.

First, the successful leader has faith. He recognizes that the greatest force in this world today is the power of God as it works through man. He takes comfort from the very real assurance that divine help can be his blessing. He is, through his faith, a believer in prayer, knowing that prayer provides power—spiritual power, and that prayer provides peace—spiritual peace. He knows and he teaches youth that the recognition of a power higher than man himself does not in any sense debase him; rather, it exalts him. He further declares, "If we will but realize that we have been created in the image of God, we will not find Him difficult to approach." This knowledge, acquired through faith, accounts for the inner calm that characterizes the successful leader.

Second, the successful leader lives as he teaches. He is honest with others. He is honest with himself. He is honest with God. He is honest by habit and as a matter of course.

In an issue of Nation's Business, there appeared a comprehensive report entitled "What It Takes to Be Successful." The report was prepared by that magazine's editors after exhaustive surveys to determine those traits which, when acquired and lived, will assure a leader's success. Business leaders, educators, and consultants evaluated the qualities a leader needs most; and the final conclusion revealed that integrity, and such variations of it as honesty or moral soundness, was given first rank by virtually all participants in the survey. The leader who has integrity, who leads by example, will never suffer the scorn of disappointed youth who declare, "People are always telling us what to do but aren't doing it themselves." The apostle Paul counseled us wisely, "Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity." (1 Timothy 4:12.)

Third, the successful leader works willingly. Formula "W" applies to him. What is Formula "W"? Simply this: Work will win when wishy-washy wishing won't. Should you be discouraged, look back carefully and honestly and you will find that your work has not been done with all your might. Victory is bound to come to him who gives all of himself to the cause he represents when there be truth in the cause. There is no place for procrastination, defined by Edward Young two centuries ago as "the thief of time."

Procrastination is really much more. It is the thief of our self-respect. It nags at us and spoils our joy. It deprives us of the fullest realization of our ambitions and hopes. But procrastination is a guest who prefers to visit the lazy, and never feels at home with the busy and diligent.

Fourth, the successful leader leads with love. You never find the successful leader scolding nor giving vent to verbal tongue lashing. Rather, he follows the counsel of President George Albert Smith, who said, "It does not pay to scold. I believe you can get people to do anything (if you can get them to do it at all) by loving them into doing it." Think back to that teacher who influenced you most, and honestly ask yourself, "Did that teacher love me and my classmates, or did she scold us?" You know the answer. Where love prevails in a class, discipline problems vanish.

Fifth, the successful leader is prepared. In his mind, he has carefully stored full information with respect to his assignment. He knows the program. He knows what is expected of him. He does not approach his assignment just hoping or wishing for success. In his heart, he has made spiritual preparation, too. He has earned, through his faithfulness, the companionship of the Holy Spirit. He has knowledge to give. He has a testimony to share.

The unprepared leader, however, will find himself drifting aimlessly on a sea of chance, with waves of failure threatening to engulf him.

Sixth, the successful leader achieves results. To begin with, he recognizes that no aim leads to no end. In short, he develops goals of accomplishment. If he be a Scoutmaster, he determines that each boy will achieve. You see such a leader at every court of honor in full uniform, his boys receiving award upon award. Their leader has taught them that we were not placed on earth to fail, but rather to succeed; that we cannot rest content with mediocrity when excellence is within our reach.

Such a leader recognizes that his attitude determines his altitude. He knows full well that nothing is as contagious as enthusiasm, unless it is a lack of enthusiasm. He carries others to accomplishment through the sheer strength of his overwhelming desire to bring success to his assignment. The leader who gets the job done is one who inspires confidence, who motivates action, and who generates enthusiasm. You will ever recognize his work—for it will be well done.

This, then, is the description—yes, the definition—of the successful leader. Neither wealth, nor fame, nor any other instrument of power can ever be more reliable in assuring his security and peace of mind than the knowledge of having inspired gratitude in another.
