Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Leadership—Our Challenge Today

We are the sons and daughters of Almighty God. We have a destiny to fulfill, a life to live, a contribution to make, a goal to achieve. The future of our country in these rapidly changing times awaits our mark of influence. The growth of the kingdom of God upon the earth will, in part, be aided by our devotion.

We have been provided the God-given blessing of free agency. The pathway is marked. The blessings and penalties are shown clearly. But the choice is up to us. Of course there will be opposition. There always has been and always will be. That evil one, even Satan, desires that we become his followers, rather than leaders in our own right. He has evil and designing men as his agents. Together they conspire to make evil appear to be good. In a most enticing manner he cunningly invites: "This is the way to happiness—come." Yet, that still, small voice within us cautions: "Not so. This doesn't seem right."

A choice has to be made. There are no minor or insignificant decisions in our lives. Decisions determine destiny. Whether we like it or not, we are engaged in the race of our lives. At stake is eternal life—yours and mine. What will be the outcome? Will we be servants of God? Or will we be servants of sin?

May I offer for our consideration a simple formula for successful leadership and a noble life:

First, think big.

Second, prepare well.

Third, work hard.

Fourth, live right.

First, think big. A story is told of a banker who would walk to work each morning and, rounding the corner of the same street, would daily see a small boy with freckled face and tousled hair playing as all boys play. The banker would run his hand through the boy's head of hair and counsel, "Remember, son, think big. Think big."

This pattern was repeated over and over again. One day, however, the boy was missing, and a sign had been erected by the lad and placed on the front lawn. It read: "Dog for Sale—$50,000."

The banker muttered, "Well, I've got the boy thinking big, anyway." That night the sign was still in place, but two days later it was gone. The banker asked the boy, "Did you sell the dog?" "Yup," came the answer. "For $50,000?" asked the banker. "Yup," came the reply. "Cash?" "Not exactly," said the boy. "I had to take two $25,000 kittens in on the deal!"

When we realize that we become what we think about, then our thoughts take on added importance. We live in a world made small by the inventions of science and the exploration of space. In these days wonders are wrought and we shrug and dismiss them as commonplace. On a television screen that none could imagine not too many years ago, we have seen man climb to the heights of the universe, step into space, and walk on the thin floor of nothingness. We have seen greater strides into the mysteries of science than others have known in all history. This is not the age of minute goals, mediocre accomplishment, or shallow thought. We must think big.

We cannot restrict our thinking to today's problems alone. We have the obligation to plan for tomorrow's opportunities. We are limited only by our thoughts and personal determination to convert these thoughts to realities. Henry Ford, the industrialist, taught us, "An educated man is not one who has trained his mind to retain a few dates in history. He is one who can accomplish things. Unless a man has learned to think, he is not an educated man, regardless of how many college degrees he has after his name."

I challenge each of us to think big, and, I might add, think wisely.

Second, prepare well. Our noble thoughts must be part of a purposeful plan, if the dream castles we have envisioned are to become a reality. The Lord taught: "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing." (D&C 88:119.) A reading of the book of Genesis gives one insight into the painstaking planning undertaken by God himself.

At times the preparation period may appear dull, uninteresting, and even unnecessary. But experience continues to demonstrate that the future belongs to those who prepare for it. And if we are to become leaders, we cannot skimp on our preparation.

Patterns of living and codes of behavior during the preparation period have a way of carrying over into actual life. John Dryden warned: "Ill habits gather by unseen degrees—As brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas." First we could break them if we would. Then we would break them if we could.

Spiritual preparation is vital. Spirituality is not like a water faucet in that it can be turned off or turned on at will. Some make the fatal error of assuming that religion is for others now and perhaps someday for us. Such thinking is not based on fact or experience, for we are daily becoming what we shall be. To be prepared spiritually for leadership overshadows all other types of preparation.

I challenge each of us to prepare well.

Third, work hard. A wise leader cautioned, "When you play, play hard. When you work, don't play at all." Leadership requires effort, hard work, a do-or-die philosophy.

When we speak of work as an essential ingredient of leadership, we speak also of teamwork. Getting along with others must be part of our work and service pattern, or leadership assignments will pass us by. One cannot perform all of the needed work by himself. J. C. Penney, the business leader, advised, "My definition of leadership is brief and to the point. It is simply this: Getting things done through the aid of other people. Cooperativeness is not so much learning how to get along with others as taking the kinks out of yourself so that others can get along with you."

I challenge each of us to work hard.

Fourth and finally, live right. Let us study the scriptures, then live their teachings. Following the Savior's guide, let us implement in our lives a set of Be Attitudes:

—Be diligent

—Be dependable

—Be honest

—Be clean

—Be true

—Be obedient

Then we can be as Jesus admonished, a light unto the world. (See Matthew 5:14.) This is true leadership: a leader in righteousness; an example of purity; a defender of truth.

We cannot compromise our principles and retain the respect of others. A simple motto to follow is to "Choose the Right." In the words of the hymn:

Choose the right! there is peace in righteous doing; Choose the right! there's safety for the soul; Choose the right, in all labors you're pursuing; Let God and heaven be your goal. —HYMNS, NO. 110

To live right, we need the companionship of the Holy Spirit. It will lead us to truth. It will keep us from error. We should pray earnestly for its companionship, for that Spirit will be to our quest for leadership success as a beacon light showing the way. Doubt not the ability of God to hear and answer prayer. He guided Samuel. He strengthened David. He appeared to Joseph. He can lead us, and does.

I experienced such guidance while serving as bishop of the Sixth-Seventh Ward in Salt Lake City. I received an assignment from our stake president to supply the stake with the names of two possible stake missionaries. My counselors and I prayed about the selection and then reviewed the listing of priesthood bearers within the ward.

We had a card file, and each individual card contained the name of the head of the family. One at a time we eliminated each of the high priests and each of the elders. My comment would be, "We can't recommend John Flanders; he's our Scoutmaster," or "We would be foolish to recommend Samuel Flake; he's busy teaching the priests quorum."

Finally, we commenced the file of the seventies. I came to a card that contained the name of Richard W. Moon and said to my counselors, "We surely won't recommend him. He's the finest assistant Sunday School superintendent we've ever had." I then attempted to put the card face down on the stack, but the card would not leave my thumb and index finger. It was as though it were glued to them. I tugged at the card, but it still would not come loose. I then said to my counselors, "The Lord needs Richard W. Moon as a stake missionary more than we need him as an assistant Sunday School superintendent."

I then related the experience to our stake president, who recommended that, under the circumstances, we should go immediately to Brother Moon's house and extend to him a call to serve. We found that he was visiting his mother, who also lived within our ward. She met us at the door of her home, and I related to her the circumstances of our decision to call her son as a stake missionary. Tears welled up in her eyes, and she said, "Bishop, ever since we heard your announcement that the Church was looking for seventies who could fill missions, I have prayed that my son might be appointed. I wondered how, with his wife and tiny children, he could be a full-time missionary. Not once did I think of a stake mission. Your visit is in answer to my prayer." Richard Moon accepted the call and became a most successful stake missionary.

Jesus, our Savior and Redeemer, extends to you and to me that same invitation given to Peter, to Matthew, to Philip: "Come, follow me." Will we do so? It is the way of true leadership. May each of us think big, prepare well, work hard, and live right, thereby finding success in life.
