Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Decisions Determine Destiny

When I am in the presence of the youth of the Church, I think of the prophet of the Lord who called me to be a member of the Council of the Twelve, President David O. McKay. I was his last appointee to the Council, and I shall ever remember and treasure the association that I had with him and the appointment wherein he extended to me my call. As I think of President McKay, I think of one of his favorite passages from the literary giants of the world—even from Longfellow—when he described youth. He said, "How beautiful is youth; how bright it gleams, with its illusions, aspirations, dreams. Book of beginnings, story without end; each maid a heroine, each man a friend."

Surely the youth of the Church represent beauty in all of its dimensions. Wherever we as General Authorities travel, we have a mother here or a father there or a younger brother or sister ask if we will bring a greeting to a precious son or daughter, brother or sister.

Some time ago it was my responsibility to fulfill an assignment in ancient Persia, the land of Iran. After the meeting, a father came up to me and placed in my hand a little note. Its message read: "Dear Brother Monson, My son Rodney is at BYU. I love him as you know a father does. He is a quiet, sensitive young man of whom we are proud. He has seldom been thanked for doing good or being a fine young man because he is so quiet. Can you find an opportunity to express the appreciation of parents for their children far away and living right. Thanks, Rodney's father." Then he added, "P.S. You won't notice Rodney in the crowd. He will be near the back row."

Youth of today are faced with monumental decisions. The world in which they live is not a play world or a Disney world. It is a very competitive world, which will require the very best that they can bring to it and will reward them when their best efforts are put forth.

Important to remember is this solemn truth: Obedience to God's law will bring liberty and eternal life, whereas disobedience will bring captivity and death.

It has been said by one, years ago, that history turns on small hinges, and so do people's lives. Our lives will depend upon the decisions we make, for decisions determine destiny.

Even so-called small decisions have their eternal consequences. For example, the decision made by Adam and Eve—we are here as a result of that decision. Think of the decisions made by people at the time of the prophet Noah, when they laughed and they mocked and they jeered as this prophet of God erected a crude-looking vessel called an ark; but they ceased from their laughing and their jeering when the rain began to come and when the rain failed to cease. They had made a decision contrary to the purposes of God, and they paid for that decision with their very lives.

I think of the decision of Laman and Lemuel, when they were commanded to go and obtain the plates of Laban. What does the record indicate that they did? They murmured and said, "This is a hard thing which we have been commanded to do," and they decided not to obey that commandment—and they lost the blessing. But Nephi, when he received that commandment, responded with that beautiful declaration: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded," and he did; and he received the coveted prize that comes through obedience.

Think of the decision of a fourteen-year-old boy who had read that if anyone lacked wisdom, he should ask of God, "that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) He made the decision to put to the test the epistle of James. He went into the grove and he prayed. Was that a minor decision? No—that was a decision that has affected all mankind and particularly all of us who are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

During the thirteenth century another important decision was made when Mongol hordes came out of Mongolia, swept across the part of the world we know as Turkey and Iran, and then entered into Europe. They were at the very gates of the city of Vienna; Western Europe and its civilization looked as though all was doomed as the leader of the Mongols, Subedei, stood ready to lead his cavalry in an annihilation of Western history and Western culture. Then something happened. A messenger from Mongolia brought the news that the Great Khan, Ogedei, had died; and Subedei had to make the decision to go on and conquer Western Europe or to return for the funeral of the Great Khan. He made the decision to return, and the Mongol hordes returned to Mongolia and never again threatened Western Europe. A small decision, but oh! its consequence.

As I have read the history of World War II, I think perhaps one of the greatest decisions to be made was the one made by General Dwight D. Eisenhower and his supreme staff to invade France on the beaches of Normandy. The enemy general staff had been led to believe that the invasion would take place at Calais, and consequently had the best-trained troops situated at Calais, ready to hurl back into the ocean the landing force. This decision proved to be wrong. The force landed on the beaches of Normandy and penetrated the hedgerows; and before the assault troops of the enemy army could repel them, they were firmly entrenched beyond the beachhead, and World War II was headed toward its conclusion. A decision that determined destiny.

Each youth—indeed, all of us—has the responsibility to make vitally important decisions. Our decisions may not be to invade the coast of Normandy; they certainly will not be to ride with the Mongol hordes toward the gates of Vienna, and we will not be called upon to make quite the same decision as did the people at the time of Noah. But there are certain decisions that youth make. They are all important. Remember the observation:

Isn't it strange that princes and kings, And clowns that caper in sawdust rings, And common people like you and me Are builders for eternity? Each is given a bag of tools, A shapeless mass, a book of rules; And each must make, ere life is flown, A stumbling block or a steppingstone. —R. L. SHARPE

Will youth make stepping-stones, or will they carve out for themselves stumbling blocks? Will they travel upward and onward toward the celestial kingdom of God, or pursue a course that would take them away from this coveted objective?

What are the important decisions our youth must make? First, what will be my faith. Second, whom shall I marry. And third, what will be my life's work.

First, what will be my faith. I feel that we should put our trust in our Heavenly Father, that each one should have the responsibility to find out for himself whether or not the gospel of Jesus Christ is true. As we read the Book of Mormon and the other standard works, as we put the teachings to the test, then we will know of the doctrine, for this is our promise, whether it be of man or whether it be of God. Sometimes that decision—What will I believe?—can have far-reaching consequences.

During the period 1959 to 1962, I had the privilege of presiding over the Canadian Mission, with headquarters in Toronto, Canada. There we had the wonderful opportunity of working with 450 of the finest young men and young women in all the world. From that particular experience, I should like to relate an account that came to Sister Monson that had far-reaching significance. One Friday she was the only person in a usually very busy mission home. The telephone rang, and the person who was on the other end of the line spoke with a Dutch accent and asked, "Is this the headquarters of the Mormon Church?" Sister Monson assured him that it was as far as Toronto was concerned, and then she said, "May I help you?" The party on the line said, "Yes. We have come from our native Holland, where we've had an opportunity to learn something about the Mormons. We'd like to know more." Sister Monson, being a good missionary, said, "We can help you." Then the gentleman who had called said, "We have chicken pox in our home; and if you could wait until the children are better, we'd love to have the missionaries call." Sister Monson said that she would arrange such, and that terminated the conversation.

Excitedly she told the two missionaries on our staff, "Here is a golden referral," and the missionaries agreed. Then, as some missionaries do, they procrastinated calling upon the family. Days went into weeks, and the weeks became several. Sister Monson would say, "Are you going to call on that Dutch family tonight, elders?" And they would respond, "Well, we're too busy tonight, but we're going to get around to it." After a few more days Sister Monson would say, "What about my Dutch family? Are you going to call on them tonight?" Again the reply, "Well we're too busy tonight, but we're going to work it into our schedule." Finally Sister Monson said, "If you aren't going to call on the Dutch family tonight, my husband and I are going to call on them," and they replied, "We'll work it into our schedule tonight." And thus they called on a lovely family. They taught them the gospel. Each person in the family became a member of the Church. The family was the Jacob de Jager family. Brother de Jager became the president of an elders quorum. His employer, the gigantic Phillips Company, then transferred him to Mexico, where he served the Church with distinction. Later he became the counselor to several mission presidents in Holland, then a Regional Representative of the Twelve, and then a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy. Today he is serving as the executive administrator of the work in Southeast Asia.

I ask, Was it an important decision that was made on the part of the missionaries to call on the de Jagers? Was it an important decision for Sister Monson to say, "Tonight is the night or else"? Was it an important decision for the de Jagers to telephone mission headquarters in Toronto, Cananda, and say, "Could we have the missionaries come to our home?" I bear testimony that these decisions had eternal consequences, not only for the de Jagers, but for many other people as well, for here is a man who can teach the gospel in English, in Dutch, in German, in Spanish, and in Indonesian, and now is learning to preach the gospel in Chinese. I ask, What will be our faith?

Our conversation may not be as dramatic as Brother and Sister de Jager's happened to be, but to each it will be equally as vital and equally as long-lasting and equally as far-reaching. That which we believe is a very important matter. Let us weigh our responsibility to search for truth.

To youth comes a second decision: Whom shall I marry. May I make personal application of this question.

At a dance for the freshman class at the University of Utah, I was dancing with a girl from West High School, and a young lady from East High School danced by with her partner. Her name was Frances Johnson. I took one look and decided that there was a young lady I wanted to meet; but she danced away, and I didn't see her for three more months. Then one day, while waiting for the old streetcar at Thirteenth East and Second South streets in Salt Lake City, I looked and couldn't believe my eyes. Here was the young lady whom I had seen dancing across the floor, and she was standing with another young lady and a young man whom I remembered from grade school days. Unfortunately, I couldn't remember his name. I had a decision to make, and I thought to myself, "This decision requires courage. What should I do?" I found in my heart an appreciation of that phrase, "When the time for decision arrives, the time for preparation is past." I squared my shoulders up and plunged toward my opportunity. I walked up to the young man and said, "Hello, my old friend from gradeschool days," and he said to me, "I can't remember your name." I told him my name, and he told me his name; and then he introduced me to the girl who later became my wife. That day I made a little note in my student directory to call on Frances Beverly Johnson, and I did. That decision, I believe, was one of the most important decisions that I have ever made. Young people who are at that particular time in their lives have the responsibility to make similar decisions. They have the important responsibility to choose whom to marry—not just whom to date.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said, "Nothing is more important than marrying the right person at the right time, in the right place, and by the right authority." We hope youth will avoid too quick courtships. It is important that each young person become acquainted with the person he plans to marry, that there is certainty that each is looking down the same pathway, with the same eternal objectives in mind.

Let us turn now to the third decision, What will be my life's work. I have counseled many returning missionaries who have asked this question. Frequently, we find that missionaries like to emulate their mission president. If he is an educator, a preponderant number of missionaries will want to be educators; if he is a businessman, a large number will want to study business; if he is a doctor, many of the missionaries will want to be physicians, for they naturally desire to emulate a man whom they respect and admire. My counsel to returning missionaries and to every youth is that they should study and prepare for their life's work in a field that they enjoy, because they are going to spend a good share of their lives in that field. I believe it should be a field that will challenge their intellect and a field that will make maximum utilization of their talents and their capabilities, and, finally, a field that will provide them sufficient remuneration to provide adequately for a companion and children. Such is a big order, but I bear testimony that these criteria are very important in choosing one's life's work.

I quote a passage of which President David O. McKay was fond: "You are the one who has to decide whether you'll do it or toss it aside; whether you'll strive for the goal that's afar, or just be content to stay where you are."

Adequate preparation enhances the ability to think and to decide. We find many people who are willing to alibi or who make excuse for a failure. During the early phases of World War II, a most vital decision was made by one of the great leaders of the Allied forces, Viscount Slim of Great Britain. Long after the war, he made this statement concerning this decision made in the battle for Khartoum in 1940: "Like so many generals whose plans have gone wrong, I could find plenty of excuses, but only one reason—myself! When two courses of action were open to me, I had not chosen, as a good commander should, the bolder. I had taken counsel of my fears."

I urge youth to not take counsel of their fears. I hope they will not say, "I'm not smart enough to study chemical engineering; hence, I'll study something less strenuous." "I can't apply myself sufficiently well to study this difficult subject or in this difficult field; hence, I'll choose the easier way." I plead with youth to choose the hard way and to tax their talents, and our Heavenly Father will make them equal to their tasks. If one should stumble, if one should take a course and get less than the A grade desired, I hope such a one will not let it discourage him. I hope that he will rise and try again.

Consider the experience of Admiral Chester W. Nimitz. When he graduated as an ensign in the U.S. Navy, he was given an old, decrepit destroyer as his first command. It was named the Decatur. It was all he could do to put the old destroyer in shape, and on one of its maiden voyages, Ensign Nimitz ran the ship aground. This resulted in a summary court-martial. Fortunately, he was found guilty only of neglect of duty, rather than a more serious offense. Had Chester Nimitz not been made of the stuff he was, that defeat could have ruined his career, but what did he do? He put that defeat behind him and went on to become the commanding admiral of the greatest sea force ever assembled in this world—the Pacific Fleet. He showed one and all that one defeat could not keep a good man down.

What will be my faith? Whom shall I marry? What will be my life's work? I am so grateful that we need not make those decisions without eternal help. Each one of us can have the guidance and direction of Heavenly Father if he strives for it. I would encourage us to learn and memorize the ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. This is a section that is frequently overlooked but that has a lesson for all of us. When we contemplate making a significant decision, may I suggest we go to our Heavenly Father in the manner in which the Prophet Joseph indicated the Lord advised him. The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph in that section: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you, therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong." (D&C 9:7-9.) Such is inspired direction for us in our day.

Recently I had the privilege of returning to Tahiti, to a people whom I dearly love. There I was talking to the mission president about the Tahitian people. They are known as some of the greatest seafaring people in all the world. The president, who spoke French but little English, was trying to describe to me the secret of the success of the Tahitian sea captains. He said, "They're amazing. The weather may be terrible; the vessels may be leaking; there may be no navigational aids except their inner feelings and the stars in the heavens, but they pray and they go!" And he repeated it three times: "They pray and they go; they pray and they go; they pray and they go!" There is a lesson for us in that statement. We need to pray and then we need to act; both are important.

In addition to the ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, in addition to the importance of prayer, I add a third dimension: Follow the prophets of God; and when we follow the prophets, we will be in safe territory. May I illustrate by sharing a most intimate experience from my own life.

I served in the United States Navy toward the end of World War II. I was what is called a seaman, the most elementary rank; then I qualified to be a seaman first class. Then I qualified to be a yeoman third class. The war ended, and I was discharged. I made a decision, however, that if ever I went back into the military, I wanted to be a commissioned officer. If one hasn't been in the military, he may not appreciate the difference between the apprentice seaman and the commissioned officer. You can best learn the difference by experience. Once learned, it's never forgotten. I thought, "No more mess kitchens for me. No more scrubbing of the decks if I can avoid it." Then I worked without respite to qualify for that commission. I joined the United States Naval Reserve; I attended drill every Monday night. I studied long hours, that I might qualify academically. I took every kind of examination you can imagine—mental, physical, emotional. Finally there came from Denver, Colorado, the welcome news: "You have been approved to receive the commission of an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve." I gleefully showed it to Sister Monson and said, "I made it! I made it!" She remarked enthusiastically, "You've worked hard to achieve it!"

But then circumstances changed. I was called to serve as a counselor in my ward bishopric. The bishop's council meeting was on the evening of my drill night. I knew there was an irreconcilable conflict. I didn't have the time to pursue the Naval Reserve and also my bishopric duties. What was I to do? A decision had to be made. Frankly, I prayed about it. I then went to see my former stake president, Elder Harold B. Lee. I sat across the table from him and mentioned to him how much I valued the Navy commission. He said to me, "Here's what you should do, Brother Monson. Write a letter to the Bureau of Naval Affairs and tell them that because of your call as a member of the bishopric, you can't accept the commission in the United States Naval Reserve." He continued, "Then write to the commandant of the Twelfth Naval District in San Francisco and tell him you'd like to be discharged from the reserve." I said, "Oh, Brother Lee, you don't understand the military. Of course they'll decline to give me that commission if I refuse, but the Twelfth Naval District isn't going to let any noncommissioned officer out of its hands with a war brewing in Korea. I could be stuck to go back in the service at a very low rating if I don't accept this commission. Are you sure this is the counsel you want me to receive?" He put his hand on my shoulder and in a fatherly way said, "Brother Monson, have more faith. The military is not for you."

I went to my home and placed a tear-stained commission back into its envelope with its accompanying letter and declined to accept it. I then wrote a letter to the Twelfth Naval District and requested a discharge from the Naval Reserve. My discharge from the Naval Reserve was in the last group processed before the outbreak of the Korean War. My headquarters unit was immediately activated. Just six weeks after being called as a counselor in a bishopric, I was called to be the bishop of my ward. I know my life would have been drastically different had I not followed the counsel of a prophet, had I not prayed about a decision, had I not come to appreciate an important truth: The wisdom of God ofttimes appears as foolishness to men, but the greatest single lesson we can learn in mortality is that when God speaks and a man obeys, that man will always be right.

May our Heavenly Father guide us and bless us in the decisions each of us will be called upon to make. If we want to see the light of heaven, if we desire to feel the inspiration of Almighty God, if we yearn to have that feeling within our bosom that our Heavenly Father is guiding us, let us "stand . . . in holy places, and be not moved." Then the Spirit of our Heavenly Father will be ours.
