Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Personal Promises

Some years ago I received an assignment to visit the stake conferences in Samoa and Australia. In Australia, that vast continent in the South Pacific, drouth is an ever-present problem. The Saints in the stakes and missions had written me through their leadership, asking that I join with them in a mighty prayer to our Heavenly Father that moisture would indeed accompany me on my projected visit.

En route to the conference appointments, I noted with some amusement the names of the stake presidents on whom I was to call. The first was President Percy Rivers; the second was William Waters. I called this to the attention of my traveling companion, only to be reminded by him that his name was Harry Brooks. We had a good laugh over this unusual assortment of names. Upon our arrival at the Sydney International Airport, we again were surprised to learn that the names of some awaiting us were Sister Rainey and Elder Hailstone. As I registered for my motel accommodation, the clerk could not locate the advance reservation. After some difficulty, he responded: "Oh, yes. Here it is. Mr. Thomas S. Monsoon." Moisture had become a common denominator.

You remember years ago in the elementary school arithmetic class the teacher would often speak of common denominators. I recognize today that there is a common denominator, common to you and to me, that binds us together as one. This common denominator is the individual call each one of us has received to fill an assignment in God's kingdom here upon the earth.

Have you ever been guilty of murmuring when an assignment came your way? Or have you accepted each calling with thanksgiving, knowing that our Heavenly Father will bless those whom he calls? I would hope that we would not lose the real vision of our cherished assignments; that we will not become swallowed up by the program alone. It is but a means to a goal. That objective, that eternal goal, is the same spoken of by the Lord and found in the Pearl of Great Price: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Our duty in addition to saving ourselves is to guide others to the celestial kingdom of God.

May we ever remember that the mantle of leadership is not the cloak of comfort, but the robe of responsibility.

As we lead, let us be true shepherds. Most of us in the western part of the United States and Canada can, on occasion, see sheepherders driving their flocks to summer pasture or returning from the mountains as winter approaches. At times the sheepherder is slouched over the saddle, trailing his flock, with a host of anxious dogs yapping at the heels of the sheep and driving them onward in a determined course. How different is this scene from one that I viewed in Munich, Germany, where a true shepherd, with staff in hand, walked in front of his flock. The sheep recognized him as their leader, and indeed their shepherd, and followed him willingly wherever he would lead them.

When we, as leaders, set before others a proper example, they will follow us as sheep follow the true shepherd. Should our assignment be with youth, perhaps a few suggestions would assist us.

First, may we consider the problems we face. Second, may we listen to the pleas of youth. And third, may we promise to be leaders worthy of emulation. The problems facing youth today are more serious than in previous generations. All about us we see a lowering of moral standards. We see, accepted on every hand, the permissive society and all that goes with it. Fractured families likewise contribute to the problems we must meet and solve.

As we note the deterioration in moral standards, we think back to the great classic The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, by Edward Gibbon. He stated the reasons for the dissolution of the great political force that had held the civilized world together for more than five hundred years. The principal reasons included:

That was Rome, fourteen hundred years ago. Does the picture seem to apply to us today? Just recently in one of the leading news magazines there appeared this letter to the editor: "There is no such thing as being immoral vs. being moral. If a person doesn't accept the established morals, he is simply living by his own standards: he is not being immoral."

This gives us a vision of what a rather substantial segment of the population really believes to be true, false though it most certainly is.

Oh that each youth in our charge came from a home presided over by the priesthood of God—a home in which there was family prayer and family home evening. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Some have little or no help from parents.

A young teenage girl, a member of the Church, wrote a touching letter to me. She said:

"Dear Brother Monson: I need counseling and advice now, and I need it from someone holding and honoring the priesthood who is in a position to have insight and give the right counsel.

"When I joined the Church I was engaged to a wonderful young man who had left for Vietnam three months before my baptism. He has since returned, and I spent Christmas vacation with him. Brother Monson, I broke the Word of Wisdom, was guilty of doubting the teachings of the Church, and slept with the boy I love several times. I don't in the least regret or feel ashamed of having shared my love with him, but I truly am ashamed of having taken a taste of rum and Coke. . . ."

This young lady really did need help. Her sense of values had been warped out of all proportion. Could she be representative of many others?

As we listen to the pleas of these young people, as we survey the problems that they encounter, we need more than an accurate diagnosis of the ailment. We require and search for a proper prescription for a lasting cure.

The pathway that will lead us to such a solution will require certain promises on our part as leaders. Will you, with me, commit yourself to the work of the Lord and consider the promises that would enhance your influence in the lives of youth? Let us consider such promises.

First, I promise to be willing. The Lord has declared: "The Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days." (D&C 64:34.)

Through such willing service, we will not be in the position of Shakespeare's Cardinal Wolsey, who, after a life of service to his king, stripped of his power, sadly lamented, "Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my king, he would not in mine age have left me naked to mine enemies."

Second, I promise to be informed. Remember the counsel of the Lord: "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence." (D&C 107:99.)

Third, I promise to be diligent. I will magnify my calling. What does it mean to magnify a calling? It means to build it up in dignity and importance, to make it honorable and commendable in the eyes of all mankind, to enlarge and strengthen it, to let the light of heaven shine through it to the view of other men. And how does one magnify a calling? Simply by performing the service that pertains to it. In short, we magnify our callings by learning what our duties are and then by performing them.

I pause when I think of the words of President John Taylor: "If you do not magnify your calling, God will hold you responsible for those whom you might have saved had you done your duty." Edgar A. Guest gave wise counsel in his poem "True Nobility":

Who does his task from day to day And meets whatever comes his way, Believing God has willed it so, Has found true greatness here below. Who guards his post, no matter where, Believing God must need him there, Although but lowly toil it be, Has risen to nobility. For great and low, there's but one test: 'Tis that each man shall do his best. Who works with all the strength he can Shall never die in debt to man.

Fourth, I promise to be prayerful. "Remember," said the Lord, "the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.) As we develop an appreciation of this great truth, we will come to realize that we affect eternity; we determine destiny. We cannot succeed alone.

Our challenge is to eliminate the weakness of a youth standing alone and to substitute therefor the strength of youth and leaders serving together.

Fifth, I promise to be understanding. Among our youth are some who have transgressed the laws of God, who have been deceived by that evil one, and who seek from us an understanding heart and a guide to the pathway of repentance and exaltation in the kingdom of our Heavenly Father. We, in effect, stand at the crossroads of their lives.

Youth come in all varieties and sizes: short, tall, slim, and stout, lacking in confidence or filled with faith. My prayer is that we will indeed promise to be willing, informed, diligent, prayerful, and understanding; that we will aid each of them, so that together we may stay on that pathway which leads to exaltation in the kingdom of our Father, that as leaders or as teachers, when one day we are privileged to view the glory of our youth, we may say, "I'm glad I helped along the way."
