Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Born of Goodly Parents

As we open the Book of Mormon, we read the salutation, "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents. . . ." What a beautiful message! What an example for you and me if we will but say the same: "I, Tom; I, Jane; I, Scott, having been born of goodly parents." How will we finish that phrase? Nephi went and did what the Lord commanded him to do. What will we do? What will be our plan? What will be our purpose as we respond to that introduction, "I, having been born of goodly parents. . . ."

May I offer three suggestions for our consideration:

How does one find faith? We do not find it by reading about it in a book; we must discover faith for ourselves. President David O. McKay taught: "The greatest battle of life is fought within the silent chambers of your own soul." It is a good thing for us to sit down and commune with ourselves, to come to an understanding of ourselves and decide in that silent moment what our duty is to family, to church, to country, and to our fellowmen.

Little children sometimes provide interesting examples of faith and devotion. I remember that when our family was very small, Sister Monson and I were praying for a particular sister in our ward who was afflicted with cancer. Her name was Margaret Lister. Each night we would kneel by the side of our bed and pray for Sister Lister. On one occasion we invited our little six-year-old boy to offer the prayer. He became a little confused in his child mind and in the prayer said, "Heavenly Father, bless Mother, Father, and Sister Lister, Henny Penny, Turkey Lurkey, and Chicken Licken and all the rest of the animals." It was all that Sister Monson and I could do to remain serious. A strange thing happened. Sister Lister had a remarkable recovery. I'm simple enough to think that her recovery may well have been assisted by the pleading of a first grade student venturing to call upon his Heavenly Father in prayer.

Some time ago, I jotted down from one of our national magazines comments interesting to me that children had prepared. They were entitled "What Children Think of God."

One wrote, "Dear God, I wished on a star two times but nothing happened. Now what? Ann." I suppose some of us do that.

Another one said, "Dear God, If you made the rule for kids to take out the garbage, please change it."

Another voice, "Dear Holy God, Would you make it so that there wouldn't be any more wars and so everyone could vote. Also everybody should have a lot of fun. Nancy."

Another one: "Dear God, Charles my cat got run over and if you made it happen, you have to tell me why. Harvey."

I enjoyed this one: "Dear God, I read your book and I like it." Then he says, "I would like to write a book someday with the same kind of stories. God, where do you get your ideas? Best wishes, Mark."

Where did God get His ideas? Whence came His stories? He didn't read about them; He experienced them, and that's how we find faith. To discover faith, we must experience it.

Let me share with you an item very close to my heart. A friend whom I had known a long while, a robust athlete, an all-star football player, was stricken with a malady that left him paralyzed. His name was Stan Cockrell. The doctors said he would never walk again. I was as crestfallen as was he. Then one day I was swimming at the Deseret Gymnasium. As I powered myself across the pool, suddenly my mind dwelt upon my friend Stan, then a patient at the University Hospital in Salt Lake City, unable to swim, unable to walk. The longer I swam, the more I had the impression and the direction that he needed me. Quickly I left the pool, dressed, and went immediately to the University Hospital. There I found my friend in the depths of despair, ready to abandon everything he held precious. I told him how I happened to be there. I said, "I didn't just come, Stan. The Lord knew you needed a blessing, and He knew that you needed it from one who knew you. He took occasion to impress this upon me while I was swimming with the full use of my body, knowing that you were handicapped with a limited use of your body." A blessing was provided.

The Spirit of the Lord was with us. Day by day, Stan Cockrell grew stronger.

A year later there was a knock at my office door, and in walked my friend Stan, aided by a cane. Here was one of whom it had been said he would never walk again. Then he handed the cane to his son, who was to be set apart for a mission, and walked over to my desk. What a joy! What a moment of thanksgiving! We set his son apart as a missionary to go to the Scotland Glasgow Mission. Then, just a few months ago in the holy temple, witnessing the marriage of his daughter, was my friend Stan Cockrell, standing there without a crutch, without a walker, without a cane. In one sentence he described the feelings of his heart. "Tom," he said, "I never doubted." Think of it: "I never doubted."

President Stephen L Richards taught, "Faith and doubt cannot exist in the same mind at the same time, for one will dispel the other." My plea is that we will find faith by experiencing faith in action. The opportunity is ours. Let us grasp it and retain it.

Now to the second point: learn love. How are we going to learn love? I would hope that most of us have already learned love as it comes from our mothers and fathers. My grandfather was a quiet Scotsman. I learned many lessons from him. As a boy I would frequently seek a nickel from him for an ice cream. We used to call it a Milk Nickel, and that's all it cost. Grandpa would counsel me on the virtue of thrift. On one occasion I bought a dog, a German short-haired pointer. I was so proud of that dog. I paid twenty-five dollars for him, and that was a fortune to me. I was attempting to train the young dog with a leash, teaching him to "heel" as I walked down the street. I made the mistake of walking in front of my grandfather's home, and he saw what I was doing. He called me over, took a look at the dog, then said, "Tom, how much did you give for that dog?" I didn't have the heart to tell him the truth. I gingerly said, "Five dollars." He responded, "You dern fool! You got bit. You paid four dollars and seventy-five cents too much!" I looked at the poor hound and I realized that I had indeed paid too much.

That wasn't the only lesson I learned from Grandpa, nor was receiving the generous offer of a nickel for an ice cream the lesson I best remember. The lesson for which I best remember my grandfather was a lesson wherein he taught me the principle of love. an elderly man from England lived on our street. We called him "Old Bob," but his name was Robert Dick. A widower and impoverished, he lived alone in a small old adobe house. Word came to him that the home was going to be demolished. This was devastating to him. He had nowhere to go; no family to whom he might turn. He walked across the street, sat on the old porch swing with my grandfather, and told him his lament. Then he said to my grandfather, "Mr. Condie, you have an old house next door to your home, and that old house is not occupied. It will take most of what I have, but could I please rent a part of that home?" I was sitting on the swing. I think I was not more than eight or nine years of age, but I was listening as children do. I remember my grandfather taking "Old Bob" by the hand and saying, "Mr. Dick, you move your things into that house of mine next door, and it won't cost you a cent. You can stay there as long as you like. And remember, nobody is ever going to put you out." I was so proud of my grandfather and his generosity as I learned from that conversation a lesson of love.

"Old Bob" lived in that house until the day that he died. Every Sunday afternoon as Mother would serve the Sunday dinner, before we sat down to the table she would prepare a plate, put some wax paper over it, hand it to me, and say, "Take this food down to 'Old Bob' and then hurry back for dinner." I'd hurry down the street to that old house, walk into the darkened living room where the kerosene lantern stood, and hand "Old Bob" the filled plate. He would smile and attempt to offer me a dime, but my mother had told me, "If he offers you money, tell him 'Thank you, the dinner isn't for sale.'" Then he would hand me the plate I had brought the previous Sunday, all washed and polished, and would put his arm around me and say, "Tell your mother 'Thank you.'" As I would hurry back up the street, hungry as a boy can be, I'd run into the house and say to Mother, "'Old Bob' says 'Thank you.'" I didn't know then why Mother's eyes would glisten, and why she would be unusually quiet when I brought to her that message, but I know now—because Mother had learned love. And I, through that experience, learned love.

Point three: choose Christ. Battles are not won in a day. Sometimes they are won only in a lifetime of service and activity.

I recall an officer of the seminary at Olympus High School in Salt Lake City—a young boy by the name of Edward Engh. He was handicapped and was confined to a wheelchair. When our daughter, who was a seminary officer, brought the officers to our home, Ed was present. We had a delightful time with the group that evening. Then this boy, in such a difficult situation, turned to me and said, "Brother Monson, you're on the Church Missionary Committee, aren't you?" I said I was. He said, "Brother Monson, all my life I've wanted to be a missionary. May I have that opportunity?" And as I looked at him, I saw no way. I comforted him in private and said, "Ed, you can be a missionary here at home, but I think it would be difficult for you to be a missionary anywhere else." Then I said, "Have you thought of a stake mission? Would you consider that?"

He was called on a stake mission and gave a fine account of himself. But he wanted to be a full-time missionary; he wanted to serve as other young men did, to have a farewell, to get a new set of scriptures, to go to the Missionary Training Center, and then to arrive in a field of labor. Finally, after about four long years, his day of glory came; and through the kindness of a particular mission president who knew him, and through the kindness of a missionary staff who wanted him, and through the faith of a mother and a father who loved him, and through the courage of a boy who honored father and honored mother and who honored the Lord, Edward Engh received his missionary call to the Canada Vancouver Mission. I'd like to share with you a letter that his mission president wrote to me:

"Dear Elder Monson, I felt impressed to write you regarding the progress of this great elder. Elder Engh has already become a legend in the mission. He has established a standard of faith and dedication in the short time he has been here. He is serving in the mission office as the recorder. He passed off his discussions in record time, and he and his companion have already baptized and lead their district in teaching. The mission work seems to agree with him. He's in good health. We're watching him carefully as to rest and diet, but he has not required any extra attention. He has a great and loving companion. These two elders truly have a Christlike love for one another, which was demonstrated when Elder Engh first arrived and expressed some concern for one of the themes of the mission, 'Lengthen Your Stride.' Elder Engh said to his companion, 'How can I lengthen my stride? I can't even walk!' His companion responded, 'That's okay, Elder Engh, we'll just have to get you some bigger wheels.'

"Elder Engh is a great inspiration to all of us. In a recent conference he told the other missionaries, 'I don't dare complain about my condition, my surroundings, my companion, the rain, or anything else. You see, I prayed night and day to be called on a mission, and the Lord answered my prayer. And now I'm here and I would not do anything to disappoint the Lord.'"

May I suggest how we can find faith, learn love, and choose Christ? When we recognize sin, shun it. When we make a mistake, admit it. When we receive a gift, share it. When we enjoy freedom, protect it. When we have the truth, live it. When we have a duty, do it. Then eternal glory will be ours.

It was Napoleon who said of his troops, "I have always found you on the road to glory." I pray that our Heavenly Father may always find you and me not only on the road to glory, but on the road to eternal life, even the highest degree of glory in the celestial kingdom of our Father.
