Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

The Spirit of Christmas

Christmas, however old, is forever new. The Christmas season can be truly meaningful if we but let it be. One Christmas my little son stood before the fireplace and recited what he thought was a new poem. He said, "Daddy, I've learned a new poem and I'd like to teach it to you. I know you'll like it." The poem he then recited commenced: "'Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house,/Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse." (Clement C. Moore, "A Visit from St. Nicholas.") And on he went. He said, "Isn't that a wonderful poem, Daddy?" I had an opportunity to tell him it was a wonderful poem, because almost everything I associate with Christmas is important to me.

On one occasion I had the privilege of taking my family downtown as Santa Claus made his appearance. It was interesting; crowds gathered. One little girl I particularly noticed had been standing on the curb for what seemed like many minutes, waiting for this great event. Just as Santa Claus was to make his entry, great throngs of people crowded in front of her, and she began to cry.

A six-foot-three man who stood by her asked, "What's the matter, dear?" She said, "I've been waiting to see Santa, and now I can't see him." The man picked her up and placed her on his shoulders, providing her a commanding view. As Santa Claus came by, she waved her little hand toward him, and he smiled and waved back to her and to everyone else in the crowd. The little girl grabbed the hair of that great big fellow and exclaimed, "He saw me! He saw me and smiled at me! I'm so glad it's Christmas!" That little girl had the Christmas spirit.

I thought back on another little child who, under different circumstances, had the Christmas spirit. As a very young elder I went with a companion to the old Primary Children's Hospital on North Temple Street to provide blessings for the sick children. As we entered the door, we noted the Christmas tree with its bright and friendly lights. We saw carefully wrapped packages beneath its outstretched limbs. Then we went through the corridors where tiny boys and girls—some with a bandage upon an arm, some with a cast upon a leg, others with ailments that perhaps could not be cured so readily—each had a smile upon his face.

I walked toward the bedside of one little boy, and he said, "What is your name?" I told him. He said, "Will you give me a blessing?" The blessing was provided; and as we turned to leave his bedside, he said, "Thank you."

We walked a few steps and then I heard his little call: "Brother Monson." I turned. He said, "Merry Christmas to you." And a great smile flashed across his countenance. That boy had the Christmas spirit as did the little girl in downtown Salt Lake City.

This spirit of Christmas is something I would hope each of us would have within his heart and within his life, not only at this particular season but throughout the year.

I once had the privilege of going to Atlanta, Georgia, and seeing the church where Peter Marshall presided. I thought of his declaration and his urging when he spoke to the people and pleaded: "Let us not spend Christmas and let us not observe Christmas, necessarily, but let us keep Christmas in our hearts and in our lives." This would be my plea today, for when we keep the spirit of Christmas we keep the spirit of Christ, because the Christmas spirit is the Christ spirit.

One who had keen insight into the Christmas spirit wrote:

"I am the Christmas Spirit. I enter the home of poverty and cause pale-faced children to open wide their eyes in pleased wonder. I cause the miser to release his clutched hand, thus painting a bright spot upon his soul.

"I cause the aged to remember their youth and to laugh in the glad old way. I bring romance to childhood and brighten dreams woven with magic.

"I cause eager feet to climb dark stairways with filled baskets, leaving behind hearts amazed at the goodness of the world.

"I cause the prodigal to pause in his wild and wasteful way and send to anxious love some little token which releases glad tears, washing away the hard lines of sorrow.

"I enter dark prison cells, causing scarred manhood to remember what might have been and pointing to better days yet to come.

"I enter the still, white home of pain, and there lips that are too weak to speak just tremble in silent, eloquent gratitude.

"In a thousand ways I cause this weary old world to look up into the face of God and for a few minutes forget everything that is small and wretched. You see, I am the Christmas Spirit." (Author Unknown.)

This is the spirit I pray we might have, because when we have the spirit of Christmas we remember Him whose birth we commemorate at this season of the year. We remember that first Christmas day—a day that was prophesied by the prophets of old. You, with me, recall the words of Isaiah, when he said, "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isaiah 7:14.) Again Isaiah declared: "For unto us a child is born, . . . and his name shall be called . . . The Prince of Peace." (Isaiah 9:6.)

On the American continent, the prophets said: "The time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent . . . shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay. . . . And lo, he shall suffer temptations, and pain. . . . And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God." (Mosiah 3:5, 7-8.)

Then came that night of nights when the shepherds were abiding in the fields and the angel of the Lord appeared to them, announcing, "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy. . . . For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." (Luke 2:10-11.) The shepherds went with haste to the manger to pay honor to Christ the Lord. Wise men journeyed from the East to Jerusalem, saying: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him. . . . When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh." (Matthew 2:2, 10-11.)

Since that time, the spirit of giving gifts has been present in the mind of each Christian as he commemorates the Christmas season. I wonder if we might profit today by asking ourselves, "What gift would God have me give to Him or to others at this precious season of the year?"

I feel that I might answer that question and declare in all solemnity that our Heavenly Father would want each one of His children to render unto Him a gift of obedience so that we would actually love the Lord our God with all our hearts, all our minds, and all our strength. Then, I am sure, He would expect us to love our neighbors as ourselves.

I would not be surprised were He to instruct us to give of ourselves and not be selfish, nor greedy, nor contentious, nor quarrelsome, repeating his own words in Third Nephi, when He said, "And there shall be no disputations among you. . . . For verily, verily I say unto you, . . . contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who . . . stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, . . . but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away." (3 Nephi 11:28-30.)

So I would plead with all to rid from our lives any spirit of contention, any spirit wherein we might vie one with another for the spoils of life, but rather that we might cooperatively work with our brethren and with our sisters for the fruits of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I trust that we will not forget at this Christmas season the gratitude that must be within our hearts and that yearns to be expressed. I hope that no one will take his birthright for granted. I hope that youth, particularly, will not forget mother or father, but rather that we might honor our fathers and honor our mothers. What finer Christmas gift could they receive than to know that a son or a daughter was honoring them by honoring God and living the commandments of the gospel of Jesus Christ?

Recently I was in Corpus Christi, Texas. A proud father came forward to me and slipped into my hand a letter from his son serving a mission in Australia. I would like to share this letter with you. It may provide the format whereby you might write a similar letter to your parents as an extra Christmas gift this year. The letter reads:

Dear Mom and Dad,

I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the many wonderful things you have done for me. I want to thank you for listening to the message the elders presented to you when they knocked at your door, and thank you for the way you grasped the gospel and made it the mold around which you shaped your lives and the lives of your children. I love each of you very much.

Thank you for the way you taught me, for the love which you expressed in many ways. Thank you for directing me in the right pathways, for showing me instead of forcing me. I am thankful for your beautiful testimonies and for the guiding love in which you helped me gain mine. I know the gospel is true. My few experiences here have strengthened my testimony. I pray that I might live up to your expectations, and with God's help, I will.

Thank you again, Mom and Dad.

Your loving son,

David

What finer expression could a boy give his parents than the gift of gratitude? I would hope that, in addition to the gift of gratitude that we bestow upon our parents, we remember that our loved ones—our brothers, our sisters, our relatives, our friends, those with whom we mingle and associate—can benefit and be profited if we give of ourselves in helping them to see the truth and helping them around the quicksands of life that would claim them if only those quicksands could. I would hope that we might be able to light a spark in the lives of others and enable them to see their possibilities, rather than the problems that beset them day by day.

I would hope that we would become expert in the field of human relations. Mr. Robert Woodruff, a great American industrialist, went from one end of this country to the other telling us how we might better get along with one another. He developed what he called a "Capsule Course in Human Relations." He taught:

"The five most important words in the English language are these: I am proud of you.

"The four most important words in the English language are these: What is your opinion?

"The three most important words are: If you please.

"The two most important words are: Thank you.

"The least important word of all is: I."

Isn't that the spirit of Christmas, really—to forget self and to think of others? I clipped an item taken from the diary of Mrs. Rebecca Riter, entered December 26, 1847. She describes that first Christmas in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake: "The winter was cold. Christmas came, and the children were hungry. I had brought a peck of wheat across the plains and had hidden it under a pile of wood. I thought I would cook a handful of wheat for the baby. Then I thought how we would need wheat for seed in the spring, so I left it alone."

In our bounteous lives, we may well reflect upon the more meager Christmas seasons of our pioneer ancestors. We might say to ourselves, "But that was yesterday. What about today? Have times changed? Is everyone so well off that he doesn't need the real spirit of Christmas?"

To this I would answer, Times have not changed. The commandments of God are the same. The principles of gratitude and of giving of oneself are the same, because today, like yesterday, there are hearts to gladden and there are lives to cheer and there are blessings to bestow upon our fellowmen.

Some might say, "I am ill-equipped; my talents are so few." Then I would ask them to take a short journey with me—a journey to a hospital in Salt Lake City, the University Hospital, where I had the privilege of being summoned to the side of a man who was in danger of dying. As I walked to the hospital ward, I noted the sign on the doorway: "Intensive Care—Enter only upon permission of the head nurse." I sought the required permission and then went to the bedside of this good man.

The great machines of medical science were by his side, mechanically taking over when his heart would falter. An oxygen mask covered his face. He turned his face toward me, but there was no glimmer of recognition in his eyes, because the man in whose presence I stood was totally blind. Yet, as he heard my voice and thought back on more pleasant times, tears began to stream from those sightless eyes and he asked a blessing from one who held the priesthood of God.

At the conclusion of that blessing I recalled how this man had been blessed with a beautiful voice. While he was not a regular attender at church, he would come—particularly on Mother's Day—and sing that beautiful number, "Mother McCree," and other songs honoring mothers. No one who ever heard him sing left without a greater appreciation for his own mother, resulting in his honoring her and all womanhood. Similarly he would participate in Christmas programs and would sing "O Holy Night." No person who heard him sing this song came away without dedicating his life to better serving the Lord and keeping Christmas, rather than spending Christmas.

The thought came into my heart that here was a man who, in his own humble way, had used the talent God had given him to bring joy and happiness into the lives of others. Multiply his talent (a beautiful voice) with the talents we possess—eyes that see, ears that hear, and hearts that know and feel—and then think where our Christmas opportunity might be this very year. It may come at a time when we least expect it.

This is the spirit of Christmas, the spirit I ask that we carry in our hearts. Let us remember the words of Charles Dickens recalling old Marley's ghost appearing to Ebenezer Scrooge: "Not to know that any Christian spirit working in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness. Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's opportunities misused! Yet such was I! Oh! Such was I!"

And then Marley added: "At this time of the rolling year I suffer most. Why did I walk through crowds of fellow beings with my eyes turned down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which guided the Wise Men to a poor abode! Were there no poor homes to which its light might have conducted me!" ("A Christmas Carol.")

May we learn a lesson from the pen of Dickens and from the words of Jesus Christ. May we lift our eyes heavenward and look upward and outward into the lives of others. May we remember each Christmas season that it is more blessed to give than to receive.

In so doing, the spirit of Christ, which is the spirit of Christmas, will find a place in our hearts and in our lives, and we will feel to say, "This has been the finest Christmas ever."
