Thomas S. Monson, Be Your Best Self ( 1979)

Know How—Tell How—Show How

When Jesus walked and taught among men during the meridian of time, the Sadducees and the Pharisees tried constantly to twist the meaning of His words and the purpose of His teachings. Such was the desire of the inquiring lawyer, who stepped from the crowd and asked Him a question, tempting Him, and saying, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus said unto him, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

If you or I were there, we might then have asked, "Master, how might we best show our love?" Perhaps we would have heard the words, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." (John 14:21.) Or, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.)

Another question: "How might I best show my love for my fellowmen?" And the words of King Benjamin could well apply: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) Service is the best measuring stick of love.

Each of us has many opportunities to serve. We have the privilege of demonstrating how well we love the Lord, our God, and our fellowmen. I fear that at times we look upon our calls to serve as routine, matter of fact, and maybe some even question the inspiration that prompted a particular call. I know that stake presidents and bishops who make such calls live close to God and earnestly pray for direction, realizing that the youth of the Church are certain to be affected thereby.

Well do I remember the inspiration that attended the call to a ward president of Young Men. As a bishopric, my counselors and I knelt and prayed for inspiration in the selection of a new president. We reviewed the names of the priesthood holders, but no name seemed to be the right one. The matter was deferred. The next day I was riding a bus south on Main Street in Salt Lake City; my mind was upon our youth problems. I felt prompted to turn and look out one of the windows of that bus, and there saw a former member of our ward walking in front of the old Post Office Building. His name was Jack, and I thought, "If only Jack still lived in our ward, what an excellent president he would make!" In our next bishopric meeting, I mentioned this experience to my counselors, and one of them replied, "Bishop, did you know that Jack has moved back into the ward?" We went immediately to his home and explained the circumstances pertinent to his call. Of course he accepted and served most capably. As a result of his service there was a special blessing bestowed. He met and fell in love with a counselor in the stake Young Women, and a temple marriage resulted. Should you today ask Jack or Evelyn the greatest decision in their lives, they would reply, "The day Jack accepted an inspired call to serve the Lord."

Such is the inspiration that attends our calls to serve. When this fact is understood, we then desire with all our hearts to serve well, that joy may attend our efforts and success crown our labors.

To help us achieve this goal, I have chosen to describe three experts who can assist me. They are men of sound judgment, men of experience, men who have proved themselves successful in youth leadership. May I present the How brothers: Know How, Tell How, and Show How. These brothers are somewhat like Siamese triplets, in that they are inseparable from one another, but more importantly, they are indispensable to us.

First, may I introduce Know How, since he will help us to obtain a proper foundation and background for our assignments. The expression "Knowledge is power" is attributed to Francis Bacon, but it had its origin long before his time, in the saying of Solomon that "a wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength." (Proverbs 24:5.)

Do we have a knowledge of our particular assignments? Do we know what is expected of us? Do we really know those who serve under our direction, that we might provide guidance and counsel for them? But above and beyond this knowledge, do we know the gospel? "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

Such knowledge will dispel that hidden and insidious enemy who lurks within and limits our capacity, destroys our initiative, and strangles our effectiveness. This enemy of whom I speak is fear: a fear to wholeheartedly accept a calling; a fear to provide direction to others; a fear to lead, to motivate, to inspire. In His wisdom, the Lord provided a formula whereby we might overcome the archvillain of fear. He instructed: "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.)

May I now formally introduce to you another of the How brothers, Tell How. He always follows his brother Know How. This way his message finds greater acceptance. To have knowledge and to know and understand an objective is one thing, but it is another matter altogether to inspire others with this same knowledge and understanding. To properly communicate to others our ideas, our hopes, and our goals requires skill and teamwork. No one serves the Lord alone. No assignment is an island by itself. The Lord's organization provides the Lord's help.

Our instructions are best understood and followed when we ourselves know where we are going. In an Eastern school where leadership was confused and stumbling, a thoughtful youth lamented: "We're asked to follow our leaders, but they don't know where they are going, or how to get there." When we know our goals and enthusiastically tell our co-workers where we are expected to go, what we are expected to do, and when and how we are expected to do it, the response is spontaneous. The apostle Peter emphasized effective communications when he urged, "Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you." (1 Peter 3:15.)

A number of years ago when a very prominent national figure was defeated for a high public office, he said, "I did not communicate effectively." This has been the experience of large numbers of unsuccessful parents, teachers, and youth. Programs can be frustrated, organizations weakened, even eternal lives lost when leaders in the Church do not get their messages over to those for whom they have responsibility. Just as we need Know How, we cannot do without Tell How.

May I now present our final How brother, Show How. He demonstrates his effectiveness wherever he happens to be. "Come follow me" continues as the most persuasive leadership phrase ever given. When the Lord gave this invitation to Peter, to Phillip, and to the Levite at receipt of customs, each followed. They knew and were yet to learn even more convincingly that Jesus, their leader, asked no sacrifice, demanded no service, required no effort beyond that which He Himself so willingly gave. He cautioned all of us in leadership positions that we are presiding servants and not presiding masters. Remember, when we as leaders serve, others will serve. When we tithe, others tithe. When we comply with God's laws, others do likewise.

Will you take the How brothers with you in your assignment? Know How will dispel fear. Tell How will instill confidence. Show How will inspire others to follow. Their teachings were demonstrated when Gideon of old faced his most crucial test. You will recall that Gideon and his followers came upon an overwhelmingly superior force of Midianites and Amalekites. The enemy lay in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude, and their camels without number as the sand by the seaside for multitude. Gideon needed knowledge to extricate himself from this frightful situation.

To his amazement, the Lord said unto him: "The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me. Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand."

Again the Lord ruled that Gideon had too many followers, and instructed him to take them to water to observe the manner in which they should drink of the water. Those who lapped the water were placed in one group, and those who bowed down upon their knees to drink were placed in another. The Lord said unto Gideon, "By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people go every man unto his place."

A battle plan was provided. The force was to be divided into three companies. Trumpets were to be taken in the right hand and a pitcher containing a lamp within the other hand. The Know How had been provided. Now Gideon supplied the Tell How. He said, "When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon." He then said in effect, "Follow me." His exact words were, "As I do, so shall ye do." Show How was now an integral part of his leadership. At the leader's signal, the host of Gideon did blow on the trumpets and did break the pitchers and did shout, "The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon." The scripture records the outcome of this decisive battle: "And they stood every man in his place," and the battle was won. (Judges 7:2-21.)

As we stand and serve in our appointed places, eternal victory may be ours and theirs whom we have been privileged to lead.
