R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

INTRODUCTION The Church and Asia

At the end of the twentieth century, Asia not only poses a significant challenge to fulfilling the Lord's charge to take the restored gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, but also offers great opportunities for spreading the gospel in a vast area extending from Karachi, Pakistan, to Tokyo, Japan. The inhabitants of China, India, Pakistan, Japan, Indonesia, and South Korea number more than three billion people. For The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the magnitude of bearing witness in these lands and in the rest of Asia—comprising 56 percent of the world's population all told—is staggering.

Asia is the seat of many great ancient cultures and religions. The world's five greatest religions were born there, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Asia is also the oldest and greatest center of Christian missionary activity. Those of us who are steeped in Western tradition are surprised to learn that during the first few centuries of Christianity, the most successful dissemination of the gospel was to the East, not to the West. The Apostle Thomas evidently took the gospel to India, and by the third century a community of Syrian Christians was established along India's Malabar Coast. During the seventh century, Nestorian Christians established a thriving church in China. Since the age of discovery, Roman Catholic and, later, Protestant missions covered most of the lands of Asia. Latter-day Saints owe gratitude to the valiant men and women who have translated the Holy Bible and who have taken their versions of Christianity as well as literacy and medical and social services to many of Asia's peoples.

Asia has been the least fertile (with the exception of the Muslim areas) of all the major Christian missionary fields of the world. Africa, Europe, the Americas, and Oceania have all been more productive of Christian converts. Although the foregoing areas are all nominally Christian, in all of Asia only the Philippine Islands (more than 90 percent Christian) is a Christian nation. The other somewhat successful areas of Christian evangelization are South Korea (35 percent Christian), Indonesia (10-12 percent Christian), Taiwan (5 percent Christian), and Vietnam (9.8 percent Christian). Korea, Indonesia, and the Philippines, the three most fruitful areas of Christian success, were never fully converted to the so-called higher religions—Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism—before Christian missionaries arrived there. Ten percent of the Korean people remain Shamanists (followers of diviners), but a much higher percentage are influenced by such thinking. In Indonesia the major pockets of Christian success have occurred where the people were still animists. Because the Roman Catholic Spanish subjugated the Philippines before Islam spread far into that land, most Filipinos moved directly from tribal religions to Catholicism. On the other hand, the people in lands where the great religions hold sway have not easily converted to Christianity. In China before 1949, there were more than four million Christians, but they totaled only 0.7 percent of the population. Between 1.4 and 2.5 percent of the Japanese, 1 percent of the Thais, and 2.61 percent of the Indian people are Christian today. The established higher religions of Asia have not easily yielded to Christianity in general nor to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^1]

The history of the Latter-day Saints in Asia relates primarily to the post—World War II era. Although the Latter-day Saints established missions in South and Southeast Asia in the 1850s and the Japanese Mission from 1901 to 1924, circumstances were not such that the Church could succeed during the prewar period. However, since 1945 Asia has changed in many ways. Colonialism has ended, and new nations have arisen that provide religious freedom. Japan's defeat created for a time a new and healthy religious environment. New constitutions and governmental systems have made the evangelization of the Asian world much more possible than in former times. Improved economic circumstances have helped alleviate suffering in some areas, and improved literacy rates have placed more people within reach of the gospel message. Although considerable economic and political strife has followed each great war, a positive result has been the planting of the restored gospel by LDS servicemen. In addition, since the 1960s the Church has grown large enough and financially capable enough to support a much greater missionary program than ever before.

Some have asked, Why take the restored gospel to Asia? This question has an odd ring in light of the Savior's commission in Matt. 28:19 to take the gospel to all nations of the earth. Moreover, President Gordon B. Hinckley has said, "These [Asian] people are as entitled to the gospel as any on this earth." [^2] But three or four decades ago it was not so unusual to hear such questions raised. President Joseph Fielding Smith answered this query by referring to Jacob, chapter 5, in the Book of Mormon. Using that scripture, he explained that the House of Israel is spread throughout the earth and that in the final period of the world's history descendants of Israel must be gathered into the Lord's church from the far corners of his vineyard—including Asia. [^3]

The position of the Church regarding the brotherhood of man is clear. All members of the human family are the spiritual offspring of God, our Heavenly Father. All humankind is born with innate goodness (the light of Christ) and the ability to grow spiritually and intellectually. Heavenly Father has graced all peoples with religious and philosophical teachers who have improved the human condition and raised the level of righteousness among the nations. Although there is much within the broad realm of religion that has not been uplifting or enriching, there is much good in the major religions of the world. The world is filled with good people. The motivation of the Latter-day Saints has been to help make them better and to provide ordinances and an order in people's lives that will lead them back into the presence of their Heavenly Father.

Missionary work is and always has been an incredibly brave and bold endeavor. To invite people to change their lives can be disruptive and painful. Many Christian missionary groups have stopped using the word convert because they believe it implies arrogance and superiority on the part of the missionary. Latter-day Saints, however, view the matter differently. Conversion implies acceptance of the life and teachings of Jesus Christ and the blessings of following him. What others may call arrogance, Latter-day Saints consider humble witness of the saving truth, the fulfillment of Christ's commandment to take the gospel to all the world.

Mormon missionaries usually have not worried much about whether their devotion, earnestness, and confidence in their position may be misperceived as arrogance. Rather, they have simply moved forward with the assumption that they are right, that their message is the saving truth, always expecting new members of the Church to leave their pasts behind, to join with a new group of associates whom they usually hardly know, and to literally become a new person with a new life in Christ. Often the members of the new group are themselves relatively new to the Church and unprepared (except for their shared convictions of the truth) to help integrate other new members. Even so, the Church grows and new members hold on because they feel the same convictions the missionaries felt and they know they must continue faithful and help build up the Church. Because of their faith and assurances that the restored gospel is true and that they are engaged in a supernally important work, new converts weather whatever personal and social storms their convictions bring.

Most Latter-day Saint missionaries are young and inexperienced and know relatively little about the people they have been sent to teach. As a result, they may have difficulty distinguishing between the principles and practices of the restored gospel and their own native cultures and preferences. American missionaries especially have been prone to forward—albeit innocently and unwittingly—their own social customs in the name of Mormonism. The miracle is that despite such obstacles, cultural and otherwise, the Church does grow and create groups, branches, and wards that fill converts' lives with meaning, direction, joy, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Since 1830, when Joseph Smith's brother Samuel placed copies of the Book of Mormon in his bag and set out to spread the message of the Restoration, the methods used to teach the gospel have been many and varied. Until the post—World War II era, there was not a unified system for teaching the gospel to investigators of the Church. Richard Lloyd Anderson and Reed Bankhead devised the first systematic, sequential method of explaining gospel concepts and moving contacts toward baptism. In 1960 the Church put forward the first unified plan to be used in missions worldwide. In Asia the use of the various unified plans has been a help and a hindrance. The various cultural and religious traditions have suggested the need for a variety of approaches to begin the teaching process on common ground, but few adaptations have been made in an effort to suit teaching methods to the circumstances of each nation. Perhaps as years pass, further adaptations will be made in continued recognition of the fact that approaches based on common Christian understandings are not ipso facto appropriate for people of all cultures, languages, and religious persuasions.

One of the most remarkable facts regarding Mormon missions in Asia is that Church leaders saw fit to send missionaries there at such an early date. Missionaries were sent from England to India in 1851, and from Salt Lake City to India, Siam, and Hong Kong in 1852. At that time the Church was very small (total membership in 1854 was 68,429). Between 1850 and 1854 the Brethren set apart 322 missionaries to serve in thirteen missions that included 859 mission branches. A high percentage of the Church's human resources were expended on missionary work. When it is remembered who these early missionaries were—mostly married men whose wives and children remained at home to continue the labor of subduing the wilderness—the meaning of missionary work to the Church takes on gigantic proportions. Sending missionaries to the British Isles and Europe in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s was a demanding proposition. Sending missionaries to India, Burma, Ceylon, Siam, and China at that time is difficult to imagine.

India in the 1850s was under British control, but life there at that time was difficult, especially for men who traveled without purse or scrip. China in the 1850s was embroiled in a civil war that ultimately took the lives of twenty million people. A decade before, in 1842, the British had forced the rulers of the Qing (Ch'ing) dynasty to open five ports to foreign trade. Protestant missionaries began entering Chinese ports, but by 1853, when the first LDS missionaries to China arrived, Hong Kong, the only available port, was not hospitable to men in their financial condition.

In 1853 Japan was still a closed country. Not until 1854 did Commodore Matthew C. Perry of the United States force open Japan to normal intercourse with the Western world. Although Protestant missionaries entered Japan in 1859, posters around the country in 1872 still proclaimed Christianity to be illegal. After that time, conditions became more favorable for foreign missionary work, but the Church's decision to enter Japan in 1901 was still quite early considering the resources of the Church and the religious situation in that country. By 1901 Church membership had reached 292,931, with members living in 50 stakes, 577 wards and 21 missions. There were 518 missionaries serving worldwide.

Considering where the Church stood in relation to Asia in 1901, or better, in 1945, its growth in that part of the world has been wonderful—a miracle. Our hindsight is sometimes better than our understanding of the present, and it is certainly better than our ability to see into the future. The history of the Church has been a steady process of expansion as its manpower resources have grown. The 322 missionaries of the early 1850s have now expanded to more than fifty thousand. The Church's ability to cover the earth with the message of the Restoration is daily becoming greater. Large population segments of the world remain virtually untouched—1.2 billion Chinese, 975 million Indians, a billion Muslims, and so on—but as the Church continues to grow, its power to fulfill the Lord's commission to carry the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people will be fulfilled. This study seeks to historically document the efforts of the Church to carry the word of the restored gospel to Asia from 1851 until 1996.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, 4:72.
[^2] For a more complete study of the India Mission, see my "A History of the Missionary Activities of the Church . . . in India, 1849-1856" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1964); and my "The Latter-day Saint Mission to India," BYU Studies 12 (spring 1972): 262-78.
[^3] See Benjamin Richey to George A. Smith, 2 December 1865, Historical Department, Archives Division, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City; hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives. See also Andrew Jenson, "Manuscript History of the East India Mission," LDS Church Archives.
