R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

EARLY ASIAN MISSIONS 1851-1856

The 1850s Missions to India, Burma, Siam, and China

More than seven decades ago, Elder Brigham H. Roberts, a well-known Latter-day Saint Church authority and historian, said concerning the LDS missionaries to India that "there is nothing more heroic in our Church annals than the labors and sufferings of these brethren of the mission to India." [^1] Considering the times in which Roberts lived and the knowledge he had of the trials and sufferings of the early members of the Church, this statement takes on great proportions. [^2]

The mission to India began not in Utah, where Brigham Young had established the Saints, but in England. The need for missionaries in India was recognized when two persons in India, Private Thomas Metcalf of the British Army and William A. Sheppard of Calcutta, wrote asking for tracts, literature, and other information about the Church. Concurrent with these requests came word concerning missionary efforts of two sailors who, after being baptized in England on January 27, 1849, had undertaken a voyage that terminated at Calcutta, India. There they waited while their ship received needed repairs. These men, George Barber and Benjamin Richey, were the first known members of the Church to teach the restored gospel on Indian soil. While they were in Calcutta, they became acquainted with a Protestant group known as the Plymouth Brethren. Barber and Richey did their best to explain Mormonism and received a warm response from several members of the congregation. These sailors were not well-informed regarding doctrines of the Church, nor did they hold priesthood authority; for this reason, when they arrived back in England they asked Church authorities there to send someone to baptize several of the Plymouth Brethren. [^3]

In response, Elder Joseph Richards was ordained, set apart, and sent to Calcutta by G. B. Wallace, a Church authority in England. Richards arrived at Calcutta in June 1851. He did not stay there long on this first visit, however, because he had obtained passage under contract as a sail maker and could not find a replacement when the ship sailed back to England. But while there he baptized the first Mormon converts of India, ordained several men to the priesthood, and established the "Wanderer's Branch." [^4]

More than six months later, on December 25, 1851, Elder William Willes, Richards's replacement, arrived in Calcutta. He had been called by Lorenzo Snow, president of the Italian Mission, who felt it his prerogative to include India in his area of authority. [^5] Willes was called especially to go to Calcutta. Elder Snow sent another elder, Hugh Findlay, to Bombay at the same time.

Willes found only six members of the Church in Calcutta, and they were without leadership. Richards had returned to London, and Maurice White, who had been ordained an elder and set apart as branch president in Calcutta only a week after his baptism, had also departed for England with the intention of learning more about doctrines and operations of the Church. Willes soon organized the group and gave the male members responsibilities such as that of secretary, treasurer, and book agent. Plans were made to publish a tract in the Bengali and Hindustani languages. Within a few days after his arrival, Willes was informed by James Patric Meik, one of the first converts, that he intended to build a lecture hall on land he had leased for the Church. By the time Elder Willes had been in India for two weeks, he had lectured several times concerning the gospel, and he was sure that he would have success. He was elated by a report from a native Indian woman named Anna, who had been baptized by Maurice White, to the effect that a whole church of Indian Episcopalian Christians would desire baptism just as soon as matters could "be arranged in relation to their social position, etc." [^6]

Matthew McCune and his family were among the first converts to the Church in India in 1851. He preached the restored gospel in Calcutta and in Burma while serving in the military. He immigrated to Utah in the 1850s. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

In his first letter home, Willes wrote: "Although I am writing in this cool, businesslike strain, my heart is abounding with grateful emotions of thanksgiving that he has made me and my brethren the instruments in His hands for spreading such glorious tidings in a land filled with 'darkness, selfishness and cruel habitations.'" [^7]

January, February, and March 1852 brought continued success. Willes had obtained the services of an Indian who had set to work translating Ancient Gospel Restored, a tract by Lorenzo Snow. Willes was also presenting a series of twenty lectures that were well attended. The number of people baptized continued to mount, and opposition to his message was minimal. By March 24 there were twelve European and twenty Indian members. On April 6 Willes baptized eleven local men who had come from a distant village. Three of these men were soon ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood. [^8]

During April some opposition began to arise from the Protestant ministers and missionaries in Calcutta. These men told the new members of the Church that they would become "Muslims" and "be obliged to have many wives, etc., and that Joe Smith bought three hundred thousand Mormons with the Gold that he found in California." But even with such rumors, by the beginning of May 1852 Church membership in and around Calcutta had increased to 150, with 3 elders, 8 priests, 9 teachers, 8 deacons, and 122 lay members. By adding to that number children belonging to the baptized families, there were more than 300 Indian Saints of all sizes, colors, and languages. On the previous Christmas (1851) there were only six members. [^9] By mid-May the Church had grown by another 39 members. The total membership amounted to 189, of whom 170 were ryots, or native farmers.

Spreading the message beyond Calcutta was physically difficult. Willes reported that when he left the confines of the city, the people were "scattered over an immense district of ploughed fields and very bad or no regular roads." [^10] He had no knowledge of Indian social patterns, no missionary plan to follow, and the climate was very difficult to adjust to.

In August 1852 Joseph Richards returned to Calcutta, having sailed all the way around the Cape of Good Hope to England and back. A few days later, Richards baptized William Sheppard and his son. Sheppard, it will be remembered, had been one of those who originally inquired for information regarding Mormonism. Following these baptisms, there was little activity for the next two months. The monsoon rains continued heavy until early November, and by that time, even though attendance at meetings was picking up, Willes and Richards had decided to set out for the Punjab, a distance of about one thousand miles northwest of Calcutta. They sustained James Patric Meik as branch president in Calcutta and set out on their journey. [^11]

What followed over the next number of months was one of the great missionary journeys of Church history. Willes and Richards traveled more than 620 miles on foot before they became convinced that it would be more economical to travel by ox-drawn wagon. Traveling the ancient route called the Grand Trunk Road, they visited many of the sacred places of the Hindu religion, as well as the famed Taj Mahal. As they made their way up the Ganges River basin, they preached and baptized a number of people.

By the time they reached Agra (approximately eight hundred miles from Calcutta), they had baptized sixteen people. At this point, however, Richards's health began to fail him and he decided that he should not continue on to the Punjab. Accordingly, he made his way back toward Calcutta. But Willes decided to go on alone. From Agra he went to a village called Dugshai and from there to Simla, which is directly north of New Delhi. (Dugshai and Simla are what the British called "hill towns," high in the Himalayan foothills.) Willes also traveled in the Punjab, but his success there was very limited. He reported that the military establishments were almost all "closed-up" against him; he believed that the chaplains had carefully written to one another warning of his coming. [^12]

HUGH FINDLAY'S WORK IN BOMBAY

Willes and Richards were not the only LDS missionaries working in India. Hugh Findlay had by this time, late 1852 and early 1853, been in Bombay for more than a year. He did not have the success that Willes enjoyed, for he had been met almost from the day of his arrival by opposition from the established Protestant sects, the press, and military officers and chaplains. [^13] Thus it was necessary from the beginning that Findlay publicly defend his position in Bombay.

It took him almost six months to baptize his first six converts. He was not allowed in any military areas in Bombay and was forbidden to preach to military personnel. Because he was not making much headway in Bombay, Findlay decided to move to what he hoped would be a more fruitful location. He selected Poona, about ninety miles from Bombay, and went there. Again he was greeted by a hostile press and by military officers who were at first not willing to let him preach. Permission to proselytize was finally given because the officer in charge felt that "the less these people are opposed the less harm they would do." [^14]

Several kinds of trouble occurred, mostly because of a rumor that the Mormons would buy the "drafts" of the British soldiers and send them to California; another problem had to do with an anti-Mormon tract that was widely distributed. Notwithstanding these difficulties, Elder Findlay was successful in organizing a branch of twelve members in Poona by mid-September 1852. They were a "little company . . . of a mixed birth, European, Eurasian, and native." [^15]

In October, Findlay was directed to leave the military cantonment. By that time it was evident to the officer in charge that Findlay was not a temporary visitor. Findlay found new quarters, which he described in these words: "This house is a little uncouth to the eye, bearing a resemblance to an English store-room, or a Bombay go-down, having a door, six feet by six feet at each end, and two windows, four by six feet, on each side, with iron bars, and the light of day is an apology for glass, indeed having such an edifice for bedroom, parlour, and sanctuary, it required considerable faith to convince one's self that imprisonment is not added to banishment. But we 'stoop to conquer,' and are thankful to the Lord for it." [^16]

Findlay held Church meetings in this place in addition to living there. He did have plans to build a chapel directly across the street, though, and saw its completion several months later.

After his expulsion from the cantonments, Findlay turned more and more to the local population. He studied the Maratha language and spent a great deal of time with a group of Brahmin intellectuals who made it a practice to discuss religion with missionaries.

MISSIONARIES FROM UTAH CALLED TO INDIA, SIAM, AND CHINA

During the time when Willes and Richards were preaching in northern India and Findlay was working in Bombay and Poona, events were taking place in Utah that were of great importance to the India Mission as well as to other areas considered in this book. On August 28 and 29, 1852, President Brigham Young called a special conference of the Church. This meeting, held specifically for the purpose of calling and sending out 108 missionaries, was an extra meeting in the Church's yearly schedule of conferences. It was held early (before the usual time in October) so that the missionaries could reach their fields with greater ease before winter. Although this was primarily a missionary conference, it is remembered today because on August 29, 1852, the Church officially announced the doctrine of plural marriage. [^17]

Nine of the 108 missionaries chosen were to go to Calcutta, India; four were to go to Siam (Thailand); and four were selected to go to Hong Kong, China.

The next two months found the newly called missionaries busy in preparation. All of the missionaries met several times with Church leaders and were given instructions and strengthened in their testimonies. They also discussed potential problems relating to their missions and made several decisions, such as to travel in wagons, with each group carrying its own food, bedding, and equipment.

On October 16, the missionaries were set apart and given priesthood blessings. They reported that the Spirit of the Lord was strongly felt that day and during the next few days. The presiding authorities of the Church gave many priesthood blessings. [^18]

The group that left Salt Lake Valley during those autumn days of late October consisted of thirty-eight missionaries called to Calcutta, Siam, China, the Sandwich Islands, and Australia. All of the groups gathered at Peteetnot Creek (Payson, Utah) on October 24 and organized the camp. Hosea Stout, a missionary bound for China, was made captain; Nathanial Vary Jones, who was headed for India, was made chaplain; Burr Frost, who was to serve in Australia, was appointed sergeant of the guard; and Amos Milton Musser, en route to India, was clerk for the company. As they renewed their journey, the course they followed lay southwestward, roughly over the present U.S. Interstate 15 highway. They traveled by the iron mines near Cedar City, Utah, through Mountain Meadows, and on down the steep gully to Santa Clara Creek. On November 12 they were joined by a group of emigrants going to California to dig gold. The next three days they followed the Rio Virgin and then began the ascent to the top of Mormon Mesa, in present-day Nevada. They were a full day getting the fourteen wagons up the last steep incline with "twenty men on the lead and four horses behind them, with two men to roll the hind wheels. A slight accident might precipitate wagons and animals into the abyss on either side of the backbone on which part of the ascent was made. Three cheers were given as the last wagon reached the summit of the precipice in safety." [^19]

Ahead of them now lay the fifty-two-mile stretch to Las Vegas. It was during this section of the trip that Nathaniel V. Jones became very ill. He did not respond to any of the usual remedies or the blessing of the elders, so it was necessary for the company to lay over at Las Vegas in hope of his recovery. In two days he improved enough for the group to resume movement. Three days after leaving Las Vegas, the company reached Cajon Pass. Because the men and animals were exhausted, their food was gone, and snow had begun to fall, it was a task to make it across the mountain; but by pushing on they were able to get to San Bernardino, California, in the evening of December 3, 1852. [^20]

The elders were happy to see once again a well-organized community of Saints. San Bernardino was a thriving community surrounded by many acres of rich and fertile farmland. Church members there were very kind to the missionaries; they took them into their homes, fed them, and gave them every comfort they could provide. For twelve days the group rested and wrote letters home. They also sold their wagons, horses and mules, and all else that was not needed for the journeys that lay ahead. The members in San Bernardino were also very generous in giving money to the missionaries. On December 17 the company moved on toward Los Angeles and San Pedro, California, where they would embark for San Francisco and hence to their various fields of labor.

The group stayed a night in Los Angeles and were shocked by the drinking, vulgar language, and debauchery of the lower element. [^21] They then moved on to San Pedro, where they arrived on the twenty-second and waited for passage to San Francisco. On December 29 fares were arranged at $17.60 per person (a full $37.50 less than the usual fares on steam packets), and the brig Fremont sailed for San Francisco on January 13. Musser and several others were able to work on board to help defray expenses, for even at such low fares the cost for the group was around $700. [^22]

Because of illness, Walter Thompson, one of the elders bound for Hong Kong, did not go on to San Francisco from southern California. He had been sick on the trip to San Bernardino and on to San Pedro, and because he did not improve, he returned home to the Salt Lake Valley. [^23]

The elders landed in San Francisco on January 9, 1853. Their next problem was raising funds to pay for their passage to the various missions. Musser listed the approximate cost for transportation to the different missions as follows:

Australian Mission$1,250Calcutta$1,800Sandwich Islands$1,000China$1,000Siam$1,200Total$6,250

After Church authorities consulted with leaders of the San Francisco Branch, it was decided that because of especially high recent demands on the Church it would be well if the missionaries tried to solicit funds from outside the Church. So for three weeks the elders attempted to collect funds, but they were able to gather only $150 from nonmembers. The remainder of the needed money was donated by T.S. Williams, who gave $500, and by John M. Horner, a wealthy member who donated the difference, which must have been between $5,000 and $6,000. [^24]

Amos Milton Musser served as mission clerk while in India. His journals provide a fine record of the East India Mission from 1853 to 1855. Like several of his companions, Musser circumnavigated the globe "without purse or scrip." (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

On January 22 the missionaries received their passports from Washington and were free to secure passage to their various destinations. Only one week later, on January 29, 1853, the thirteen men who were bound for India and Siam embarked from San Francisco on a clipper ship called the Monsoon. They arrived at Calcutta on April 25, having covered 10,976 miles in eighty-six days. [^25]

The elders were very excited about their arrival and were in good health and spirits. For a number of days they had intensified their study of the gospel and missionary techniques. Every day they held classes in which Richard Ballantyne and Chauncy W. West lectured on English grammar, and the elders gave practice sermons to each other and freely criticized what they heard.

As they traveled up the Hooghly River, they were struck by the beauty of the scenery. Musser recorded these words: "April 25 [the actual date was April 26] A.M. We arrived opposite Ft. William about 6 o'clock. The beauty of scenery surpasses anything I ever before beheld on both sides of the river as we passed along its shores. About noon we took a customs house officer aboard, the tide has been in our favor. . . . My feelings while beholding the beautiful scenes as we passed along the muddy channel of the Hooghly, which presented themselves as I stated before is undescribable." [^26]

The elders were met at the docks by twelve-year-old Henry Frederick McCune, son of Matthew and Sarah McCune and the only male member of the Church in Calcutta at that time. With him were servants to carry the missionaries' luggage. Young McCune led the newly arrived group to his parents' forty-room bungalow, where each man was assigned a room and servant. Such a comfortable beginning was not a portent of easy times to come. Matthew McCune was in Burma on a military assignment, and Elders Willes and Richards were still up-country. The branch was not in good condition: "of about 180 members, 170 natives, there were but 6 or 8 left." [^27] The missionaries were pleased, however, to discover that James Patric Meik had built a chapel, undoubtedly the first LDS chapel in all of Asia. At least they had a place to preach.

On April 29 the elders and local members held a conference, but only four of those present were not missionaries. The pertinent business at hand was to decide who would lead the mission and who would be assigned to the various parts of India. Nathaniel V. Jones was selected as president of the mission and president of the Calcutta Branch. The remaining elders were assigned as follows: Amos Milton Musser was to remain in Calcutta; Truman Leonard and Samuel Amos Woolley were to go to Chinsura, a city 30 miles north of Calcutta; William Fotheringham and William F. Carter were assigned to Dinapore, 290 miles northwest from Calcutta; and Richard Ballantyne, Robert Skelton, and Robert Owens were to sail south to Madras. The four who had been sent to Siam found they could not obtain passage during the next few months. As a result, they agreed that Elam Luddington and Levi Savage should stay in Calcutta and look for a way to Burma and then to Siam, and that Chauncy Walker West and Benjamin F. Dewey were to go to Ceylon (Sri Lanka) until fall, when they expected to obtain passage. They had originally planned to go by way of Burma, but that way was not open because of the Second Anglo-Burmese War. Even in the best of times, passage from Burma to Siam was extremely difficult.

The days and weeks that followed were filled with activity. The elders bound for Madras, Ceylon, and Burma all found passage and sailed by June 20. All six of these elders had experiences at sea that involved considerable danger. Because of a severe storm, the first attempted voyage of Elders Luddington and Savage to Burma nearly took the lives of all on board. Musser described the return of the elders to Calcutta in this way: "While at dinner Brother Luddington came in in an awful predicament, close [sic] dirty, hat reduced to 2/3 the size, etc., etc. The ship they started to Rangoon in, three days after they left here she sprung a leak and they have been bailing and pumping water night and day ever since. They throwed all their cargo overboard and gave themselves up to the Lord and resigned themselves for a watery grave. They throwed all of the stores overboard, but the Lord delivered them safe." [^28]

Ballantyne and Skelton, who had found it necessary to go to Madras without Robert Owens, were caught in the same storm, and their ship nearly sank. In all, the elders experienced six storms and other mishaps at sea that were severe enough to cause them to fear for their lives. Fortunately, however, no missionaries were lost at sea.

When the missionaries separated and went to their various areas of labor, the East India Mission practically became several unconnected missions. For one thing, communications between missionaries were very inadequate. Moreover, travel was slow and relatively expensive. Because of these problems India, Burma, and Siam were not a well-integrated mission in the sense that England and other LDS missions were at that time.

Truman Leonard and Samuel A. Woolley established themselves at Chinsura, where they found Joseph Richards. He had assumed leadership of the Chinsura Saints when he returned from his journey toward the Punjab. By this time he was in good health and had decided to go to Calcutta and from there to Salt Lake Valley. He sailed from Calcutta, bound for California and Utah, on June 18, 1853. [^29] Leonard and Woolley worked in Chinsura for three months but did not baptize anyone.

William Fotheringham and William F. Carter traveled to Dinapore and worked there and round about for a short time before returning to Calcutta on June 5. Carter became very ill, and it was decided that in order to preserve his life he should be released from his call and sent home. On July 7 he boarded the John Gilpin and sailed for Boston. After Carter left, Fotheringham worked in Calcutta with Elders Jones, Musser, and Owens for the next month and a half.

During July and August several letters arrived in Calcutta that had been sent from William Willes, who was working near Delhi. In each letter he asked for a companion and finally sent twenty-five rupees (perhaps the equivalent to twenty-five dollars) to assist with any travel expenses for another elder. By August 19, 1853, Elders Fotheringham and Woolley had both decided to join Willes. A few days later they took places on a "Government Bullock Train" and traveled day and night for almost a month. When they arrived at Sikandarabad, they left the train and traveled a little distance to meet Willes at Belespore. By this time Willes was quite discouraged, but he felt there was still some hope for the people of that region. He decided, however, after spending only a brief time with Woolley and Fotheringham, that he would return to Calcutta. After discussing the work in that area with Willes, the two men went to Meerut (thirty-eight miles northeast of Delhi) and Willes returned to Calcutta. [^30]

Meerut had the largest number of Europeans in the area of the Upper Provinces, with 250 civilians, many officers, and two or three regiments. [^31] But even though there seemed to be a large number of potential converts, the elders met with poor success. The commanding officer of the cantonment was antagonistic, and his treatment of the elders was typical of what they received in nearly every part of India. When Woolley and Fotheringham called upon Brigadier General Scott, the commanding officer, and asked for permission to teach, he told them that he had been informed of their work by the Bishop of Calcutta and that he would not consider it fair to his own chaplains to have Mormons preaching in the area. Fotheringham reported their interview in this way:

We then asked him if we could lodge in the cantonments. He replied not without his permission and if he granted us two weeks stay in this place, as soon as the time was expired, we would be under necessity of having it renewed again and many other restrictions he laid upon us which would be too numerous to mention. Among some of the restrictions was if we should get a place outside of the boundary lines to preach in we were not allowed to send a circular amongst the soldiers to notify our meetings. If we did we should be marched out of the cantonments without a moment's notice. Or if we should be found preaching to the soldiers on the streets we should be marched out. This is like tying a man's hands and feet and throwing him into a river and making him swim. [^32]

They then turned to the civilian population, but having no success for five weeks, they moved to Delhi. [^33] Then seven weeks later they traveled seventy miles north to the city of Karnal, and after that area proved unsuccessful, they migrated south toward Agra, arriving there at Christmastime 1853. But because once again they were not allowed to teach any military personnel, the civilian population was their only hope. They obtained a hall and held meetings for several nights, but when the crowds dwindled from twenty-four down to one investigator on the fourth night, the meetings were discontinued. The elders were tired and discouraged by this time; one wrote: "It makes me almost sick at heart to read of the Elders in other countries doing such great works. . . . I hope the Lord will be pleased to let us go before long to some other place where we can do some good for the cause. But God's will be done, not mine, unless mine is His. It was necessary for somebody to come here, and it might as well be us as any others." [^34]

Woolley and Fotheringham left Agra and worked their way toward Calcutta. They preached the gospel at Cawnpore, a major British cantonment and settlement, Allahabad, and other towns along the way and then returned to Calcutta on March 6, 1854. Their long journey had not produced any success, for not a baptism was performed on the entire expedition. [^35]

The months that marked their absence from Calcutta brought little more success there. Jones, Musser, Owens, and later Leonard, who had been at Chinsura until he thought his labors there to be useless, worked diligently at spreading their message. They printed several tracts, handed them to people in the streets and in their homes, and held many meetings in which they delivered lectures; but none of their approaches seemed to succeed.

By March 1854 the major problems of preaching in India had become quite evident. Elder N. V. Jones, in a long letter to the editor of the Millennial Star in England, summarized the problems that he and other missionaries were having in India. Concerning the types of people and the clergy who lived in the area where Willes and Richards and Woolley and Fotheringham had worked, Jones wrote:

The settlements in the upper provinces are chiefly composed of invalids from the lower provinces and soldiers, who have, in a manner, worn themselves out in the service and have settled down upon small pensions. Besides these there are a few public officers who are engaged in business for the government of the company (East India), or some military station. The inhabitants range generally from ten to one hundred in a place, except Agra, and one or two other places, which have about two hundred each, and as to soldiers, it is a hard matter to get access to them, although the law does not rule over the consciences of men, but the discretionary power of the officers does effectually accomplish it, to the great satisfaction of the clergy. There are two kinds of priests who are allowed to be with the soldiers, viz., the Church of England and Catholic, and all others are excluded, and the most rigid measures are taken to prevent their introduction. [^36]

Jones commented on the aristocratic nature of the Englishmen the missionaries were working with: "The Europeans of India are generally of the aristocracy at home, and entertain such an exalted opinion of themselves, and of human greatness, that it is impossible for a common man to speak to them. There is scarcely a man in this country whose fate is not linked with either the company or the government, and to come to our meetings, or independently investigate our principles, would jeopardize his office and salary. In fact, that class of people, amongst which the Gospel has been preached with such good[success[,] is not in this country." [^37]

Concerning this same problem—European elitism and social consciousness—A. Milton Musser wrote: "In going to preach to the inhabitants of India (Europeans), is like going to England and America and selecting none but the aristocracy or upper ten to preach to; as all the European inhabitants of this country are living in the greatest ease, having many servants to wait on them. They care nothing for the servants of God." [^38]

Perhaps Elder Jones did not feel that he had put his point across well enough, because he went on to explain: "If Gabriel from the region of Bliss, the presence of God, should come, I do not believe that he would attract any curiosity or create any excitement whatever. They would not stop their carriages or look out of their windows to see him. They are so lost in their own folly that the Holy Ghost and the Bible, is of so little consequence that they have not got time to spend with them." [^39]

Jones and Musser overestimated the importance of the social position that most officers of the East India Company and military would have held at home in England. For the most part, these self-important people had gone to India in quest of power, wealth, and social importance. Hypocrisy was among the major weaknesses of this class of people known as nabobs.

British snootiness was a great problem, but the elders might have accepted it more easily if there had been an alternative group to whom they could turn. Unfortunately, the elders were as disappointed with the local peoples as they were with the British. Consider what Jones had to say about the Indian people:

It appears that they have great disregard to all principles of honesty and honor, from the highest Rajahs to the meanest Ryot. And the greatest breaches of fidelity and trust are looked upon by the injured party with a degree of complacency, as though it was expected. And in the same light, they look upon all schemes of deliberate, systematic fraud, perjury and all violations of truth, honor, honesty; these things are indeed not matters of conscience with them. And they are fully competent to do the meanest possible amount, and are not capable of forming any friendship or attachments that can be valued over one pice (which is equivalent to one quarter of a cent). There are many in government and individual employ, who have been for years carrying on a well-regulated system of fraud, and who are known to be such characters by their employers; and to exchange them or turn them off would be only making a bad matter worse. To all human appearance, there is scarcely a redeeming quality in the nation. [^40]

Jones was not generous in his assessment of India, but it must be recognized that he knew that many members of the Church in England, Europe, and America were watching and hoping for great success in India. He wanted to make sure they knew the problems the missionaries were having. Jones's attitude toward the people of India was typical of the other LDS missionaries. The treatment they received in every part of India was similar to what Jones described. Circumstances differed somewhat in each locality, but as a whole, affairs were much the same.

The original caption in the 1908 Improvement Era reads "L. D. Saints Chapel built by A. Musser at Kurrachee, India 1855." Musser and Truman Leonard were the first LDS missionaries to preach the restored gospel in the land now called Pakistan. (From the Improvement Era, 1908)

The elders showed considerable personal stamina and courage. In addition to the rather long journeys that have been mentioned, missionaries worked and traveled in and around Madras; Colombo, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka); Bombay and its environs; Karachi (in modern Pakistan), Hyderabad and the area near there; Rangoon, Burma, and some areas inland from Rangoon.

Several points concerning the missionary work deserve mention: There were in total nineteen missionaries who served in India, Burma, and Siam. Of that number, two were converted and baptized in India. The mission was most fully staffed from April 1853 to July 1854, when the elders started to become very discouraged and thought more and more of going home.

It is almost impossible to determine the total number of converts made in the mission. Elder Robert Skelton, who was the last man to leave India (May 2, 1856), said he thought there were around sixty-one members in India and Burma at the time of his departure. [^41] There were also eleven Church members who had immigrated to Salt Lake Valley. This small number of converts was a great disappointment to the missionaries. Willes had baptized many more people than this during his first four months in India. But most of the Indians who were baptized during that time left the Church when it became evident that they were not going to receive any worldly gain. This phenomenon was caused in part by the missionary methods of the Roman Catholics and Protestants. Elder Chauncy West interpreted the situation this way:

The English and American missionaries who have gone to that country have been furnished with plenty of money by missionary societies at home, and when they found that they could not win the native with their principles, they have hired them to join their churches, and have written back what great things they are doing in converting the poor heathen. I have had numbers of them come to me and offer to leave the churches whose names they were then acknowledging and come to ours, if I would only give them a few more cents than they were getting. At the same time they knew no more about the principles and faith of the Church to which they professed to belong, than the brute-beast, and these same people will bow down and worship sticks and stones, gods of their own make, when they think there is no Christian seeing them. [^42]

West was not entirely fair or did not know the history of missionary work in India. The practice of supporting Indian converts to Christianity had started when the early Protestant missionaries observed what happened to converts who left their castes and became Christians. These people were expelled from their castes and were considered dead in the eyes of their people. Considering the plight of their new converts, the missionaries gave them employment as custodians, teachers, domestic servants, cooks, and so on, and in that way preserved their lives. As the numbers of Indian converts increased, the problem grew out of control. In some instances Indians did play one sect against another when seeking better wages. This was a problem to the LDS missionaries, and it discouraged them on a number of occasions. The problem of apostasy was also common among the European converts.

As has been mentioned, the missionaries had some serious problems with the clergy of other denominations. It appears that all of the Christian churches in India were against the Mormon movement. This prejudice grew out of the fact that Joseph Smith, the founder, claimed to have restored the gospel of Jesus Christ. A greater reason for their prejudice, however, was their dislike of polygamy. This was the major point of contention in all the cities of India where the elders preached.

Although some effort was made to work with the local peoples, the elders did not consider themselves called to preach to these people. It was their understanding that they had been sent to India to convert the European population. Only after they failed with those people did they turn to the Indians. But teaching the Indians had several inherent problems. The first difficulty was communication. The missionaries attempted to learn some of the native languages—Burmese, Hindustani, Tamil, Telugu, and Maratha—but were not able to gain a useful mastery in any instance.

The LDS missionaries also found no shared religious ground. Whereas the elders carried a message having to do with one God whom they described as an anthropomorphic being, most of the people of India believed in a great number of deities of all types and forms. Those few Hindus (generally Brahmins) who were capable of understanding the non-dualistic concept of Brahman were not accessible to the missionaries (and even if they had been, they would have shared few points in common). The missionaries did not understand Hindu, Muslim, Parsee (Zoroastrian), Jain, or Buddhist concepts any better than Asians believing in these religions understood Mormonism—and this has changed little in the late twentieth century. In addition to even the most general concepts of God, the Mormons differed greatly with the people of India on the subject of the application of religion. Hinduism, particularly, not only is capable of all-inclusiveness in religious matters but also exalts that principle. Hinduism has had as its greatest asset for survival the ability to accept many levels and ideas of truth. But although the Mormons believed that truth existed to some degree in other religions, their brand of inclusiveness did not allow for so much flexibility. To them only one religion was capable of bringing salvation to men, and that was, of course, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

It could be supposed that the Mormons and the Muslims would have found some common ground for discussion, but there is no evidence that this was so. A more similar concept of God, a more similar concept of salvation, a "true believer" psychology among the adherents, and even the common concept of polygamy could have brought some feelings of common trust between the two groups, but they did not. Few or no Muslims were converted to the Church by these early missionaries to India.

Another matter was the teaching methods the missionaries used. There was no clear-cut program or approach to teaching the gospel. The missionaries distributed tracts, pamphlets (some of which were translated), and other literature (particularly the Book of Mormon), held lecture meetings, and visited homes; but these approaches were not well organized. Although the LDS missionaries did construct chapels at Calcutta (the first on the Asian continent), Poona, and Karachi, they did not sponsor any schools, medical centers, or other institutions that would be classed as part of the social gospel movement. Such programs were not part of the general missionary approach of the Church. The missionaries had traveled to India without any financial support from the Church or from missionary societies, and so they were completely dependent upon the generosity of the people of India for their daily sustenance while they were there. (Two exceptions occurred when Willes and Musser, at different times and in different parts of India, decided they should take employment in order to stay alive.) The point is that the elders were more dependent upon India than India was dependent upon the elders. After a year or so they were free to change their stations and go to work anywhere they felt they could convert more people. When the situation in which the missionaries found themselves is considered, their lack of patience can be understood.

Sometimes surprising growth comes from gospel seeds dropped along the way. Late in their mission, Elders A. Milton Musser and Truman Leonard taught the gospel in Karachi and Hyderabad, in the Indus River area, which is now part of Pakistan. When they departed for home, they did so thinking they had accomplished little or nothing there. But Elder Leonard left some literature with a young man named Robert Marshall: a first edition of the Pearl of Great Price that included Joseph Smith's prophecy of the coming American Civil War, some copies of the Millennial Star, and the first volume of the Journal of Discourses. A decade later the actual occurrence of the Civil War brought the Mormon materials back to Marshall's mind, and he began reading all the materials he had on the Church. He was soon convinced that Joseph Smith was a true prophet and wanted to be baptized. He shared his newly acquired views with family, friends, and acquaintances and became known as a Mormon.

In the 1880s Marshall or a member of his family wrote to the European Mission in Liverpool and received a reply, but nothing came of the interchange. Years passed and Robert Marshall became old and blind. He wanted to be baptized before he died. In 1903 one of his sons again wrote to England and asked for missionaries to come and baptize his father and others. They were informed by mission president Francis M. Lyman that a Mormon elder named John H. Cooper was presently in Calcutta, soon to return home. Cooper stopped off in Karachi for three months, from June 26 to September 24, 1903, during which time he baptized thirteen persons—six members of Marshall's family and seven others, including Henry J. Lilley, the man who reported this information to the Improvement Era in 1908. [^43] Elder Cooper ordained some of the men to the office of elder and organized the Karachi Branch—the result of missionary work done almost fifty years before. By 1908 the branch had dwindled to four, the others having moved away from Karachi or having fallen away. The end of the branch's history is not known.

Lilley's report states that missionaries had been sent to India following the mission of the 1850s. Word has it that William Willes visited India again in the 1880s. How many other missionaries might have served there during these decades is not known.

THE EARLY MISSIONS TO BURMA AND SIAM

The elders bound for Siam (now called Thailand) had gone to Calcutta with the India group because separate passage to Bangkok was not available. These four men, Elam Luddington, Levi Savage Jr., Chauncey Walker West, and Benjamin F. Dewey, set their minds on reaching their destination, but in the end only one of them ever set foot on Siamese soil. Their intention had been to travel overland across Burma to Siam. However, the Second Anglo-Burmese War was then under way, and that route was closed. Even if there had not been a war, the terrain and plant and animal life were so treacherous and threatening that the overland route would have been nearly impossible. West and Dewey tried several times to find sea passage, but in the end, after visiting Ceylon and Bombay, they were forced because of bad weather in Southeast Asian waters to give up on their attempts to reach Bangkok.

Elders Luddington and Savage decided that they would go to Rangoon to work. Rangoon had already been secured and was at peace. From there they hoped to find a ship to Siam. They were encouraged to go to Rangoon by reports sent to Church members in Calcutta from Sergeant Major Matthew McCune, who had been baptized in India. In August 1852, at the time when new missionaries were being called to Asia, McCune, who was by this time an elder in the Church, was sent by the British-Indian Army to Rangoon. He traveled with William Adams, also a sergeant, who was a member of the Church and held the office of teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood. They arrived in Rangoon on August 17. [^44]

Eager to teach Mormonism to other members of their military unit, they decided to hold lecture meetings each Tuesday and Thursday evening. At first their meetings were well attended, but attendance dwindled quickly and soon the elders became interested in the Burmese people. Elder McCune felt that the gospel should be preached to all people, and knowing that he could not teach the Burmese without a knowledge of their language, he made arrangements with a native teacher and started learning the Burmese tongue. He also hoped the gospel could soon be preached to a group of hill people called the Karens. Through rumors, he incorrectly judged these people to be ready for the gospel.

From August 1852 until January 1853, McCune and Adams worked diligently at teaching the gospel. Although their meetings were poorly attended and their handbills and announcements were frequently destroyed, they managed by January 1853 to baptize eight soldiers.

Elder McCune was transferred with his unit from Rangoon to Martaban in late 1852, and by the first part of 1853, he was scheduled to move into the field of combat. From January to August 1853, he was on active duty, but he continued his missionary work while in the field with his company. [^45]

When he arrived back in Rangoon in August 1853, he found that the little branch there had become inactive. Persecutions had been too great for the new convert who had been left in charge. McCune was, of course, disappointed to find affairs in this state, but he was soon given hope by the arrival of Elders Luddington and Savage. [^46] When Luddington and Savage arrived in Rangoon, they began holding meetings on the same schedule that McCune and Adams had followed. Evidently they had good attendance at their meetings. Sometimes they preached in a hall near the great Shirah-dong Pagoda, and sometimes they lectured on the government wharf. In a letter to England, Elder Luddington wrote of their success. He told of one meeting in which he spoke "to Burmese, Bengalese [sic], Malays, Brahmins of different castes, Mussulmen, Armenians, Jews, and gentiles." [^47]

In the meantime, Elder Savage decided that he would branch out on his own. He thought he would be happier if he went to work preaching to the Burmese. On September 28, 1853, he left Rangoon and sailed to Moulmein, across the Gulf of Martaban, where he remained for some months attempting to learn the Burmese language. [^48]

By January 1854, Luddington, with the assistance of Sergeant McCune, had been able to baptize two more soldiers into the Church. But the work was moving slowly, for in the year and a half that McCune had been in Rangoon, only ten persons had become members. None were Burmese. Because Luddington still had a desire to realize his mission call to Siam, he sailed from Rangoon for Singapore on February 3, 1854, arriving at Penang, or Prince of Wales Island, late that month. After a stay there of five days, during which he preached the gospel, he sailed again, this time to Singapore. From there he took passage on a ship bound for Bangkok, arriving there on April 6, 1854. A few weeks later he wrote to the Saints in England: "I am following my calling at this time in the jungles of Siam, far from a civilized nation, and surrounded on the one hand by wild savages, and by wild beasts on the other." [^49] He obviously exaggerated his circumstances (Siam, after all, was a nation with a long and highly cultured history), but he did not have an easy time in Bangkok. His only converts were Captain James Trail and his wife. Trail had given Luddington passage to Bangkok on his ship Serious.

Luddington remained in Bangkok for a little over four months, having had some difficult experiences. He was stoned twice, rejected by most of the Westerners, and had no success attracting attention among the Siamese people. Although he tried to learn the language, he did not believe he could gain a useful ability in it in less than a year or two. On August 12, 1854, he left Bangkok on Captain Trail's ship. From Bangkok he went to Singapore and from there to Hong Kong, where he hoped to find the elders who had been sent there. He endured terrible storms at sea but finally arrived safely in Utah in 1855. [^50]

In March 1854 Elder William Willes, the second LDS missionary to be sent to India and who by this time had been given his choice to go home or stay in India, decided to go to Rangoon to help Matthew McCune, who was now working there alone. [^51] Elder Willes added a great deal of enthusiasm to the Burma mission during the six months he stayed there. He baptized twenty persons and opened a school to teach the English language. He used the money he earned teaching English to pay his passage home to England.

Before the Burma mission ran its course, Savage returned to Rangoon, where he worked until late 1855. He and McCune were joined briefly by President Jones. The McCune family remained in Rangoon until 1856, when he was discharged from the army. He then took his family to Salt Lake City. From the time the McCunes left Rangoon until 1968, the Church did not have an official mission in Burma or Siam. [^52]

THE EARLY MISSION TO CHINA

The India-Siam group were fortunate to arrange passage from San Francisco to their destination within a week after they received their passports in late January 1853. The three remaining China-bound elders, Hosea Stout, James Lewis, and Chapman Duncan, were not so favored. They did not sail from San Francisco until March 9. But even though they left the United States much later than their cohorts, they arrived in Hong Kong on April 28, only two days after the India group reached Calcutta.

The missionaries had seen Chinese junks for several days before landing and found the atmosphere quite exciting even before they docked. Hosea Stout recorded their reception upon arrival in Hong Kong: "We had scarcely dropped anchor before the deck was covered with Chinees [sic] men and women as well as professional whites who were seeking for an opportunity to make a drive on the Green Horns. While the china men were seeking employment and the women were soliciting our washing patronage, while others came forward to bargain off their professional sex to the crew and all whom it concerned at the lowest possible rates, which seemed on board to range at about one dollar each." [^53]

Hosea Stout was one of three elders sent to open missionary work in China. Their short-lived mission in Hong Kong lasted only fifty-six days but manifested the willingness of the elders of the Church to take the gospel to every nation. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

The following day Elders Duncan and Stout went ashore and spent the morning walking about the city. They became acquainted with a Mr. Emeny, a ship chandler, who shared with them a great amount of information concerning the city and offered to rent them one of his rooms. They accepted the offer and had temporary quarters. For the next few days they sought information concerning conditions in the city and also looked for someone who would "be willing to hear the message we have to this nation but as yet we find none." [^54] They were discouraged because the cost of rent was too high. As yet they had not been able to do any better than about thirty dollars a month each. Stout felt that they had reached their darkest hour. Fortunately, within a day or two they had befriended a landlord by the name of Dudell, who, after listening to the purposes of the missionaries, offered free rent for three months.

On Wednesday, May 5, 1853, the missionaries moved into their own apartment. It was located at "Canton Bazaar," where they had an "excellent suit [sic] of rooms." The rooms were on the third story of the building. The men hired a "Chinese servant at six dollars and fifty cents per month, who does all the duties of cook, market man, and chamber maid." [^55] Apparently, they were a little embarrassed to have a servant, for Hosea Stout wrote, "Such is the force of custom here that it is far cheaper to employ one than to do without for we cannot purchase in the markets if you do you will be cheated in both weight and measures and shaved in your change." [^56]

On the evening of May 6 the elders, after spending most of the day indoors because of the oppressive heat, held their first preaching meeting. They taught the gospel to a small group of British soldiers. On May 11 they made their first contact with Chinese people, to whom these missionaries had been sent. The first two Chinese to investigate were a pair of curious Christians. One was a local tailor, the other a product of the London Missionary Society. He had spent eight years in England and was well educated. Although it looked promising, nothing came of the meetings between the missionaries and their Chinese acquaintances.

The elders received little encouragement. They didn't seem to have any contacts or an approach that permitted them to make any headway. Their spirits were lifted momentarily when they met the acting editor of the China Mail, a local paper. This man treated them kindly and suggested that it would be wise if they would hold their meetings on the "green," or parade ground. He also promised not only to attend but also to publish the meeting times free of charge. [^57] They accepted this offer and published the time for their meeting on the green. Stout wrote in his diary that "there were about 100 citizens and as many soldiers present. Elder Lewis spoke on the first principles of the gospel, showing also the difference between our religion and the sects of the day. He delivered a powerful discourse, handling the sects quite unciremoniously [sic]." [^58]

Noting the people's seeming interest in the message of the restored gospel, Stout said that he felt that "the ice of superstition is broken and a good work will follow." Meetings were subsequently held on May 19 and 20. On the twentieth there were about thirty citizens and two hundred soldiers moving in and out of the group "in swarms." Although Stout thought Duncan was in his usual good form, he noticed a change of attitude and wrote, "It is amusing to see how nice and reserved the people act with an assumed modesty of a ticklish coquette wanting to talk but not be seen." [^59] The cause of this change turned out to be the spreading of the news that the Mormons were polygamists. Articles appeared in three newspapers publicizing this fact.

The days dragged on and nothing was accomplished. The elders spent a large part of their time indoors because the weather was hot, humid, and often very rainy. Stout recorded meetings with various newspaper editors who seem to have been reasonable men; nevertheless, they did not stop printing articles that upset the missionaries. The elders took consolation in telling themselves that when the opposition of the devil starts to howl, it is a sure sign that the Lord's servants are about to succeed. Unfortunately for them, the situation went from bad to worse.

Their last meeting on the green was held on May 31. The elders preached to a group of about fifty persons, but even though the missionaries felt they did a good job of proving various contending religions wrong, the crowd did not ask a single question and left almost immediately. Future meetings were attempted, but the weather caused problems. The elders tried to find ways to enter people's homes to preach to them, but this also proved to be futile. On June 7 Stout wrote that he felt that he and his companions had done all that God or man could require of them in Hong Kong. "We have preached publicly and privately as long as anyone would hear and often tried when no one would hear." On June 9 they decided to go home. [^60]

Stout was disturbed that they were not able to find interested listeners or even overt opposition. He found that "no one will give heed to what we say, neither does anyone manifest any opposition or interest but treats us with the utmost civility, conversing freely on all subjects except the pure principles of the gospel. When we approach[that[,] they have universally in the most polite manner declined by saying that they did not wish to hear anything on that subject for they are willing to extend the mantle of charity over all Christian believers and ourselves among the rest, not doubting that we were good men and all would be right with all." [^61]

That same day, June 9, the elders went on board the Rose of Sharron, an English ship, and arranged cabin passage to San Francisco. From that day until June 22, the elders were busy clearing up their few affairs, such as selling their furniture and preparing for their voyage back to San Francisco.

The mission to China cannot be assessed as anything but a complete failure. The missionaries were as well aware of this as any later observer. Sources such as Stout's journal reveal that the missionaries were quite well apprised of the situation as it existed in China while they were there. However, before they arrived in Hong Kong they knew almost nothing about Hong Kong and the Chinese situation.

The missionaries realized many of the reasons for their failure. Two letters speak of the Tai-ping Rebellion, the general cultural situation, and problems relating to the Chinese language. Probably the greatest disappointment the elders faced was that there were so few Europeans in Hong Kong. According to their count, there were some 250 European civilians in Hong Kong, plus between one and two thousand soldiers. Stout wrote concerning this problem: "Here we find a people situated differently from others we have seen and less likely to receive the gospel. There are no common or middle class inhabitants here. There are few whites and these are merchants, traders, all deeply engrossed in business." [^62]

Stout wrote further that the Europeans in Hong Kong were the "would be nabobs, of the world. . . . This class we found almost unapproachable, on account of their wealth and popularity, and look with contempt upon all who are not of the same grade with themselves; also a few lawyers, doctors, and a small sprinkling of missionaries also of the upper circles, luxuriating upon the proceeds of the cent societies at home, and the miseries of the people in that region." [^63]

It is quite possible that this opinion would have been different if he had made contact with the soldiers, but they were not allowed out of their posts except from five to eight o'clock each evening. "They were," according to Stout, "so fond of the licensed privileges found among the Chinese women, that they are as corrupt as vicious habits can make them." According to the record of Elder James Lewis, however, the soldiers turned away from Mormonism because of their officers. [^64] It would appear that the missionaries in China received about the same treatment from the military that the elders in India received.

After the first and seemingly easiest approach to teaching the gospel had been closed, the next alternative was to turn to the Chinese. Unfortunately for the elders, not many Chinese knew English, and the elders knew no Chinese. This problem ultimately came down to one of money, for it would have cost about thirty dollars a month for a language teacher. Furthermore, most of the Chinese who knew English worked either for the government or for missionaries of other faiths. Although the elders knew that the language had to be learned if they were to teach the gospel, they did not know how they could accomplish this task. The elders found the variations in class structure among the Chinese to be an additional problem.

Within six weeks of their arrival in Hong Kong, the elders realized that they were not going to succeed. One might ask why they did not turn to another port or go inland. The answer is that the mainland of China was at this time seized in a great revolution: the Tai-ping Rebellion. This religiously motivated uprising had started in July 1851 and lasted until 1864. The Mormon elders arrived in China in April 1853, the time of some of the greatest success of the rebel army. During one period or another, the movement engulfed a great portion of China, and allegedly a total of twenty million people died in its battles and the resulting famines. [^65]

Foreigners in Shanghai had organized themselves for any problems that might arise. All the trading ports were anxiously awaiting the outcome of the rebellion. Stout wrote that "the troops here are held in readiness to act as occasion requires. Part of the American fleet has arrived and is reconnoitering at Shanghai in preparation for rendering philanthropic services to Japan." [^66]

The voyage home to San Francisco was a long one of sixty-two days. The winds were contrary, and at times the ship sat in doldrums. The arrival of the elders in San Francisco on August 22, 1853, ended LDS missionary efforts in China until 1949.

In 1996, after the Church had been established in Hong Kong for almost half a century, the Church dedicated a temple there for the use of Latter-day Saints from Hong Kong and other nations nearby. In the dedicatory prayer, President Gordon B. Hinckley memorialized the labors and sacrifices of the early missionaries and provided a beautiful benedictory on their services. His words may as well be applied to their companions who labored in India, Burma, and Siam at the same time. He prayed: "We are grateful for the faith of those who, nearly a century and a half ago, first came to Hong Kong as missionaries of Thy Church. Their labors were difficult and largely without reward. But their coming was an evidence of the outreach of our people to all nations of the earth in harmony with the commandments of Thy Beloved Son that the gospel should be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people." [^67]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] For in-depth histories of the early mission in Japan, see my "Early Latter-day Saint Missions to South and East Asia," (Ph.D. diss., Claremont Graduate School and University Center, 1967); and Murray L. Nichols, "History of the Japan Mission of the Church . . ., 1901-1924" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1958).
[^2] "A Future Mission Field," The Contributor, October 1895, pp. 764-65.
[^3] Deseret News, 6 April 1901, p. 9.
[^4] Heber J. Grant, A Japanese Journal, comp. Gordon A. Madsen (n.p., n.d.), pp. 12-13.
[^5] John M. L. Young, The Two Empires in Japan (Tokyo: The Bible Times Press, 1958), p. 44.
[^6] See J. Herbert Kane, A Global View of Christian Missions, rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1971), 238-49; Stephen Neill, A History of Christian Missions, 2nd ed. rev. (London: Penguin Books, 1986), pp. 276-82.
[^7] As quoted by Heber J. Grant, in Conference Report, April 1902, p. 47.
[^8] Deseret News, 21 October 1901; Alma O. Taylor, Journal B, 1 September 1901, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah (hereafter cited as BYU Special Collections). For a summary of the prayer, see the Alma O. Taylor Papers, BYU Special Collections.
[^9] See Taylor, Journal B, 9 February to 19 March 1903, BYU Special Collections.
[^10] Ibid., 23 February 1902.
[^11] See ibid., 10 March 1902.
[^12] Heber J. Grant, address, in Conference Reports, 1901-1904, 4 October 1903, 7.
[^13] President Grant was home for only a little more than two months when the First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) called him to preside over the European Mission of the Church. He felt that this was in a way a second opportunity for success in the mission field.
[^14] Alma O. Taylor, Journal E, 16 July 1904, BYU Special Collections.
[^15] Alma O. Taylor, "About Japan and the Japanese Mission," Improvement Era 10 (November 1906): 6.
[^16] See Taylor's journals for a complete record of the translation process. See also his typed recollections of the same, in Taylor Papers, BYU Special Collections.
[^17] Joseph H. Stimpson to David O. McKay, 18 March 1920, Copybook H, 359, LDS Church Archives.
[^18] Mission Financial and Statistical Reports, Japan Mission, 1921, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as MFSR.
[^19] See Joseph H. Stimpson to Alma O. Taylor, 19 January 1921, Copybook I, 10, LDS Church Archives.
[^20] See MFSR, Japan Mission, 1920-1924; and Andrew Jenson, "Manuscript History of the Japan Mission," 1918-1924, LDS Church Archives.
[^21] See Kenneth Scott Latourette, A History of the Expansion of Christianity, The Great Century: North America and Asia, A.D. 1800-A.D. 1914, (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1970), 6:385ff.
[^22] See Hilton A. Robertson, in Conference Report, October 1924, pp. 123-24.
[^23] This information is based on an article in the scrapbook of Hilton A. Robertson, Provo, Utah. Brother Robertson has passed away since this manuscript was written, and the present location of the scrapbook is unknown to the author. See Deseret News, 11 September 1923.
[^24] See Edwin O. Reischauer, The United States and Japan (New York: Viking Press, 1963), pp. 16-17, for an evaluation of these events. See also his Japan: The Story of a Nation, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 1990), p. 155.
[^25] See Sidney L. Gulick, "American-Japanese Relations: The Logic of the Exclusionists," Annals of the American Academy of Social and Political Sciences 122 (November 1925): 181.
[^26] See Japan Mission Journals (1901-1924), 13 June 1924, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as JMJ.
[^27] See my "The Closing of the Early Japan Mission," BYU Studies 15 (winter 1975): 171-90.
[^28] Ibid., 14 May 1924.
[^29] Heber J. Grant, Letterbook (21 February-19 July 1924), 20 February 1924, p. 155, LDS Church Archives. In the same letter the First Presidency mentioned that Lloyd O. Ivie, the previous mission president, estimated that there were "only five or six real converts to the Gospel in that mission."
[^30] Ibid., 156.
[^31] JMJ, 15 June 1924. The LDS missionaries in Japan were not aware that a formal public announcement concerning the closing of the mission had been made in the Deseret News on June 12, 1924. It is not surprising that by June 15 international news-wire services had picked up this information.
[^32] Jenson, "Japan Mission"; see Grant, Letterbook, 19 June 1924, p. 752.
[^33] See Jenson, "Japan Mission," 7 August 1924. One of the final entries in this history states simply that in the first twenty-three years, eighty-eight missionaries had served in Japan. One died in the mission field, and seven were sent home sick. Nine elders had been sent home in varying degrees of dishonor. During that period 174 Japanese had been baptized—112 men and 62 women. Ten members had been excommunicated, nine had died, and eight had moved. Seven elders, twenty-two priests, fifteen teachers, and thirty deacons had been ordained.
[^34] Ibid., 22 August 1924.
[^35] Hilton A. Robertson, in Conference Report, April 1947, p. 53.
[^36] 36. Millennial Star 15 (3 October 1853): 811. See also Journal History of the Church, N.V. Jones to F. D. Richards, 3 October 1853, LDS Church Archives.
[^37] 37. Ibid.
[^38] 38. Musser, Journals, 2:72. Percival Spear has written well on the topic of the English elite in India. See his book The Nabobs (London: Oxford University Press, 1963).
[^39] 39. Millennial Star 15:211-12.
[^40] 40. Ibid.
[^41] 41. R. Skelton, "Hindostan," See Millennial Star 18 (16 August 1856): 523; and Jenson, Church Chronology, 56.
[^42] 42. Deseret News, 5:206.
[^43] 43. Henry J. Lilley, "From India's Coral Strand," Improvement Era 12 (1908-9): 423-34.
[^44] 44. Matthew McCune, "The Burman Mission," See Millennial Star 15 (15 January 1853): 44.
[^45] 45. See Millennial Star 15 (August 1853): 53, 78ff.
[^46] 46. See Musser, Journals, 3:81-4.
[^47] 47. Millennial Star 16:190-91.
[^48] 48. See Musser, Journals, 3:81-84.
[^49] 49. Millennial Star 16:540-41.
[^50] 50. See Andrew Jenson, "Manuscript History of the Siam Mission," 7-8, LDS Church Archives.
[^51] 51. See Millennial Star 16:540-41.
[^52] 52. See the author's article "The Early Missions to Burma and Siam," Improvement Era, March 1970, pp. 35-44.
[^53] 53. On the Mormon Frontier: The Diary of Hosea Stout, ed. Juanita Brooks, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1964), 2:476.
[^54] 54. Ibid.
[^55] 55. Ibid.
[^56] 56. Ibid.
[^57] 57. See ibid., 2:479.
[^58] 58. Ibid.
[^59] 59. Ibid., 2:479-80.
[^60] 60. See ibid., 2:484.
[^61] 61. Ibid.
[^62] 62. Stout, Hosea Stout, 170-71.
[^63] 63. Deseret News, 3:26.
[^64] 64. See Deseret News, 4 January, 1852.
[^65] 65. The movement first emerged in the province of Kwangsi (modern Guangxi). The founder, Hung Hsiu-ch'uan (Hong Xiuquan, 1814-1864), and his chief collaborators were Hakkas, that is, members of a distinct minority linguistic group who were descended from north Chinese migrants. Hung was not only a mystic but also a frustrated scholar who had failed more than once in the Canton Civil Service examinations. He had a religious experience that convinced him that he was a messiah, a concept he borrowed from Christianity. Just two months before the elders arrived in Hong Kong, The T'ai-p'ings captured Nanking (Nanjing), the number-two city of the Ch'ing (Qing) empire. See Eugene P. Boardman, Christian Influence upon the Theology of the Taiping Rebellion (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1952).
[^66] 66. Stout, Hosea Stout, 171-72. Whether or not Stout said this tongue in cheek cannot be known. The interest in this statement comes with the knowledge that just before this letter was written, Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry and his small fleet had arrived in Hong Kong and were on course toward Shanghai and later to Japan to open that country to foreign relations. Perhaps Stout saw in that act a "philanthropic service."
[^67] 67. "May Thy watch care be over it" [dedicatory prayer of the Hong Kong Temple], Church News, 1 June 1996, 4.
