R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

JAPAN 1901-1924

The Early Japanese Mission

President Lorenzo Snow, who had pursued a course of expansion since he became leader of the Church in 1898, announced plans on February 14, 1901, to open a mission in Japan. [^1] He chose Elder Heber J. Grant of the Council of the Twelve Apostles to preside over the new mission.

More than four decades had passed since the Church had first attempted to expand into Asia. The years since the 1850s had been difficult for the Church. Doubtless the most serious problem had been polygamy, or plural marriage, as the Saints preferred to call it. Church leaders and members alike had endured physical and psychological harassment from the government and the general public. Not until 1896, years after Utah first applied for statehood, was statehood achieved. But by the turn of the century the Church was gaining acceptance among the American people (though there were yet many barriers to pass, such as the Reed Smoot hearings in the Senate), and its financial situation was somewhat improved over that of a few years before. Perhaps these and other improvements gave President Snow and the Council of the Twelve the courage to pursue once again the great commission to take the gospel to "every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (D&C 133:37).

There were several reasons why the Brethren decided to open a mission in Japan rather than in China or some other Asian nation. China was at this time recovering from the disruption and shock of the Boxer uprising, in which Christian missionaries had been among the main targets of Chinese anti-foreignism. Southeast Asia seemed to be beyond the purview and experience of most Latter-day Saints at that time, and India had already proved a failure from the LDS point of view. Japan, on the other hand, had shown to the world through its victory in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95 that it had "made wonderful strides within a few years in the arts of civilization." [^2] Japan's modernization encouraged Church leaders because they believed that any people who were progressive would also be open to the message of the Restoration. Moreover, President Snow and other Church authorities had met some of Japan's most distinguished leaders and had found them to be men of goodwill, men who they believed would help the Church succeed if it were introduced in Japan.

When President Snow announced the new mission, he explained that he had been thinking about such a mission for many years. In 1872 "a party of distinguished officials of the Japanese government [the Iwakura diplomatic mission] visited Salt Lake en route to Washington from their own country," reported President Snow in 1901. "During their stopover they called on the Legislature and were given an appropriate welcome. . . . They expressed a great deal of interest in Utah and the manner in which it had been settled by the Mormons. Our talk was altogether very pleasant and they expressed considerable wonderment as to why we had not sent missionaries to Japan. That, together with the knowledge that they are a progressive people has remained with me until the present time, and while it may not be the actuating motive in attempting to open a mission there now, it probably had something to do with it." [^3]

In retrospect it is strange that members of the Iwakura Mission noted the absence of Mormon missionaries in Japan. President Snow apparently took this as an invitation to open a mission there, though that was probably not the intent of the comment. What President Snow and the other Brethren evidently did not know in 1901 was how much Japan had changed and developed since the 1870s. Nor did they have much information concerning Japan's religious history, because the country was only opened to the Western world as recently as 1854. But more important than international affairs or the progress of one nation or another was the fact that the Lord had made it clear to President Snow that this was the time to open a mission in Japan. Consider the substance of his remarks of June 26, 1901:

When the Lord first sent forth his Elders in this generation very little was known as to what their labors would be and what they could accomplish. They failed in some respects but they did not fail in one thing; they did their duty. Apostles Orson pratt and others were sent to Austria to open a mission there, but by reason of the rejection of their testimony, they did not succeed. Nevertheless, they did their duty and were blessed. Noah preached 120 years, he was a grand man, he did his duty but failed and this because the people rejected him. However, by doing his duty he secured to himself exaltation and glory. . . .

As to these brethren who will shortly leave for Japan the Lord has not revealed to me that they will succeed, but He has shown me that it is their duty to go. They need not worry concerning the results, only be careful to search the Spirit of the Lord to see what it indicates to them. Do not be governed by your own wisdom, but rather by the wisdom of God. [^4]

THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN

Quite by accident, Portuguese sailors discovered Japan in 1543. Six years later the great Catholic Jesuit priest Francis Xavier arrived at Japan's shores bearing the message of Christ. Although he did not remain long, he established a mission that by 1615 had claimed the devotion of about five hundred thousand Japanese. Unfortunately, from 1587 onward, the Japanese government pursued a course of repression—and finally one of calculated persecution—of Christians. As a result, the once-thriving Christian community was nearly destroyed. Many devout Japanese Christians died as martyrs, thousands denied the faith, and only a few practiced their religion secretly from then until the 1860s.

Because of anti-foreign fears and feelings, the shogun (military dictator and ruler) closed Japanese ports and cut off relations with the outside world in 1639. From then until 1853, when Commodore Matthew C. Perry forced the Japanese government to engage in more normal relations, Japan was a closed country. Once a year a Dutch ship was allowed at Nagasaki, and occasionally Chinese and Korean traders were accepted. But for the greater part, Japan remained in isolation. By the calculated use of Confucianism, the government enforced an ethic of strict compliance and regimentation. Shinto, Japan's indigenous religion, sustained a feeling of respect for Japan's rulers and for its historic past. Buddhism, a foreign religion but one that had been naturalized over more than a thousand years, received continuing patronage, largely because its priests provided much of the formal education during this era.

After Japan was opened to the West, only five years passed before Protestant missionaries arrived in 1859. They were not warmly received; in truth, they were forced to work quietly, operating schools and medical clinics lest they be deported. Not until the early 1870s did they have any real success, but even then the government was openly hostile to the foreign faith.

The last shogun resigned in 1867, and early in 1868 the Emperor Meiji assumed full control of the Japanese state. With Meiji's ascension, Japan entered a new era of conscious westernization. But the government also faced the problem of national consolidation at a time when the old order was passing and a new one was coming to be. Since Shinto was in a way the embodiment of the past, the government employed it to help bring solidity to the regime. Christianity, being foreign, was distrusted and proscribed. Wall posters and other legal notices informed villagers throughout Japan that Christianity was not acceptable. When a group of secret Christians, a remnant of those who had gone underground in the 1600s, was discovered in the late 1860s, the government openly repressed the movement and placed some members of the group in prison.

Word of this anti-Christian policy reached government leaders in the United States and Europe and caused a strong anti-Japanese reaction. As a result, members of the Iwakura Mission were brought to an abrupt realization that their efforts to establish normal relations with the so-called Christian nations would fail if they did not change the anti-Christian policy at home. On February 23, 1873, while the Iwakura Mission was still in Europe, the anti-Christian edicts were removed. Technically the laws were not changed until 1889, but through the removal of the edicts the government gave tacit consent to the presence of Christians and Christian missionaries. After that time the number of Protestant and Catholic missionaries grew rapidly.

Growth in numbers of missionaries and converts laid the groundwork for the rapid expansion of Protestant Christianity during the 1880s. By 1888 there were more than twenty-five thousand Japanese Christians and 450 missionaries, and the entire Bible had been translated into Japanese and published.

But 1889 and 1890 brought changes that set back Christianity until after World War II. In February 1889 Emperor Meiji gave a constitution to the Japanese people. Although it was progressive by Asian standards, it was authoritarian in structure and strongly weighted in favor of the aristocracy. Its position concerning freedom of religion was somewhat vague. Article 28 of the constitution reads: "Japanese subjects, within the limits not prejudicial to peace and order, and not antagonistic to their duties as subjects, shall enjoy freedom of religious belief." This article of the new constitution left considerable latitude of interpretation, and both Japanese Christians and foreign missionaries considered it a charter of liberty.

The next year, however, the Ministry of Education promulgated the "Imperial Rescript on Education" (kyoiku chokugo), a document that one writer described as "the most damaging blow [that] ever struck the Christian cause in Japan." [^5] The basic concept underlying the rescript was that Japan, having a divine origin and mission, was unique among the nations. At the head of the Japanese people was the emperor, a direct descendant of Jimmu Tenno, the first god-emperor of Japan. The ancestral gods of Japan, the Shinto kami, demanded and deserved the reverent obeisance of every Japanese student. On all public holidays, the principal of every school was to read the entire rescript to the students as they stood at attention with heads bowed before the portrait of the emperor. Over the years, the psychological conditioning effect of this simple ceremony was great. The rescript implied, among other things, that Christian views of God and morality were not acceptable.

The overwhelming Japanese victory in the Sino-Japanese War focused the Japanese mind on the greatness of the Japanese nation and people. Foreign religions now seemed to have little if any place. Although the years from 1895 to 1901 were peaceful, Christianity made relatively little headway. [^6] It was at this time that the LDS Church found itself ready to move into Japan.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE JAPANESE MISSION

President Heber J. Grant and his companions were the first to admit that they did not know much about Japan. In Elder Grant's words the new mission was an "unknown quality." But in spite of some misgivings and apprehensions, President Snow, mission president Grant, and the others all believed the new mission would succeed. Other Christian groups had done well, President Snow reasoned; why not the Latter-day Saints?

Before going to Japan, President Grant chose two mature and experienced missionaries, Louis A. Kelsch and Horace S. Ensign, to go with him. Then, on May 10, 1901, he called eighteen-year-old Alma O. Taylor. Even before the missionaries left Salt Lake City, Elder Taylor worked on the Japanese language, and later he demonstrated unusual linguistic ability.

The Japan-bound elders departed from Salt Lake City, Utah, on July 24, 1901, and traveled to Vancouver, British Columbia, where they boarded the Empress of India, which carried them to Japan. They arrived there on August 12.

Upon their arrival they found that even if they had desired to slip into the country unnoticed, they could not have done so. The foreign press in Yokohama had received word of their coming, and as became evident during the coming weeks, the Christian community was united together to drum the Mormons out of the country before they could gain a foothold. Almost before the four elders settled into the Grand Hotel in Yokohama, they found themselves in a verbal battle in the local newspapers that went on intermittently for several months. At least eight newspapers and many more writers became involved.

Somewhat surprisingly, in a land where Victorian morality had little or no place, the basic issue was whether the Mormons could be allowed within a reasonable distance of Christian women. When President Grant and his companions applied for permanent accommodations at a Western-style boardinghouse, the owner, Mr. Staniland, told them bluntly that he could not consider taking them in. When word of this action reached the press, it caused a heated debate between liberals who were willing to accept the elders in spite of the polygamy issue and those conservatives who claimed that polygamy was not dead and hence the missionaries could not be accepted. The most delightful piece relating to this matter was written by the Japanese intellectual Takahashi Goro. With tongue in cheek he wrote: "The enlightened people of Tokio have recently welcomed a sect from Thibet that preaches Lamanism, polyandry, a plurality of husbands, and scarce have they welcomed them with extraordinary enthusiasm and the huzzahs died away before they are condemning, with absolute ignorance, the 'Mormon' religion! And these people who are condemning the 'Mormons' and polygamy are believers in concubinage! Can there be under the sun a greater inconsistency than this? We might say something about the Emperor and his concubines, but perhaps it would be considered disloyal, and therefore we will keep quiet." [^7]

Years passed before the Latter-day Saint missionaries developed any degree of mutuality with the established Christian missions. There is no evidence that the established Japanese religious denominations paid any attention to the Mormons.

THE DEDICATION OF JAPAN FOR THE PREACHING OF THE GOSPEL

Having decided the previous Sunday that they would seek a wooded place, a place of solitude, on the next Thursday—September 1, 1901, fast day—and there dedicate the land of Japan to the preaching of the gospel, President Grant led his three companions to a secluded spot in a small grove situated on the slope of one of the rolling hills lying south of Yokohama. There they formed a small circle, sang, and prayed for the Spirit of the Lord to attend them. When they felt that they were in the proper spirit, President Grant offered the dedicatory prayer. According to Alma O. Taylor, "his tongue was loosed and the Spirit rested mightily upon him; so much that we felt the angels of God were near for our hearts burned within us as the words fell from his lips. I never experienced such a peaceful influence or heard such a powerful prayer before. Every word penetrated into my very bones and I could have wept for joy." [^8]

President Grant's prayer covered fifteen major points. Possibly of greatest importance was his supplication that Israel might be gathered, that Satan would release his hold upon the minds of the people, and that the hearts of the people might be prepared to This photograph, taken 19 February 1902, shows Elder Heber J. Grant, president of the Japanese Mission (third from left), and his three companions (left to right)—Horace S. Ensign, Alma O. Taylor, and Louis A. Kelsch—at the location where Grant, on 1 September 1901, had dedicated Japan for the preaching of the gospel. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) recognize the truth when it was declared to them. With this prayer the mission was officially opened.

LATE 1901 TO 1903: A PERIOD OF MANY FIRSTS

Probably in no other country have the first LDS missionaries had a harder time getting out among the people than in Japan. In India, Burma, and Siam the elders had begun preaching the gospel immediately upon arriving in those lands. This was also true throughout the Pacific. But the elders serving in Japan seem to have felt the weight of history and tradition against them. Possibly the most formidable obstacle, at least in the beginning, was the Japanese language. It is probably the most difficult language in the world to learn to read, write, and speak. The grammar is complex and very different from those of European languages. The Chinese characters must be memorized; they cannot be sounded out as can those of alphabetic languages.

Use of the jinrickshaw, which appears today to be a slow and perhaps inhumane means of transportation, continued well into the twentieth century. Elder Heber J. Grant traveled in such conveyances frequently while presiding over the Japanese Mission from 1901 to 1903. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

Within a week or two of their arrival, the elders hired a language teacher, the first of several over the next year or so. They decided that because they were all neophytes, they would devote their full time to language study until the next spring; then they would split into pairs and move out among the people. But this method proved tedious and slow, and by December Elders Ensign and Taylor had decided to move from the Metropol Hotel in Tokyo to a completely Japanese area where they would have to use the language. On December 4, 1901, Ensign and Taylor moved into the Nakai Hotel, actually a Japanese-style ryokan, or hotel, where they were to live for the next fifteen months.

The elders in Japan seem to have been more thwarted by local customs, culture, and mores than those who served in the Pacific missions. Perhaps this was because the Pacific peoples generally looked to the missionaries for leadership not only in religious matters but also in matters of modernity. The more primitive cultures of the Pacific were not a threat to the missionaries. In Japan, on the other hand, the local culture was both old and advanced. Japanese civilization was well developed in every way—in the arts, literature, religion, history, philosophy, architecture, and so on. Also, the Japanese had come technologically abreast of the modern countries of the world. Taken together, Japanese language and civilization presented a considerable barrier. The language alone was so difficult that the elders did not decide to go out among the people to teach the gospel until February 1903, eighteen months after the first group arrived in the country. [^9]

During the early months of 1902, while Ensign and Taylor were adjusting to Japanese food, manners, bathing habits, and so forth, President Grant and Elder Kelsch occupied their time studying the language and working on written materials to present to the Japanese people. In February President Grant (who was also an apostle) proposed to his companions that it might be well for him to return to Utah for general conference in April. He had several purposes in mind, among them to give a full report to Church leaders on conditions in Japan, to propose that additional elders be called to Japan, and to perform the marriage of one of his daughters. The other elders of course supported him in his plans.

Before President Grant left for home, however, two men were baptized into the Church, an event that was totally unexpected, for the elders had not as yet sought converts. The first convert was a man named Nakazawa Hajime, a Shinto priest who seems to have been something of a firebrand. His visits with the LDS missionaries evidently caused his dismissal from his position as a Shinto priest. Concerning Nakazawa's expulsion from his faith, Elder Taylor wrote: "The first Japanese to be put to death in effigy for the cause of truth in this land! The first one to be ostracized from the company of his fellows for having anything to do with the 'damned Mormons!'" [^10] Nakazawa's who considered himself a "small Luther," demanded baptism even though the missionaries did not believe he was ready. On the morning of March 8, the elders, Nakazawa, and an interpreter, Mr. Hiroi, traveled to the village of Omori on Tokyo Bay. Finding the tide low, This building served as the first Tokyo, Japan, missionary home during the early years of the mission. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) they took a rowboat out far enough to immerse the candidate. Then President Grant and Nakazawa climbed over the side into the water and performed the ordinance. Mr. Hiroi translated the baptismal prayer as President Grant spoke it in English. Following the baptism, President Grant confirmed Nakazawa a member of the Church and ordained him to the office of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Two days after this first baptism, a second candidate, Kikuchi Gaboro, a man who had visited the missionaries, presented himself to President Grant early in the morning and pleaded for baptism. Although President Grant did not feel good about baptizing Kikuchi, he was so insistent—arguing that he would understand the gospel better after he was baptized, and even claiming a willingness to die as the first Latter-day Saint martyr in Japan if necessary—that his request was granted later the same morning. He too was ordained an elder. [^11]

President Grant sailed for America the next day. He was elated with the progress of the mission and enthusiastically reported the two baptisms to the Saints at home. Unfortunately, Nakazawa and Kikuchi both proved to be dishonest in their intentions and were later excommunicated from the Church. Sadly, they seem to represent the whole history of the early mission. A few excellent and devoted converts were made among the Japanese, but for the most part the mission was a great disappointment to the missionaries themselves and to the Church at home.

When President Grant returned from Salt Lake City, he brought his wife, Augusta; their daughter Mary; Horace Ensign's wife, Mary; and six additional missionaries: Joseph E. and Marie S. Featherstone, Erastus L. Jarvis, John W. Stoker, Sanford W. Hedges, and Fred A. Caine. With the new missionaries, the mission was large enough to hold regular Sunday services. The missionaries started a Sunday School in the hope that prospective members would find it helpful in their quest for truth.

By March 1903 the elders had made considerable progress in the Japanese language. They had spoken to each other in Japanese in their Church services and had even translated some hymns ("We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" was first) and some tracts. They also were quite comfortable in their surroundings. Therefore President Grant assigned pairs of companions and sent them into the field. During late April, Elders Featherstone and Hedges moved to Hojo, Jarvis and Stoker went to Naoetsu, (about a day's train ride from Tokyo), and Ensign and Caine relocated to Nagano, more than half a day's journey away from Tokyo. The mission had moved into the extended period that lasted until its closure in 1924.

As would be expected, new elders came into the field from time to time, transfers were made, and cities were opened and closed to missionary activity. President Grant established the general pattern of missionary work before he was released to go home. However, he was dissatisfied with his performance in Japan. He had not learned to speak Japanese, nor had he moved to Japanese-style accommodations or eaten Japanese food when he could avoid it. Furthermore, during his presidency very few converts came into the Church. When he received his release to return to Salt Lake City, his first impulse was to ask for a six-month extension. But when he questioned himself about his motives for wanting to stay, he concluded: "What good is there for you to stay here? How much more can you do than Brother Ensign? And I began to realize it was a desire to be able to come home and tell you [the members of the Church] I had done something which prompted my wish to stay there longer." [^12]

President Grant was too hard on himself. His principal assignment had been to supervise the work of the other missionaries. He had done what was right with regard to them. He had encouraged them to live in the Japanese style and had supported and helped them in their efforts to master the language. He had also recognized that tracts and Church publications that had worked well in other parts of the world were not appropriate for Japan and that new ones were required to address the special needs of the Japanese. Three tracts had been published in Japanese while President Grant presided over the mission. Under his direction, other procedures had been started that gave the mission stability and regularity. On September 8, 1903, President Grant and his family sailed from Yokohama for home. He was replaced by Elder Horace Ensign, who was already in the mission. [^13]

TRANSLATION OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

During Elder Ensign's presidency, important things were accomplished. One stride forward was the organization of Sunday Schools in Hojo and Tokyo. Most important, however, were his contributions in the area of publications. He directed the writing and printing of a number of tracts, published a hymnal in Japanese, and instigated the lengthy process of translating the Book of Mormon. President Ensign believed, as had President Grant before him, that the Book of Mormon would be a great proselytizing tool, one that would significantly help the work.

On January 11, 1904, President Ensign asked all of the missionaries to begin translating different sections of the book. This procedure did not work out for a number of reasons, but it was a beginning. By September, however, President Ensign could see that the translation would have to be placed in the hands of no more than one or two men. By that time Elder Taylor was by far the most competent translator. In fact, he was writing in kanji, Chinese-style characters. Concerning his call to translate full-time, Taylor wrote that "it was the direct answer to the earnest desires of my heart and a fulfilling of the promises given me in blessings pronounced by President Grant during his sojourn in Japan." [^14] By September 15 he had completed the first book of Nephi—fortynine English pages. Neither Elder Taylor nor President Ensign knew at the outset how large a project it would prove to be.

Shortly before President Ensign received his release to return home, new elders arrived in Japan, making it possible to open the work in Sapporo (on the island of Hokkaido) and Sendai (in northern Honshu). Ensign's release came on July 27, 1905. Young Elder Taylor was to be his replacement. By the time of the Ensigns' departure, seven people had been baptized, but two had been excommunicated.

During President Taylor's term as president, 1905 to 1909, the work moved generally at a slow pace. The number of missionaries grew slightly and averaged thirteen during those five years. But convert baptisms were few—one in 1905, two in 1906, and two more in 1907—and people at home began raising questions concerning the practicality of the mission. In answer to these criticisms, President Taylor sent a blanket rebuff to the doubting members of the Church: "Is the Japan mission a failure? Is it premature? The shortest answer to both these questions is an emphatic 'NO!' It is the mission of 'Mormonism' to preach the gospel to all the world for a witness before the end shall come. Therefore, counting its success or failure by the number of converts made is a gross mistake." President Taylor believed that one of the mission's goals was to spread the truth so that the world would be left without an excuse at Christ's second coming. He said, "Our success or failure, then, must be determined by the answer to the question, 'What has the Japan Mission done, what is it doing for the spread of the truth?'"

Taylor went on to explain the difficulty of communicating with the Japanese until elders had been in the field for at least two years. He also complained that the number of laborers was too few to do the work effectively. [^15]

President Taylor had enough problems in Japan without additional ones from home. His most time-consuming task at hand was the translation of the Book of Mormon. This took a great deal more time and effort than was originally anticipated. The translating involved two steps: changing the scripture to Japanese and putting the Japanese into characters. A translator needed a knowledge of at least two thousand characters to do this work, and in view of the fact that Taylor and Elder Fred Caine (who worked side by side with Taylor) were so new to Japan when they started, what they accomplished was remarkable.

The first translation of the book was completed on March 21, 1906, but the corrections and revisions took longer than the original work. Because he was dissatisfied with his early sections, Taylor revised the entire first translation, and this took from May 1906 until December. The finished product was off the press on October 6, 1909. Five thousand copies were printed. [^16]

President Taylor and Elder Caine received their releases to return home on December 18, 1909. Taylor had served almost nine years, and Caine had devoted eight years. Elder Elbert D. Thomas was appointed the new mission president.

SEASON OF PROGRESS AND CHALLENGE

President Elbert D. Thomas, who following his mission became a professor at the University of Utah and then a United States senator from Utah, had ideas about language learning and mission tenure that differed from those of President Taylor. Thomas believed it was unnecessary for missionaries to remain in Japan for five or six years. In his opinion, they could become proficient in speaking the language in a shorter time, and learning to read it was not necessary. Because the First Presidency agreed with him, mission terms seldom lasted more than four years from then until the mission's closure.

Missionaries with Japanese members in Osaka, Japan, 13 May 1917. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

During the Thomas years, 1910 to 1912, the elders opened work among the Ainu, the indigenous people of Hokkaido, and started missionary work in Osaka, a large industrial and commercial city in the west. They also started using street meetings as a method of finding investigators and advertising their Church services. In early 1911 the elders in Kofu initiated English language classes at Kofu Commercial School. These regular English classes were part of the school's curriculum. During 1911 and 1912, some of the elders played baseball with the Tokyo American baseball team. This was the most important effort of the entire mission to establish warm relations with representatives from other churches.

From 1910 until 1921, the missionaries never ceased working on one kind of translation project or another. They published several books and a number of tracts. They also worked steadily at enlarging the number of meetings that were held in the branches. The Mutual Improvement Association was started in 1916, and the first Relief Society was organized in Tokyo on May 30, 1917.

During President Joseph H. Stimpson's era, from 1915 until 1921, the Church grew faster than at any earlier time. Between 1915 and 1920, the elders performed sixty baptisms, sixteen children were blessed, thirty-seven men were ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood, and the total membership grew to 124. President Stimpson was proud of the mission's accomplishments, but he was concerned about the small number of missionaries in the field—only eight.

President Stimpson struggled with this handicap and sought the help of Elder David O. McKay of the Council of the Twelve. In March 1920 Stimpson wrote a letter to Elder McKay to invite him to an international Sunday School convention to be held in Tokyo that fall. In his letter he pleaded with Elder McKay to use whatever influence he could to have six more missionaries sent to Japan. Three new elders did arrive in May 1920, the first to come in two and a half years, but they merely replaced several others who were released. There were only two elders working in each conference, and Sendai had been closed for lack of missionaries. Stimpson wrote, "We have so few missionaries here in the mission at the present time that the devil has to look elsewhere for a workshop." [^17]

From 1920 onward, the Japan Mission was on trial. There is no question that by this time Church leaders in Salt Lake City were harboring grave doubts concerning the value of continuing the mission. During Stimpson's era, the missionaries continually received rumors from home that Church authorities were thinking about closing the mission. Confirmation was never received by Stimpson from the Brethren, but when Elder David O. McKay visited Japan as part of his world mission tour, one of his purposes was to assess the situation and decide whether or not the mission should be continued.

Elder McKay arrived in Japan on December 20, 1920, and stayed for a month. While there he visited all of the mission conferences except one in Sapporo, Hokkaido, where a blizzard prevented such a visit. He spent considerable time asking questions and seeking to learn more about the Japanese people. At the end of his visit he concluded that the mission was worth continuing and that if this was so, enough missionaries must be assigned to make it a success. "It is like trying to run a sixty horsepower machine with a one horsepower motor and that out of repair," said Elder McKay. [^18] He decided that the mission would be much better if there were several married couples appointed and distributed to each of the conferences. [^19] These couples were to have six or eight missionaries working under them, and they were to act as guardians and counselors for their missionaries. This idea began to be put into effect during the coming months but never became fully operational. In June 1921 Hilton A. and Hazel Robertson arrived in Tokyo, and in November 1922 three more couples arrived in the mission. At the end of the year there were twenty missionaries in the field, three more than in any other year.

In addition to the plan for more missionaries, Elder McKay also made some suggestions concerning improving the work. He stressed the need to turn every conversation into a gospel discussion. Missionaries were always to carry tracts and other literature. They were to spend more time in teaching the gospel in public places such as markets. Street meetings were to be continued. Evidently the visitor did not feel that the missionaries had been working hard enough. He told them to work at least as hard as if they were earning salaries.

The last official act of Elder McKay was to release the Stimpsons to return home. They left Japan on February 11, 1921. In March 1921, Lloyd O. Ivie, a former missionary to Japan, and his new bride, Nora, arrived in Japan to assume leadership. Ivie continued in the spirit of the reforms or innovations started by Elder McKay. He tried to expand the work. He sent missionaries to four new areas and introduced new methods of language study. For a brief period, total numbers of missionaries, Book of Mormon In 1920 and 1921, Elder David O. McKay of the Quorum of the Twelve (back row, third man from left), with his traveling companion, Hugh J. Cannon (third man from right of photo), traveled around the world visiting the missions of the Church. They visited Japan in December 1920 and January 1921. Elder McKay is shown here with mission president Joseph Stimpson (back row between McKay and Cannon) and a group of Japanese members. Nachie Tsune (far left with arms around child) later immigrated to Hawaii, where she did temple work for many years. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) sales, and baptisms increased; but by the end of 1922 matters had returned to the old pattern. In January 1922 Kofu, after having been worked for fourteen consecutive years, was closed. This left only three conferences in the mission. Unfortunately, after the arrival of the couples, leaders in Salt lake City did not continue to send the numbers of missionaries that had been suggested by Elder McKay. The result was a dampening of enthusiasm among the missionaries.

During 1923 and 1924 missionary activity varied little throughout the mission, and weekday schedules were quite similar in all areas. The missionaries spent most mornings studying, teaching English at local schools, and taking care of various menial tasks such as letter writing, picture taking, shopping, and visiting the doctor. Active proselytizing did not usually begin until afternoon. They filled their evenings with English classes, Mutual Improvement Association lessons, and visits to friends and investigators. As a rule, they held three meetings on Sunday. Large numbers of children attended Sunday School. The missionaries hoped these children would be a successful avenue of approach to their parents. Only a few members and investigators usually attended sacrament meetings. The missionaries also frequently held evening preaching meetings that drew fairly good numbers. Attendance patterns in the individual branches of the mission were not encouraging.

In summary, the statistics for the mission were far from impressive. This is evident in the following table of statistics for the years 1918 through 1924. [^20]

#DateNumber of MembersConvert BaptismsOrdinations: Aaronic and MelchizedekNumber of Missionaries#1918105101111#1919118134 10#19201271069#1921135101113#192215418717#192315861 19#192416482 14

Were the Latter-day Saints different from other missionary groups in their lack of success? It appears that they were no less successful than other missionaries, and they may have been more successful. It is difficult to accumulate statistics to prove this statement, but the ratio of effectiveness was about proportional to the number of man-years invested by any missionary group. Other Christian missionaries stayed in Japan much longer and still had few converts, especially during the early years. [^21] Figuring in terms of man-years, the LDS missionaries actually gained converts a little faster than did the Protestants.

Elder Hilton A. Robertson was appointed president of the mission when the Ivies were released in October 1923. The period of his leadership, which ended with the closing of the mission, was short-lived for two principal reasons, among others that will be mentioned later. The more serious reason was a problem that arose in Japan resulting from passage of the Oriental exclusion laws (often referred to as the Japanese exclusion laws) in the United States. A second contributing factor was the great Tokyo earthquake of September 1, 1923.

The destruction that came in the wake of this terrible earthquake was very great. It is estimated that between 120,000 and 150,000 people died—many in the flames that engulfed Tokyo, some under falling debris, and others as a result of riots and disorders. Several missionaries, including the Robertsons, were in Tokyo at the time of the disaster and were fortunate to escape bodily harm or death. Through the entire disaster, Robertson reported, not one member of the Church was injured, nor were any of the missionaries. The mission home lost some tile from the roof and plaster from the walls, but aside from that the place fared very well. [^22]

The earthquake caused the work of the missionaries in Tokyo to stop for a long time. However, they filled their days by helping some of the members repair their homes and others to relocate.

At home in Utah, gloomy reports were circulated, and in one instance an incorrect report of the death of President Robertson was published in one of the Utah papers. Not until September 11 did the friends and relatives of the missionaries know they were safe. [^23] The earthquake had a lasting effect on the mission in that it started the leaders at home thinking more seriously about the work in Japan and reassessing the position of the Church there. Also, the parents of the missionaries felt the distance from their sons and daughters to be greater than ever before.

Except for the unavailability of missionaries during World War I, international matters had no major effect on the mission until 1924, when America's Japanese exclusion law caused the most serious problems. A long series of state and national issues concerning the immigration of Orientals into the United States and subsequent issues relating to their possession of land had begun in 1882. This culminated with Congress's enactment in 1924 of a new immigration law, the second Johnson Act (also called the Exclusion Act of 1924), containing a section forbidding "aliens ineligible for citizenship" admittance to the United States. [^24] Because the Asians of China and Japan were the only aliens not eligible for citizenship, the law was a direct insult to the Japanese nation and was interpreted by the Japanese as such.

The law went into effect on July 1, 1924. That day was observed throughout Japan as a "day of humiliation," and Tokyo blazed with posters that read "Hate Everything American." The largest of sixteen meetings of protest lasted continuously from one o'clock in the afternoon until ten o'clock in the evening, with an audience ranging from five thousand to twelve thousand people. [^25]

The situation became very tense for the missionaries after this law was passed. On one occasion, shortly after the 1924 exclusion law went into effect, President Robertson found two posters tacked to his door saying, "Bei-jin Haiseki"—"American go home."

THE CLOSING OF THE MISSION

On June 13, 1924, President Hilton A. Robertson received from Church headquarters in Salt Lake City a telegram advising that twelve thousand yen was being wired to him. There was no message of explanation, [^26] but Robertson and his missionaries had a good idea why the money was being sent. For several years rumors had circulated among them concerning the possible closing of the mission. [^27] Even during a missionary conference a month earlier, President Robertson had "touched upon the possibilities of the Japan Mission closing and said that under present conditions, with the current thought as it is, it is impossible for the missionaries to spend their best efforts in the work." He also told the missionaries "that he hoped to learn in the very near future the fate of the mission." [^28]

He was free to make such a statement because he had been corresponding with the First Presidency regarding the matter. On January 31 he sent them a very carefully written appraisal of the condition of the mission. This was done after President Robertson had consulted with all of his missionaries to learn how they appraised conditions in their areas. This five-page report was seriously considered by Church president Heber J. Grant and his counselors.

In answering this letter, the First Presidency gave several indications that they were seriously considering closing the mission. The words "if the work continues" were used in one instance, and elsewhere they said they had doubted "the wisdom of continuing the mission." The most direct reference to closing the mission said:

When we stop to think that over twenty years of hard labor have been performed in Japan, it certainly looks as though the Lord would justify us if we saw fit to close that mission, when we read the words: "I feel perfectly safe in saying that we haven't over five or six real Saints in the mission who are willing and ready to help carry on the work." The Lord has said in D&C 18 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!"

We do not wish to lose one soul in Japan, but if the same amount of labor in some other country was performed, the chances are we would have many times as many converts. [^29]

Robertson's letter had indicated that all of the missionaries felt "the same amount of labor with some other people would bring better results." The only thing that appears to have kept the First Presidency from a final decision to close the mission at that time was "whether we have done our duty in warning the Japanese nation." [^30]

Following the May 1924 conference, the missionaries in Osaka, Sapporo, and Sendai, as well as those in Tokyo, found attendance at scheduled meetings dropping weekly. Furthermore, some of the elders were insulted by irate Japanese who were aroused by the recent passage of the Japanese exclusion laws in the United States. Notes telling them to go home had been left on their doors. To their surprise, on Sunday, June 15, a Tokyo newspaper "contained a short telegram message stating that the Mormon missionaries would be immediately withdrawn from Japan." [^31]

Why an earlier telegram from President Heber J. Grant had been delayed is not known, but on Thursday, June 26, 1924, the following correspondence dated June 9 arrived at the mission office: "Have decided to withdraw all missionaries from Japan temporarily. Cabling you twelve thousand yen for that purpose. If more needed cable us. Arrange return immediately. Grant." [^32] The man who had opened the mission in 1901 had made the decision to close it temporarily.

When the telegram arrived on June 26 instructing them to return, the missionaries promptly set about making arrangements for closing the mission. During the first three weeks of July, elders and sisters arrived at Tokyo from their various locations. They spent most of their last month or so in Japan visiting members, selling and giving away mission-owned goods, shipping books, and engaging in similar activities.

Then, on July 24, 1924, Elders William E. Davis and Milton B. Taylor, along with Elder and Sister F. Wallace Browning (who had visited China since the notice of closure came), boarded the S.S. President Cleveland and sailed for the United States.

After June 29, all meetings were canceled except sacrament meeting, which was held until the last Sunday before departure. Only two to four Japanese Saints attended during that time. The elders passed out thirty-seven hundred tracts during the final days of the mission. On August 2 President and Sister Robertson went to Osaka to encourage the Saints there to "live up to their duties." Then they boarded the S.S. President Pierce in Kobe, and all the remaining missionaries, Elder and Sister Elwood L. Christensen and Elders Rulon Esplin, Vinal G. Mauss, Lewis H. Moore, and Ernest B. Woodward, boarded the same ship in Yokohama. Sailing from Japan on August 7, 1924, their departure marked the closing of the early mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to Japan. [^33]

When the missionaries arrived in Salt Lake City on August 22, 1924, President Grant greeted them, saying, "Thank God you are home because I know what is in store for the people of that land and we are glad you are safely home." [^34] President Robertson made a statement many years later that was similar in spirit to that of President Grant's greeting. He said: "I think that the mission was closed for a purpose in 1924 when we returned home. I feel that the Lord knew what was going to transpire [speaking of ultranationalism and World War II] and he called the missionaries home and ordered the mission closed temporarily. Later on we find that the other denominations throughout the world who were proselyting in Japan were forced to close their missions and return to America at great loss and sacrifice." [^35]

Considering the number of problems the mission had faced through the years, the disruptions of the final two years, and the psychological distress suffered by the missionaries, it is easy to understand the decision of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve to close the mission. It was true that the results had been "almost negligible." Nevertheless, the mission did produce some lasting contributions, translation work in particular, and a few converts who were brought into the Church remained faithful through the years until the work was recommenced following World War II.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] See J. Christopher Conkling, "Members without a Church: Japanese Mormons in Japan from 1924 to 1948," BYU Studies 15 (spring 1975): 191-214.
[^2] See my "The Blossoming of the Church in Japan," Ensign 22 (October 1992): 33-34.
[^3] This chapter has been only slightly revised from chapter 10 of the author's book Unto the Islands of the Sea (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986).
[^4] See Edward L. Clissold Oral History, interview by author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1976, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 6-7.
[^5] See Elwood L. Christensen Oral History, interview by author, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1978, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 17-20.
[^6] J. Reuben Clark Jr., "The Outpost in Mid-Pacific," Improvement Era 38 (September 1935): 533.
[^7] See Conkling, "Members without a Church," p. 210. Conkling's data is from Mission Financial and Statistical Reports, Central Pacific Mission, 1937-1948, LDS Church Archives. I have added the information for 1949.
[^8] Ibid., p. 208.
[^9] Ibid., p. 211.
[^10] Ibid., 23 February 1902.
[^11] See ibid., 10 March 1902.
[^12] Heber J. Grant, address, in Conference Reports, 1901-1904, 4 October 1903, 7.
[^13] President Grant was home for only a little more than two months when the First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) called him to preside over the European Mission of the Church. He felt that this was in a way a second opportunity for success in the mission field.
[^14] Alma O. Taylor, Journal E, 16 July 1904, BYU Special Collections.
[^15] Alma O. Taylor, "About Japan and the Japanese Mission," Improvement Era 10 (November 1906): 6.
[^16] See Taylor's journals for a complete record of the translation process. See also his typed recollections of the same, in Taylor Papers, BYU Special Collections.
[^17] Joseph H. Stimpson to David O. McKay, 18 March 1920, Copybook H, 359, LDS Church Archives.
[^18] Mission Financial and Statistical Reports, Japan Mission, 1921, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as MFSR.
[^19] See Joseph H. Stimpson to Alma O. Taylor, 19 January 1921, Copybook I, 10, LDS Church Archives.
[^20] See MFSR, Japan Mission, 1920-1924; and Andrew Jenson, "Manuscript History of the Japan Mission," 1918-1924, LDS Church Archives.
[^21] See Kenneth Scott Latourette, A History of the Expansion of Christianity, The Great Century: North America and Asia, A.D. 1800-A.D. 1914, (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1970), 6:385ff.
[^22] See Hilton A. Robertson, in Conference Report, October 1924, pp. 123-24.
[^23] This information is based on an article in the scrapbook of Hilton A. Robertson, Provo, Utah. Brother Robertson has passed away since this manuscript was written, and the present location of the scrapbook is unknown to the author. See Deseret News, 11 September 1923.
[^24] See Edwin O. Reischauer, The United States and Japan (New York: Viking Press, 1963), pp. 16-17, for an evaluation of these events. See also his Japan: The Story of a Nation, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 1990), p. 155.
[^25] See Sidney L. Gulick, "American-Japanese Relations: The Logic of the Exclusionists," Annals of the American Academy of Social and Political Sciences 122 (November 1925): 181.
[^26] See Japan Mission Journals (1901-1924), 13 June 1924, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as JMJ.
[^27] See my "The Closing of the Early Japan Mission," BYU Studies 15 (winter 1975): 171-90.
[^28] Ibid., 14 May 1924.
[^29] Heber J. Grant, Letterbook (21 February-19 July 1924), 20 February 1924, p. 155, LDS Church Archives. In the same letter the First Presidency mentioned that Lloyd O. Ivie, the previous mission president, estimated that there were "only five or six real converts to the Gospel in that mission."
[^30] Ibid., 156.
[^31] JMJ, 15 June 1924. The LDS missionaries in Japan were not aware that a formal public announcement concerning the closing of the mission had been made in the Deseret News on June 12, 1924. It is not surprising that by June 15 international news-wire services had picked up this information.
[^32] Jenson, "Japan Mission"; see Grant, Letterbook, 19 June 1924, p. 752.
[^33] See Jenson, "Japan Mission," 7 August 1924. One of the final entries in this history states simply that in the first twenty-three years, eighty-eight missionaries had served in Japan. One died in the mission field, and seven were sent home sick. Nine elders had been sent home in varying degrees of dishonor. During that period 174 Japanese had been baptized—112 men and 62 women. Ten members had been excommunicated, nine had died, and eight had moved. Seven elders, twenty-two priests, fifteen teachers, and thirty deacons had been ordained.
[^34] Ibid., 22 August 1924.
[^35] Hilton A. Robertson, in Conference Report, April 1947, p. 53.
