R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

JAPAN AND HAWAII 1924-1945

The Interim

HOLDING ON THROUGH "THE ABSOLUTE DARK AGES"

With the mission closed, President Grant often brooded over the isolated Japanese Saints and looked for the time when the gospel could again be taught to those people. In the interim a faithful Latter-day Saint, Nara Fujiya, who later described the era as "the absolute dark ages," helped keep members unified by maintaining the Mutual Improvement Association (the only Church meeting they were authorized to hold) and publishing a newsletter called Shuro (The Palm), which appeared from 1925 through the fall of 1929. There were about two dozen Japanese members who wished to maintain activity in the Church, but they were spread from Sapporo in the north, to Tokyo and Kofu in the middle, and to Osaka in the west. From 1924 to 1927, the little flocks tried valiantly to sustain one another. Parties, especially at Christmastime, brought some warmth and fellowship. Some of these members eventually fell away, but most survived through their dedication to the Church.

In 1927 the First Presidency appointed twenty-eight-year-old Brother Nara to be the presiding elder in Japan and permitted the Saints to act more fully in priesthood functions. The First Presidency asked former mission president Alma O. Taylor to correspond with some of the members. But from 1927 until 1934 the picture is not clear. When Brother Nara's railway job took him to Manchuria in 1933, Church leaders found his replacement in BYU-educated Fujiwara Takeo. [^1]

In 1926 BYU president Franklin S. Harris had visited Japan in a professional capacity, but he also represented the Brethren in visiting the Japanese members and helping with organizational matters. While in Sapporo, he met Fujiwara and invited him to attend BYU. Brother Fujiwara became the first Japanese to graduate from BYU. In 1934, shortly after his graduation, he accepted the call to serve as presiding elder and as a special missionary in Japan. He shepherded the Japanese Saints faithfully, even performing two baptisms of member children and trying diligently to activate members and remain in touch until his early death from pleurisy in 1936. [^2] The decade from 1936 to 1945 was a period of little or no communication between the Church and the members in Japan. In fact, the focus shifted to Hawaii.

HARVESTING THE JAPANESE FIELD IN HAWAII

Recognizing that years might pass before missionaries could again preach in Japan, Heber J. Grant, the man who had established the Japanese Mission in 1901 and closed it in 1924, decided to continue work among the only significant population of Japanese who were available to the missionaries, the Japanese in Hawaii. [^3]

When President Grant arrived in Hawaii to organize the Oahu Stake in 1935, he was introduced to nine Japanese of Hawaii, generally called Americans of Japanese Ancestry (AJA), who had been baptized members of the Church the day before. [^4]

President Grant's entire Hawaiian experience pointed him to the conclusion that work had to be seriously undertaken among the Japanese, Chinese, and other Asians in Hawaii. From President Castle H. Murphy, who had felt compelled to start missionary work among the Chinese and Japanese in 1932, he learned of the various ethnic Sunday Schools in Honolulu. But the Japanese organization, which held all of its meetings in the Japanese language, seemed to impress him most. For a year or two before this, Elwood L. Christensen, a former missionary to Japan, had conducted services with the small but growing Japanese congregation. [^5] Both President Grant and his counselor President J. Reuben Clark Jr. related prophetic visions of the role Hawaii was to play in the expansion of the Church into Asia. President Clark wrote: "It would seem not improbable that Hawaii is the most favorable place for the Church to make its next effort to preach the Gospel to the Japanese people; and it would further appear that a strong colony of Japanese Saints in Hawaii could operate from there into their homeland in a way that might bring many Japanese to a knowledge not only of Christianity, but of the restored Gospel. There are evidences that the fields are ripening; if so, they will be ready sooner or later for the harvest to begin." [^6] The same reasoning was applied to the Chinese, Filipinos, and Indians of Hawaii. This vision of things to come has been fulfilled to a remarkable degree.

While President Grant was in the islands, he talked with President Murphy and others about reopening the Japanese Mission, but in Hawaii rather than in Japan. More than a year passed, and then, in November 1936, Hilton A. Robertson, who had served as mission president in Japan at the time the mission closed, and his wife, Hazel, were called to open the Japanese Mission in Hawaii. They arrived in Honolulu on February 24, 1937.

On the following Sunday the Robertsons met with a little band of thirty-five Japanese Saints and investigators. Among them was Sister Isune Nachie, who was now very old. She had joined the Church in Japan before the mission's closure and came to Laie in 1923 to do temple work. Edward L. Clissold described her as a true Saint. Others who were there were Dr. Tomizo Katsunuma, who had been converted to the Church while attending Utah State University in Logan, Utah, and Kay Ikegami, who also proved to be a faithful leader.

The first three missionaries to the Japanese Mission in Hawaii arrived in October 1937. They were Preston D. Evans, Roy W. Spear, and Melvyn A. Weenig. Weenig was later called as president of this mission in 1946. By the end of the first year, the total membership of the mission was seventeen: nine males and eight females. Four converts had been baptized, and the mission was off to a good start.

J. Christopher Conkling has prepared the following table to show the growth of the Japanese/Central Pacific Mission: [^7]

1937193819391940194119421943194419451946194719481949Missionaries519325455181374 34668977Baptisms Total4 1326374815672483430155267Membership173060101150302375437484522532604671

As can be seen in this table, the number of missionaries increased fairly rapidly after 1937, and the number of members began to rise steadily as well. During 1938 the work was expanded to the island of Hawaii, and in January and February 1939, missionaries of this mission were sent to Maui and Kauai, respectively. From the beginning, the greatest success came from among the young AJA. Sunday Schools, Primary classes, and MIA groups were organized wherever the missionaries worked.

During the lifetime of the mission, the elders and sisters were encouraged to learn the Japanese language. In retrospect this seems almost unnecessary, but it was considered wise at the time even though nearly all of the converts were among the English-speaking young people. The major concern was that when the youths had been influenced by the missionaries, they would want to introduce the missionaries to their parents. It was hoped that an ability to speak the Japanese language would help to influence Following its closure in Japan in 1924, the Japanese Mission was reopened in Hawaii in 1937. Mission president Hilton A. Robertson and his wife, Hazel, are sitting near the middle of the second row, among American Japanese members, friends, and missionaries. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) the older people, if only to convince them that their children should become Latter-day Saints.

Another reason for learning the Japanese language was the hope that the Japanese Mission in Hawaii would someday be the base of operations for the reopening of Japan to LDS missionary efforts. Although affairs did not work out in precisely this way, a missionary in Hawaii did teach the Japanese language to the first missionaries called to reopen Japan. In 1948, while waiting for permission to enter Japan, the first five elders studied the language on Oahu under the tutelage of Paul V. Hyer, who had learned to speak Japanese while serving a mission in Hawaii.

An important tie between the Japanese Mission in Hawaii and the Saints in Japan was established in 1939 when the Church sent President Hilton A. Robertson to Japan to maintain contact with the members there. Conkling described the trip in these words:

In April and May of 1939, Hilton A. Robertson made an official visit to Japan on behalf of the Church. With only inaccurate addresses, he began searching for Nami Suzuki, an old sister who had once lived in and cooked for the mission home. Of all the millions in the Tokyo-Yokohama area, a young girl emerged from a public bath, saw the foreigner and asked what he wanted. When Robertson told her, she said, "That's my mother." She took him right to Sister Suzuki's, and Robertson got other addresses from her. He visited the Tokyo, Sapporo, and Osaka Saints, and assured them that they had not been forgotten and that missionaries would return someday. While in Japan he baptized several new members—the two surviving children of Sister Suzuki (with Elder Watanabe confirming) and Elder Katsura's daughter (with Katsura confirming), among others. [^8]

The Robertsons were released in September 1940, and President Jay C. Jensen and his wife were called to direct the work. President Jensen, who had been a missionary in Japan during the early mission, continued the patterns of proselytizing established by President Robertson.

The churches of Hawaii, LDS and non-LDS, grew in number during World War II. Many of the new members were AJA. They, like many others, found themselves turning to religion more than before. It is fortunate that the Church had developed an organization ready to benefit from this new interest in Christian religions. A glance at the preceding table reveals that the Japanese Mission membership more than doubled during 1942, the first year of the war.

Concurrent with the greater interest in religion among the AJA was another development that may have contributed to the rapid growth during 1942. The missionaries were going home, and no new elders were on their way to replace them. It is probable that the missionaries put more pressure on their prospective converts to make decisions to be baptized than they might have otherwise done. Whatever the reasons, the number of converts expanded rapidly during 1942 and continued to grow throughout the war even though the missionary force was greatly diminished.

Edward L. Clissold, who was first counselor in the Oahu Stake presidency, was called to replace President Jensen in December 1942. He served as acting president until 1944, when his assignment as a reserve naval officer took him away from Hawaii. He was also temple president during these years.

One of the first changes Clissold made was the name of the mission. Because the term Japanese was held in derision and contempt, President Clissold felt that a more innocuous name would be better for the image of the mission. The name he chose for the mission was the Central Pacific Mission (CPM). This name remained from 1943 until the mission was combined with the Hawaiian Mission in 1950.

As the number of full-time missionaries dropped, President Clissold had to encourage the Japanese members to join with the long-established wards and branches. In 1944 President Castle Murphy was again called to Hawaii, this time to act simultaneously as president of the Hawaiian Mission, the Central Pacific Mission, and the Hawaii Temple. He was also servicemen's coordinator.

The conclusion of the war brought marked changes to the mission. In 1946 Melvyn A. Weenig and his wife, Georgia, were called to preside over the CPM, and before the year was over forty-five missionaries were serving in it, a number that Weenig did not believe adequate to handle the work. Over the next two years the mission force increased, but the number of baptisms did not grow accordingly. The immediacy of the war was past, and the AJA turned back toward their Japanese heritage.

But even though numbers of converts did not grow rapidly after the war, the AJA converts of earlier times remained loyal. According to Conkling, they "were the most faithful [Saints] in the world." [^9] Among those who were converted to the Church by the Japanese/CPM were Adney Y. Komatsu, later to be the first AJA to be a mission president and then a General Authority of the Church; Tomosue Abo; Kenji Akagi; Russell N. Horiuchi; Kotaro Koizumi; William Nako; Arthur K. Nishimoto; Edward Okazaki and his wife, Chieko, who until mid-1997 served in the general presidency of the Relief Society; Satoru Sato; Ralph Shino; Sam Shimabukuro, who served as mission president, temple president, and as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy; Walter Teruya; Roy I. Tsuya; and others, all of whom (with the exception of Sister Okazaki) have been called to serve as mission presidents to Japan, as Regional Representatives, or as temple presidents in Tokyo. Many other Japanese from the CPM in Hawaii have served in Japan as missionaries.

One of the aspirations of President Weenig and his missionaries was to extend their mission to Japan. This was not the destiny of the CPM. It did, however, produce many missionaries who were called to Japan. It was to Edward L. Clissold, not to President Weenig, that the responsibility of reopening the Japanese Mission was given.

President Clissold had been assigned to Japan as a member of the Occupation forces at the end of the war. While there, he participated with the LDS servicemen and reported their missionary activities to President McKay after he returned home. In 1948 the First Presidency decided that Clissold and Weenig should go to Japan together, but because of restrictions of the Occupation forces, only one man could be sent. Because Brother Clissold was already familiar with conditions in Japan and knew many important people there, he was sent to reopen the mission in Japan. He arrived there in the spring of 1948.

After the war, the efforts of the CPM were centered almost entirely upon young people who did not speak Japanese and who were part of the new Hawaiian Mission. For this reason Church leaders in Hawaii and Salt Lake City began to question the need for a separate mission for Japanese Americans. Finally, in 1950, the First Presidency decided to combine the CPM and Hawaiian Missions.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Edwin O. Reischauer, The Japanese (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1978), 213. The most recent history of Japan by a prominent writer is Mikiso Hane, Eastern Phoenix: Japan since 1945 (Boulder, Colo: Westview Press, 1996). Hane handles the religion-secularism question in almost the same manner. The fascinating fact, however, is that people "may profess affiliation with two or three different religions. In 1990, the total number of people that religious organizations claimed as members came to 217 million, twice the size of the population" (p. 182). It is difficult to have all the facets of Japanese religion reflect a clear light for non-Japanese.
[^2] There is considerable debate among sociologists of Japanese religion regarding the state of secularism in Japan. Winston Davis, for example, finds Japanese cultural and religious traits different enough from those of the West to question the validity of international surveys that include Japan. Even within Japan he questions whether standard questions regarding religiosity uncover the true religious feelings of the Japanese. "While belief naturally seems to be an appropriate index of religiousness to the westerner (and to the Japanese sociologist trained in western sociology)," writes Davis, "by itself it tells us only part of the story. The reason for this is that religious praxis (shugy&obar;) and feelings (kimochi) and not belief per se form the core of Japanese religion. The best way to understand the real genius of this religion (and its putative decline) is to turn from what Japanese believe or think about religion to what they feel and do. This, of course, takes us from statistics to a more humanistic examination of religious behavior" (Winston Davis, Japanese Religion and Society: Paradigms of Structure and Change [Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992], p. 236; emphasis added).
[^3] J. Herbert Kane, A Global View of Christian Missions, rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1975), p. 252.
[^4] See D. C. Holtom, Modern Japan and Shinto Nationalism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1943), p. 97.
[^5] Richard H. Drummond, A History of Christianity in Japan (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1971), pp. 272-73.
[^6] A photocopy of the original advertisement is in my possession.
[^7] See Yukiko Konno, "Fujiya Nara: Twice a Pioneer," Ensign 23 (April 1993): 31, 33.
[^8] Edward L. Clissold, interview by Kenneth Barnum and J. Christopher Conkling, November 8, 1973. Tape recording in my possession.
[^9] See Mission Financial and Statistical Records, Japanese Mission, 1948, LDS Church Archives (hereafter cited as MFSR).
