R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

JAPAN 1945-1962

The Reopening and Foundation Years

Most Americans think of the Japanese as a deeply religious people—indeed, saturated with religion for both national and personal reasons. In truth, however, this conception needs explanation and interpretation. Although most Japanese claim to have religious beliefs or affiliations, Japan is a secularized society, one wherein religion plays a minor role in the lives of most of the people. In his book The Japanese, Edwin O. Reischauer, highly regarded scholar of Japanese history, says: "If this book dealt with a South Asian or Middle Eastern people, it might well have started with a consideration of religion. Even for most Western nations, religion would have required earlier and fuller treatment. But religion occupies a more peripheral position in Japan. Before the seventeenth century it did play much the same role in Japan as in the West, but the trend toward secularism that has recently become marked in the West dates back at least three centuries in Japan." [^1]

Reischauer then explains the role Confucianism has played in Japanese religious and social life. Confucianism stresses a rational natural order and a social system based on strict ethical rules. But it has no concept of a personal deity, no priesthood, and very little religious ritual. Although few, if any, contemporary Japanese would consider themselves Confucianists, most Japanese are more strongly influenced in the way they live their lives by Confucianism than by Buddhism, Shinto, or the so-called new religions (Shink&obar;-Sh&ubar;ky&obar;) of the postwar era. [^2]

The Japanese, like the Chinese, have seen little conflict among religious persuasions. For hundreds of years it has been traditional for a Japanese to be blessed at birth and married by a Shinto priest, to live his or her life according to Confucian ethics, and to be buried or cremated by a Buddhist priest. Buddhism, it should be noted, is the only religion (or philosophy, in the case of Confucianism) of the three that has a well-developed concept of mankind's destiny after death. When asked regarding their religious affiliations, most Japanese answer that they are Buddhist.

The history of religions in Japan during the twentieth century has been one of general decline punctuated by periods of upheaval, suppression, government misuse, and spectacular growth. Though it is beyond the scope of this book to review all of the major developments during the past nine-plus decades, it is appropriate to touch on a few events and trends that have had an effect on the history of the LDS Church in Japan.

Following the closing of the early mission in 1924, Japan moved steadily into the period of ultranationalism that eventually resulted in the Sino-Japanese War and World War II. During the 1930s the Japanese government required all citizens to visit Shinto shrines and to worship the emperor. The government took the position that "bowing to the portrait of the emperor was simply a patriotic gesture and that attendance at the Shinto shrines was devoid of religious significance." [^3] This was hard for the Christians to accept, but in 1936 the churches were forced to submit to the government's position. [^4]

When Protestant and Roman Catholic ministers, missionaries, and priests left Japan on "furlough" during the late 1930s, they were not allowed to return. Christianity had always been considered a foreign religion, and at a time of ultranationalism, it and its proponents were automatically suspect. The situation was further exacerbated when the government passed the Religious Bodies Law of 1939. This law brought all religion under state control. According to this measure, all Christian churches were supposed to unite in one body, the Kyodan—a religious party or association. Some religious denominations did unite, others operated secretly, and still others were forced to disband or leave the country. By 1941 most Americans and other foreign missionaries had returned to their own lands. During the war, Japanese Christians and their churches were subjected to many pressures. Compulsory emperor worship was introduced, all hymns referring to the lordship of Jesus Christ were removed, and Sunday school materials were used by the government as a potent vehicle for the dissemination of government propaganda. Although Christian church services continued throughout the war, conditions were depressingly difficult by the end of the war. Not only had many non-Christian lives been lost, but Christians and their property were lost to the bombings of almost all of Japan's major cities.

When the war finally ended on August 14, 1945, the Japanese nation was exhausted, prostrate before the Allied forces. Although the Japanese people had been told that the American and other Allied troops would be harsh overlords, such proved to be untrue. The Allied forces, in turn, were surprised to find that the Japanese people, a people who had fought bitterly, even ferociously, were submissive and cooperative subjects of the Occupation government.

On October 4, 1945, the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers (SCAP), a designation that was applied not only to General Douglas MacArthur but also to his Occupation government, repealed the Religious Bodies Law. Two months later, on December 28, SCAP gave a directive that became part of the law of the land under the title of the Religious Juridical Persons Law. The freedom of religion implied in this law was given legal validity when it was accepted as Article Twenty of the new constitution, which went into effect in May 1947. Another step, one of great importance, was Emperor Hirohito's proclamation, on January 1, 1946, that he was not a divine or quasi-divine person and that the Japanese people were not superior in any way to other races and peoples. "By this statement," writes Richard H. Drummond, "the traditional spiritual basis of the Japanese government and society, the doctrine of the divinity of the emperor, which had been developed with increasing explicitness for over half a century, was at one stroke demolished. For many Japanese the act was psychically more shattering than military defeat and surrender, and it left literally millions to reconstruct their spiritual foundations and standards of value." [^5]

It was in this spiritual vacuum that dedicated LDS servicemen first taught the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. The time was right for the growth of all Christian churches as well as for many new religious movements that sprang from the Japanese people themselves. Protestants and Roman Catholics frequently refer to the period from 1945 to 1951 as the "Christian Boom." Circumstances were definitely right for the establishment of the LDS Church during that period. Between 1945 and 1951, the year the Occupation ended, the Japanese people were excited about most things American, and they were grateful to have religious freedom. But after 1951, when the economic growth of the nation began to spiral upward and most Japanese became quite comfortable with their new postwar standard of living, interest in religion slackened and the difficulty of converting Japanese to Mormonism became greater. The present trend toward secularism—that is, the process whereby religious thought, practice, and institutions have lost social significance—has intensified ever since the early 1950s.

THE REESTABLISHMENT OF THE LDS CHURCH IN JAPAN

In 1944 Edward L. Clissold, at that time a member of the Oahu Stake presidency, president of the Hawaii Temple and the Central Pacific Mission, and an active-duty Navy officer, was sent to military government school at the University of Chicago. While there he was trained as a government administrator, and he President Edward "Vaun" Clissold stands between Church members W. Paul Merrill (left) and Guy A. Hart, who were with the army engineers in Japan during the Occupation. Merrill and Hart advised Clissold regarding the feasibility of reconstructing the building the Church had purchased as a mission home. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) expected to be assigned as a provincial governor in Japan when the war ended. As he had anticipated, Clissold was sent to Japan immediately after the conclusion of hostilities. But contrary to his expectations, he was assigned to work in the education and religion section of SCAP.

During his short tour of duty in Japan (only two months), Clissold became acquainted with a number of LDS servicemen and the operation of servicemen's groups. He also became thoroughly familiar with the officers within the section of SCAP that had greatest influence on the development of religious affairs in postwar Japan. In addition, Clissold did what he could to find the remaining Japanese Latter-day Saints from the previous mission era. On October 30, 1945, he placed a small ad in Japanese in a Tokyo newspaper, saying: "URGENT NOTICE—I would like any member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Near-Day Saints (Mormon Church) to contact me as soon as possible. Daiichi Hotel, Room 548. Lt. Col. Edward Clissold." [^6] Brother Nara Fujiya, who had shepherded the Japanese Saints from 1924 until 1933, responded to Brother Clissold's notice. As a result, a few other Japanese members were located and integrated into the activities of the LDS servicemen. [^7]

In February 1946, the Clissolds returned to Honolulu to resume their business and Church activities that had been curtailed by the war. Brother Clissold was soon called as both a stake high councilor and stake mission president. In the spring of 1947, the First Presidency called Melvyn A. Weenig, president of the Central Pacific Mission, and Brother Clissold to go to Japan to investigate the possibility of reopening the mission, and if appropriate, to do so. Since the mission had been closed for so long, however, the U.S. Department of War would allow only one representative of the Church to enter the country. Because he had been in Japan recently and knew how to deal with the military government, Clissold was selected to go. He received word of this appointment and was set apart as mission president on October 22, 1947.

The First Presidency instructed President Clissold to preside over the members, to organize the Church, to establish a mission headquarters, and to make arrangements for missionaries to enter the country. When he arrived in Japan on March 6, 1948, President Clissold almost immediately saw the reason for his previous appointment to the education and religion section of SCAP. For the next several months he had regular contact with many of the men he had worked with in his military assignment. Through this affiliation he found help and open doors that greatly facilitated the organization of the mission. [^8]

Since missionaries were not permitted entrance into Japan until provision had been made for their maintenance, President Clissold began immediately to search for living and office quarters. In April he located a partly burned mansion in Azabu, Tokyo, President Edward L. Clissold purchased this building soon after he arrived in Japan to reopen the mission in 1948. The mansion served as mission home and offices for nearly thirty years before being razed to make way for the Tokyo Temple, which was dedicated in 1980. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) and through the help of many influential people, even Prince Takamatsu, and after a series of extremely complex negotiations, he obtained permission to buy the property. [^9] This mansion had served as the residence of the Japanese minister of welfare during the war. Although it had taken a direct hit from an incendiary bomb, the walls of the ferro-concrete structure were still solid. [^10] Renovation of the building began in May, and by the twenty-second of that month President Clissold moved into the servants' quarters over the garage. Although Sister Clissold and other missionaries moved into the home in September, the remodeling work was not completed until November 25, 1948. A large addition came later, and in the late 1970s the building was razed to make way for the new Tokyo Temple. It was in an excellent part of the city and served the Church well as a mission home and The mansion, which had housed the Japanese minister of welfare, had taken direct hits from an incendiary bomb during World War II. This picture shows the building as it appeared when purchased by the Church. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) office for almost thirty years. It is significant that within the first month of the new mission the Church bought property in Japan. None had been acquired between 1901 and 1924.

The initial group of missionaries arrived in Japan on June 26, 1948. The first of their number, Harrison Theodore "Ted" Price, was called to serve in late 1947. The other four were Paul C. Andrus, Wayne McDaniel, Koji Okauchi, a nisei (second-generation American of Japanese Ancestry), and Raymond C. Price, brother to Ted. (Elder Paul Andrus and Elder Ted Price both later served as mission presidents in Japan, and Ray Price served in the presidency of the Tokyo Temple.) At least two of these men had fought against the Japanese in the Pacific theater during World War II. Now they were returning to teach the gospel of peace. Between December 1947 and March 1948, these elders were assigned to the Central Pacific Mission in Hawaii for language training under Paul V. Hyer, an elder who had learned to speak Japanese well. They not only studied the Japanese language but also tracted and taught the gospel with companions from the Central Pacific Mission. Their experience in Hawaii prepared them to teach the gospel as somewhat experienced missionaries. Otherwise they would have entered the Japanese mission field as total "greenies." [^11] They were allowed to enter Japan only after President Clissold had made arrangements for them to live with American Saints in the Occupation forces. [^12] Between June and the end of 1948, the mission force grew to seventeen: President and Sister Clissold, thirteen elders (seven Caucasians and six nisei), and two sister missionaries (both nisei).

One of the early assignments President Clissold gave the first group of elders was to find any members from the former mission who were still alive. Some of the converts of the early mission, such as Brothers Nara, Shiraishi, and Takagi, as well as a few women, had already found the Church and were serving well in one or two small groups. But by no means had all of the old members found the Church. Paul C. Andrus and his companion, Ray Price, found some members in the Yokohama area who had been out of touch with the Church since the late 1930s but who had nevertheless remained faithful. One of those who was overjoyed to know that the Church had returned to Japan was Sister Suzuki Nami. According to Elder Andrus, "she remained faithful even though during the war and during the Japanese incident in Manchuria she lost two of her sons and one daughter. . . . Her very nice home in Yokohama was bombed and burned and destroyed completely. When Ray Price and I found her, she and her husband were living on two tatami straw mats. Each mat is six by three feet. Over these they had a corrugated iron lean-to. They cooked in there on a charcoal brazier, a hibachi, and they slept there. This was their property where they had had their restaurant, which had also been destroyed." [^13]

In their search the elders found a few other Japanese Saints, and along with new investigators and new converts they began to build not only a new church but also new lives from the rubble of war.

As the missionaries went to work proselytizing among the Japanese, they found them much more willing to listen to the message of the restored gospel than had been true before the war. The elders had several advantages that the missionaries before 1924 had not enjoyed. Among these were translated materials to share with prospective converts. The most important item was of course the Japanese version of the Book of Mormon. A collection of hymns and a few tracts were also available. But more important than the literature were the people, both those members who remained faithful from the early mission and the U.S. military people who not only lived the gospel and taught it to their Japanese friends but also contributed time, money, and leadership to the newly established mission.

Even before the mission was officially opened in March 1948, some Japanese had been baptized into the Church. The first Japanese to join were Sato Tatsui and his wife, Chiyo, who were taught the gospel by Ray Hanks and C. Elliott Richards. Mel Arnold and Boyd K. Packer also became friends and gospel teachers. On July 7, 1946, the Satos were baptized in a swimming pool at Kansaigakuin University. Elliott Richards baptized Brother Sato, and Boyd K. Packer baptized Chiyo. [^14] Brother Sato, who remained faithful to the Church until his death in Salt Lake City in 1996, organized a Sunday School in Nagoya in 1946 and conducted it almost single-handedly until missionaries were sent there in October 1948. He later became the official translator for the Church in Japan and eventually retranslated the Book of Mormon as well as produced new translations of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and a number of other Church books and publications. [^15]

As had been true during the early mission, many Japanese were eager to learn the English language. President Clissold noted that he had almost daily requests for the elders and sisters to teach spoken English at schools from elementary to college level, as well as at clubs and businesses. The missionaries took advantage of many of these opportunities to teach, provided that the learners were willing to be taught from LDS materials. English classes were the foundation of the first Mutual Improvement Associations in Japan after the war.

The day after President Clissold arrived in Japan, he was taken to a Japanese Sunday School that was directed by his friend Nara Fujiya and conducted by Tsukayama Kiyoshi. Forty-three people were in attendance. Certainly the circumstances of the reestablishment were better than those that had prevailed during the early mission. Brother Nara's little group became the nucleus of the Ogikubo Branch, which was organized later that year. By the end of 1948, President Clissold had organized a branch and four Sunday Schools. And these organizations were separate from the servicemen's groups. At that time, President Clissold reported that nine hundred people were attending LDS services every week. Twenty-two converts' names were entered on the Church records in 1948. [^16]

When President Clissold submitted his year-end report to the Presiding Bishopric, he expressed confidence that the missionaries would bring many converts into the Church during the coming year. "The great needs of the mission at this time," wrote Clissold, "are literature in Japanese and more missionaries." The missionaries were working on the literature problem, but the shortage of missionaries Clissold perceived could be alleviated only at Church headquarters. President Clissold repeatedly asked the First Presidency to supply ten missionaries each month, five Caucasians and five Japanese-speaking nisei. His plan was to put Japanese speakers together with the language learners. This would eliminate the need for lost time in language study. Eventually the Caucasian elders and sisters would be able to function well, but in the meantime the nisei could carry the load. Considering the worldwide missionary demands of the Church, it was difficult for the Church leaders to meet his requests. It is regrettable that more missionaries could not have been sent. Taking into account the dislocation, the upheaval, the changes in the family system, and the newfound freedom of religion in Occupation Japan, 1948 through 1951 could have been the best possible years for the Church to expand rapidly in that land.

Although President Clissold was not satisfied with the number of missionaries assigned to Japan, he used those whom he had to expand the proselytizing area to Sapporo in the north and to Osaka-Kobe in west-central Honshu. By the time he was released to return home on August 31, 1949, elders and sisters were teaching the restored gospel in at least ten major cities, including Tokyo, the largest city in the world.

On June 11, 1949, Elder Matthew Cowley of the Quorum of the Twelve and his wife, Elva, arrived in Tokyo for a tour of the mission. He was at that time president of the Asian and Pacific missions of the Church. During his stay in Japan, he visited most of the branches and traveled as far west as Hiroshima. While in Japan, Elder Cowley prophetically promised "many Church buildings and even [LDS] temples in this land." [^17]

President Clissold's term as mission president was short by normal standards, but considering his previous service to the Church in Hawaii and his years away from home while in the military, his arrangements with the First Presidency to remain in Japan for only eighteen months were understandable. By the time he departed for home, he had accomplished all of the tasks assigned him by the First Presidency. Vinal G. Mauss, who followed Clissold as mission president, gave him high praise when he said, "I don't see how any one man could accomplish what he did, in the time he was there, in getting the facilities and the organization that were necessary." [^18]

THE PRESIDENCY OF VINAL G. MAUSS

When President Mauss arrived in Japan on August 20, 1949, he began a mission that lasted for more than four years. Mauss, a businessman and mortician from Oakland, California, had served as a missionary to Japan during the last year or two of the early mission. During the years of his presidency, he moved the work along well, especially considering the international developments that occurred while he was in Japan.

Between 1949 and 1953, Japanese membership grew from 211 to more than 800, the number of districts expanded from one to five, and the number of Japanese branches grew from twelve Sunday Schools and one or two branches to twenty-five branches. The number of missionaries also expanded to a high of eighty-four during this time.

President Mauss's greatest contributions, however, were not in numerical growth but in the areas of missionary training and expanded proselytizing, Church organization, acquisition of property, and work with LDS servicemen's groups. If President Clissold laid the foundation for the Japanese Mission, President Mauss can be credited with the erection of the walls. By the end of 1949, the missionary force was up to forty-four. During 1950 President Mauss was busy integrating still another thirty-six elders and sisters. With the added numbers of workers, he asked all branch leaders to expand the Sunday Schools and to begin holding sacrament meetings. It was at that time that many of the Sunday Schools in fact became branches. By the end of 1950 there were fifteen branches in the mission. Almost all of these units were presided over by missionaries.

THE IMPACT OF THE KOREAN WAR

Midway in that year, however, war broke out in Korea, and before the end of the year its effects were being felt by the Japanese Mission. The military draft greatly diminished the supply of new LDS missionaries. But because the missionary terms in Japan were for three years rather than two and one-half or two years, the number of missionaries did not drop as quickly or as low as in other missions before the cease-fire in 1953. But the mission was affected, and President Mauss took action to keep his missionary force from dropping too far. In 1950 Mauss's missionaries baptized 184 people into the Church, ten more than the total number of converts who had joined during the entire twenty-three-year history of the early mission. He was elated and wanted to see the work expand.

Another effect of the Korean War was the assignment by the U.S. military of thousands of servicemen not only to Korea but also to Japan (which was a major staging area), Guam, Okinawa, and the Philippines. Among these military people were hundreds of Latter-day Saints. On June 23, 1951, the First Presidency asked President Mauss to include in the Japanese Mission Guam, the Philippines, and Okinawa, as well as all other parts of East Asia where LDS service personnel were stationed. They also asked him to visit the major areas and supervise the LDS servicemen's groups and districts. By 1953 there were seven groups and two servicemen's districts in Japan. There were even larger numbers in Korea, as well as other groups elsewhere in East Asia and the Philippines. President Mauss supervised all of these units.

In 1953 President Mauss's son, Armand, who was serving as president of one of the servicemen's districts in Japan, compiled a manual of operations for servicemen's organizations. This manual, published and distributed widely among LDS military personnel, served to unify record keeping and to help leaders understand not only how to keep records but also why priesthood ordinances such as baptisms, blessings, and ordinations should be cleared with the proper authority and recorded. [^19] The servicemen's organization was completely separate from the Japanese Mission organization. [^20]

The service personnel supported the development of the Church in many ways, not the least of which was by way of example. When it became evident to President Mauss that the supply of American missionaries was going to be diminished, he decided to call local Japanese members on full-time missions. By the end of 1952, eleven young Japanese men and women were serving two-year missions, and by mid-1953 the number was up to twenty. Almost all of them were supported by money contributed by LDS servicemen. Years later President Mauss asserted that his most important contribution to the Church in Japan was the calling of local missionaries. With only one or two exceptions, all of the local missionaries became strong leaders in the Church. [^21]

DEVELOPING JAPANESE LEADERSHIP

In September 1951, before he was able to initiate missionary calls for local Saints, President Mauss found it necessary to combine the four Tokyo branches into two. Only two foreign elders were used to supervise the two new branch presidencies. The Tokyo First Branch was presided over by Takagi Tomigoro and his counselors, Shiraishi Genkichi and Imai Kazuo. The president of the Tokyo Second Branch was Nara Fujiya, and his counselors were Sato Tatsui, who had moved to Tokyo from Nagoya to work for the mission as a full-time translator, and Nakahigashi Mikio. [^22] Most of these early leaders have remained active in the Church to the present or until their deaths. Although it was the exception to have only local men in the branch presidencies, it was an indication that some Japanese were ready for leadership positions by this time.

The activity of the Japanese Saints was impressive. Many of the young members of the Church had influenced their parents to stop drinking tea as a measure to improve their health. Members were eager and willing to pay tithes and offerings. At the end of 1952 there was an average attendance of more than 50 percent at sacrament meetings and 75 percent activity among priesthood holders. There was little unemployment or need for welfare help. Japan was definitely well on the way to economic recovery by 1951, and this fact was reflected in the well-being of the members and investigators. [^23]

EFFECTS OF JAPAN'S GROWING ECONOMY AND JAPANESE CULTURAL TRAITS

On the other hand, there were some negative effects of Japan's new economic prosperity. One of these was a growing apathy toward religion. Mauss noted, "There has developed that spirit of indifference which always seems to come when there is an abundance of material things." [^24] This change was observed not only by the Latter-day Saints but also by other Christian groups. That the mission was actually having less success in converting new members is reflected in the steady decline in baptisms from 214 in 1951 to 55 in 1955. [^25] Only in 1956 did the mission begin to have greater success, but some of that success was really achieved in Korea, which was a district of the mission.

Economic prosperity was not the only cause of the decline in convert baptisms. The missionaries gradually learned that they did not understand Japanese thinking or Japanese customs. There was a tremendous gap in communication between the Japanese people and the American missionaries, a gap much larger than simply that of language. For example, the Japanese people have a religious tradition of inclusion rather than exclusion. They hold that all religious truth is relative. Whereas Christians in general and Mormons in particular believe that God has provided only one way to salvation, the Japanese are willing to assimilate various religious beliefs and patterns. In accepting one religion, most Japanese see no reason to give up others.

Another example is the Japanese desire to avoid direct confrontation or uncomfortable situations. It is of higher social value in Japan to avoid an embarrassing situation than to make a commitment that one does not intend to keep. When LDS missionaries pressed Japanese for certain answers or commitments, or when they asked prospective converts how they felt about the teachings of the Church, Japanese often pretended to agree, simply to avoid confrontation. Some Japanese even joined the Church as a way of paying back the missionaries for English-language lessons.

Similar to this is the matter of giri/ninjo, duty versus human feelings, which is frequently portrayed in sharp contrast in Japanese literature. In Japan, giri (duty) almost always takes precedence over ninjo, one's true feelings, beliefs, or ideas. Thus social conventions rule individual lives. Failure to conform brings shame to the individual and one's family. This had been a problem for the Church when investigators have cooperated with missionaries because good manners demanded such behavior. On the other hand, when Japanese have truly developed testimonies of the gospel, it has helped to cement loyalties to the Church. A third result of giri has been the tendency of some Japanese to favor traditional beliefs and behavior even when their mind, spirit, and feelings have inclined them toward the restored gospel. Remaining a loyal part of the Japanese national family, one's own family, one's place of employment, one's club or interest group has been a strong deterrent to conversion to the Church.

Still another problem was the Japanese custom of &obar;n, or obligation. Americans usually feel that they should return favors that are given as acts of kindness, but generally the repayments are casual and sometimes even forgotten. In Japan, on the other hand, the people believe in a rigid system of reciprocal obligations. Favors and kindnesses must be repaid. It is a moral obligation. In some cases Japanese investigators have joined the Church because they have "carried" an &obar;n to the missionaries. In other instances, the missionaries acquired an &obar;n to people of influence who had done favors to the Church, such as lending space for meetings. These missionaries did not realize that they were bound by duty (giri) to repay the favor with something of equal value. Such oversights have resulted in loss of face for the Church. [^26] These kinds of problems—customs, economics, obligations, duties, and religious relativity—were becoming evident to the foreign missionaries during President Mauss's period, and they remain significant challenges in the present.

Because prices were rising rapidly, President Mauss decided to raise money to buy property for meeting places as rapidly as possible. Before his release, he succeeded in securing four fine homes to be used as chapels. The mission did not construct any new buildings at that time. President Mauss and the Saints decided to raise money to build a chapel in Tokyo. Although they did not succeed in collecting enough to move ahead with the project, they did carry out some activities that welded the local Saints, the missionaries, and the military people together. Two of the most successful money-raising activities were a fashion show and a program called "Hawaii Calls." The latter was a natural because many of the missionaries were from Hawaii.

TWO MORE YEARS OF SERVICE FOR HILTON A. ROBERTSON

Vinal G. Mauss served long and well. His release to return home came in October 1953. His replacement was Hilton A. Robertson, who had recently been released as president of the Chinese Mission, which had been terminated a few months before in California. [^27] Robertson and his wife, Hazel, had also served previously in Japan, where he closed the early mission, and in Hawaii, where he organized and presided over the Japanese-Central Pacific Mission from 1937 to 1940. He was a dedicated worker, steady and faithful. His missionaries admired his good qualities, and the members respected his years of experience and his insight into their needs.

When President McKay set Hilton A. Robertson apart as mission president, he gave him unusually broad authority. He was to preside over not only the Japanese Mission but also the Chinese Mission. "Yours is now a distinct responsibility, a mighty one, in holding the Presidency of the Missions in the Orient, in Asia," said President McKay. He told him to "organize these missions" and to "expand in excellency, in permanency." He specifically told President Robertson to take care of the little group of Chinese Saints in Hong Kong. [^28]

When President Robertson arrived in Japan, he found the demands of the mission and the servicemen's organization to be very time-consuming. In fact, he hardly had time to think about China or other areas such as Korea, Okinawa, the Philippines, and Guam. But Church leaders in Salt Lake City, particularly President McKay, had a larger vision of the world and the missionary responsibility of the Church. In the summer of 1954 President McKay sent Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve Apostles to Japan and Asia to survey the progress of the mission and to study the possibilities for growth. Elder and Sister Lee arrived in Japan on August 20. During their stay they visited all five mission districts and the servicemen's districts. Elder Lee and President Robertson went to Korea, where they visited with many servicemen and held several conferences. The five LDS chaplains in Korea all strongly encouraged Elder Lee to send missionaries into Korea. Although Elder Lee was favorably impressed by their positive attitude, President Robertson was concerned about possible problems of health, housing, and food. [^29] After the visit to Korea, Elder Lee and President Robertson and their wives traveled to Okinawa, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and Guam. When Elder Lee reported his trip to Asia at general conference a week after he returned to Salt Lake City, he told the Church: "The signs of divinity are in the Far East. The work of the Almighty is increasing with a tremendous surge." [^30] During his travels in East Asia, Elder Lee met with 1,563 LDS servicemen and servicewomen.

Elder Lee was obviously impressed with the missionary possibilities he saw. Only a year later, undoubtedly as a result of Elder Lee's recommendations, [^31] President Joseph Fielding Smith, then President of the Council of the Twelve, visited Asia, made some significant changes in mission organization, and dedicated several new lands for the preaching of the restored gospel. President and Sister Smith arrived in Tokyo on July 25, 1955. Two days later President Smith met with the missionaries and service people at Karuizawa. He there proposed that the mission, which had sometimes been called the Far East Mission but was generally known as the Japanese Mission, should be divided into two missions. Japan, Korea, and Okinawa were renamed the Northern Far East Mission. Hong Kong, Taiwan, the Philippines, and Guam were named the Southern Far East Mission. President Smith sustained Missionaries of the newly renamed Northern Far East Mission in Japan are gathered around President Joseph Fielding Smith (dark suit, center second row) and his wife, Jessie. Surrounding President and Sister Smith are (left to right) H. Grant Heaton and his wife, Luana (holding baby), on their way to Hong Kong to open the Southern Far East Mission; and Hazel and Hilton A. Robertson, who presided over the Northern Far East Mission. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) H. Grant Heaton, who accompanied him, as president of the southern mission. [^32]

This division in the mission was highly significant. It was an indication from the leaders of the Church that even though the missionaries had been unsuccessful in establishing a permanent mission in Hong Kong in 1949, they were ready to move forward again. That President Smith, the President of the Council of the Twelve, was selected to make this move and to dedicate the lands of South Korea, Okinawa, the Philippines, and Guam was no accident. His coming made it clear that the First Presidency and the Twelve considered the actions he carried out to be highly important. At that time the LDS servicemen outnumbered the Asian members (1,600 servicemen in thirty-four groups compared to 1,050 Asian members in twenty-five branches), but the prospects among the Asian people were recognized as excellent.

President Robertson's missionaries, however, did not convert many Japanese. The principal reason was the tremendous turnover in missionaries. Most of the local Japanese missionaries completed their terms during 1954 and early 1955, and President Robertson did not see the need to replace them with more local missionaries. Had he done so, he could have largely eliminated the other part of the problem, that of having too many missionaries who did not speak Japanese well enough to be effective. President Andrus, who followed Robertson, almost immediately reinstituted the pattern of calling local missionaries, but that change was not made until early 1956.

President Robertson's leadership was important in three other areas. He supported and helped Sato Tatsui with his retranslation of the Book of Mormon—a project that Sato began while President Clissold was still in Japan—and with his translations of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, which he worked on concurrently with the Book of Mormon. While President Joseph Fielding Smith was in Japan, he spent considerable time with Brother Sato, explaining difficult passages and helping with interpretation of meaning. Brother Sato had worked carefully on this large assignment. Since Presidents Robertson, Mauss, and Clissold all encouraged him to take whatever time was needed to do the job right, the books were not published until President Andrus presided over the mission.

Another contribution was in the acquisition of property. President Robertson purchased for the Church at least three homes that doubled as chapels and living quarters for missionaries. He noted that wherever the Church had buildings the work was "greatly facilitated." [^33]

Finally, President Robertson did much to strengthen the auxiliaries: the MIA, which had held meetings throughout the mission since the early months; Sunday Schools, which had been started early, even before sacrament meetings in most instances; and Relief Societies, which had been organized during Mauss's time. Primaries had their beginning under Robertson's direction in 1954.

President Robertson's health began to fail during 1955. He mentioned his health problems, particularly trouble with his vision, to President Smith. He undoubtedly also mentioned his long years of service in the mission field. In late October, only a day or two after Robertson had it confirmed that he had cataracts in both eyes, he and his wife received their letter of release. [^34] It was soon announced in Salt Lake City that Paul C. Andrus and his wife, Frances, of Honolulu, both of whom had formerly served as missionaries under Presidents Clissold and Mauss, had been called to lead the Northern Far East Mission. The Andruses arrived in Japan on December 9, eleven days after the Robertsons sailed for home.

THE LENGTHY PRESIDENCY OF PAUL ANDRUS

"Japan is in a period of great transition, economically and politically," wrote President Robertson in his 1954 report, "and the Japanese mind and attitude toward life is quite unstable, as you may realize, since the war. We hope this condition will right itself more rapidly, that we might be able to impress the people more with the importance and need of the restored gospel." [^35] President Robertson probably misinterpreted his opportunities. Research in the sociology of religion points to the link between instability and the growth of proselytizing religions. Thirty-one-year-old President Andrus, on the other hand, could see nothing but significant progress during the five years since his release from his first mission and magnificent opportunities for proselytizing in the future. He wrote:

The growth and the progress of the Church in Japan seems striking indeed as I return after an absence of five years and compare our position now with our position at that time. Although the number of branches is approximately the same, they are organized and functioning much more completely; there are more good leaders serving in the branches; the Church owns more property, and meeting places in general have improved; our members generally have grown stronger in faith and in works as their experience has increased and their testimonies have congealed. The Japanese economy has made very good progress in the last five years, and the goods and services available to the missionaries have grown in number and improved in quality accordingly. The present position of the Church in Japan seems all the more marvelous when I recall that not quite eight years have elapsed since Pres. Edward L. Clissold, and subsequently the missionaries, arrived back in Japan to reopen the work. [^36]

President Andrus's positive attitude sustained him during the six-plus years he presided over the mission. His term was a period of rapid growth on many fronts. The mission-member population grew from just over one thousand to more than sixty-six hundred. During these years (1955 to 1962), the Church in Korea grew so rapidly that it was made a separate mission in 1962 (there were only sixty-five members there in 1955). The missionary force also doubled during this time, growing from 82 to 179 foreign missionaries. It was during President Andrus's time that Elder Gordon B. Hinckley began his years as supervisor of the Asian missions of the Church.

DEVELOPING A UNIFORM PLAN FOR TEACHING THE GOSPEL

Shortly after President Andrus arrived, he learned that there was no uniform teaching plan and that each pair of elders or sisters used whatever methods suited them best. During the Clissold era, the missionaries had concluded that because the Japanese people were not Christian it would be necessary to teach them first about Christianity and then about the restored gospel. Later, during Mauss's time, the mission used the Anderson-Bankhead Plan for a while. This plan was gradually laid aside, and by late 1955 every set of missionaries had created their own system. Another problem made this nonsystem still less effective. During the first year or two of the mission, a number of converts, perhaps more than 50 percent, dropped into inactivity. According to President Andrus, some observers criticized the mission for baptizing converts too soon. As a result, during the Mauss and Robertson years the mission philosophy was that the missionaries should teach investigators until they asked for baptism. The missionaries did not generally push for a decision. As a result, by the end of the Robertson years the missionaries were baptizing only 0.7 converts a year per missionary. Clearly something had to be done to improve the situation.

President Andrus met with his traveling elders (later called supervising elders or assistants to the president) and asked them to create a uniform plan for teaching the gospel. A suitable plan was not accepted by the mission until late in 1956. In the meantime President Andrus placed the missionaries on a strict work schedule and encouraged them to move toward uniformity in their teaching methods. These simple measures more than doubled the number of converts per missionary in 1956.

Toward the end of that year, President Andrus received a copy of Willard Aston's book Teaching the Gospel with Prayer and Testimony. One of the basic principles taught in that book was that one teaches the gospel, bears testimony, and then invites the investigator to be baptized. "At the end of 1956," said Andrus, "I called together our leading elders and talked about this. We came up with a six-lesson teaching plan that was geared for the Japanese. We incorporated into it these principles. We announced the introduction of this plan and began using it in 1957." [^37]

For the first time, the missionaries realized that their former slow approach had been wrong. Moreover, there was no need to convert the Japanese investigators to Christianity. The important objective was to convert Japanese directly to the restored gospel and "and let them find out about so-called Christianity thereafter." [^38] It was this idea that moved the mission forward and brought the great growth of the next five years.

TRANSLATION OF THE STANDARD WORKS OF THE CHURCH

The new missionary approach dovetailed perfectly with the publication of the standard works in Japanese. As was noted earlier, Brother Sato completed his retranslation of the Book of Mormon and his new translations of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price during the closing months of 1955. Because President Andrus had done a considerable amount of translating during his first mission and was unusually well prepared to work with the Japanese language, he obtained permission from the First Presidency to organize a translation review committee in Japan. This committee was given final authority to approve the translation of the standard works. It consisted of President Andrus, Sato Tatsui, Takagi Tomigoro, Elder Ben Oniki, and Elder Don Lundberg. For a number of months they met every day for three or four hours until they completed the review and revision of the manuscripts. Sanseido Printing Company, a large dictionary firm, printed ten thousand copies of the Book of Mormon, which were delivered to the mission home a day or two before Christmas 1956. The Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price came off the press about a year later.

The timing of the publication of the Book of Mormon and the creation of the new proselytizing plan were just right to move the mission forward on its new course. The missionaries were able to go into the homes of investigators and tell them the story of Joseph Smith, give or sell them a copy of the Book of Mormon, and invite them to be baptized. The missionaries implemented the new plan, and before long they were baptizing people whom they had known for months or even years but whom they had failed to invite to join the Church. Convert baptisms jumped from 129 in 1956 to 616 in 1957. The average number of baptisms per missionary climbed to 5.8. [^39]

PLANNING FOR FUTURE GROWTH

When Elder Delbert L. Stapley of the Quorum of the Twelve set President Andrus apart in Hawaii, he gave him a charge from the Brethren to prepare the Saints in Japan for the organization of a stake and to open missionary work in Korea and Okinawa. A similar charge had been given to H. Grant Heaton earlier that year to expand the Church into the Philippines, Taiwan, and Guam. Expansion was definitely on the minds of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve. When President Andrus arrived in Japan, he surveyed the branches and decided that creation of a stake would be a long way off unless he reorganized some of the branches and opened new ones.

In 1955 there were two branches in Tokyo (a city of nine million people), one in Yokohama, one in Osaka, and so on. The previous mission presidents had operated on two premises. At first they sent missionaries to the cities where there were members of the Church to work with and build upon. Later, President Mauss moved the missionaries into a number of small cities because he believed that people in the rural areas deserved to hear the gospel and were more willing to listen to that message. But although the people of smaller towns proved to be friendly and kind, they were as set in their ways as the urban Japanese and did not accept the gospel readily. In fact, the Japanese of smaller communities were more tightly woven together than those of the big cities and were thus more difficult to shake loose from their established social ties. Therefore, President Andrus concentrated on the large metropolitan areas. Tokyo was not only large enough for many branches but also, as was shown during 1978 when the mission was divided, large enough for two or more missions.

Whenever he felt it wise to do so, Andrus closed small, out-of-the-way branches. Then, as soon as possible, he built the number of branches to five each in Tokyo, Osaka-Kobe, and Seoul, Korea. These branches later became the nucleus for stakes in all three cities.

As the Church grew, President Andrus was able to make two other important changes that helped prepare Japan and Korea for stakes. For reasons that were more Japanese in origin than American, very few Japanese men were ordained to the priesthood during the pre-Andrus years. In fact, by the end of 1955 there were only forty-one Japanese Melchizedek Priesthood holders. According to Armand J. Mauss, many Japanese Church leaders did not understand the value of having many men hold the priesthood and share the leadership of the branches. Hence, they did not propose that new converts should receive advancements in the priesthood. This hesitation was partly a result of their deep respect for the priesthood. The idea seems to have been that a new convert should prove himself for three to five years before he received the priesthood. Thus it was impossible for mission leaders to turn many positions over to the local members. This may have been one reason why most branches and districts were led by missionaries.

As more members came into the Church, Andrus set up a two-year program for advancement in the priesthood that, over the years of his mission, brought the number of Japanese and Korean Melchizedek priesthood holders to more than 350. This enlarged number made it possible for mission leaders to place local men in almost all (75 to 80 percent) branch and district positions. This move, of course, released many elders from administrative duties and allowed them to proselytize full-time. [^40]

Because Elder Stapley had asked President Andrus to expand missionary work into Korea and Okinawa, Andrus went to those places soon after he arrived in Japan. In both areas he found the people to be ready for the gospel, particularly in Korea, but found physical circumstances difficult in both places. Nevertheless, through the help and consideration of Kim Ho Jik (whose story, along with that of the opening of Korea, is told in chapter 8), a few other members, and the LDS servicemen in Korea, and with the assistance of Sister Nakamura Nobu and some LDS servicemen in Naha, Okinawa, President Andrus made arrangements to send the elders to those areas.

OPENING MISSIONARY WORK IN OKINAWA

The Lord provided help to the mission in a most unusual way. In 1955 a former missionary to Japan named Elder Ralph Bird, who was now in the service, was assigned to Guam. But for some unknown reason, he one day received orders to go to Okinawa. When he arrived there, his military superiors did not expect him, nor did they have a job for him. They gave him some time off until they figured out the situation. President Andrus told the remainder of the story this way:

So, speaking Japanese, he was interested in the Okinawans. He walked out into the countryside, and as he was walking along the road, he came to a home and decided . . . he would go in and speak with the people to see if he could take a picture of their home. So he slid open the door and said, "Gomen kudasai." [Excuse me or pardon me.] He didn't realize that at this very moment Sister Nakamura was in her home on her knees praying that the Lord would lead her to the true church. And here Elder Bird came, opened the door, and said, "Gomen kudasai."

She came out and was very impressed that here was an American who could speak Japanese. So she asked, "How is it that you speak Japanese so well?" He said, "Well, I was a missionary for the Mormon Church in Japan." She said, "Wouldn't you come in and tell me about your church?" This is how they came together. He taught her and she was converted and baptized. [^41]

Sister Nakamura Nobu, her teenaged daughter Ayako, and a woman named Tamanaha Kuniko were baptized into the Church in the East China Sea on Christmas Day 1955.

When President Andrus went to Okinawa looking for a place for the missionaries to stay, Sister Nakamura offered her home—a comfortable one by Okinawan standards—and it was there that the elders lived when they first arrived in the country. The first elders, Clarence LeRoy B. Anderson and Sam K. Shimabukuro (the latter served in the Second Quorum of the Seventy from 1992 to 1997), traveled to Okinawa from Japan proper by boat and arrived there on April 17, 1956. They stayed at the home of Sister Nakamura for two or three months. Her home was a former castle. Before long they had established a small branch and built a Quonset hut chapel.

OTHER STRIDES FORWARD

In addition to his efforts to expand the mission, to prepare the Saints for stakes, and to improve proselytizing efforts, President Andrus also helped to make Church materials—even beyond the standard works—available in Japanese and Korean. He organized a staff of translators, typists, and printers and produced most of the priesthood and auxiliary manuals and handbooks. During this time the mission began publication of Seito No Michi (Way of the Saints), which developed into a fine monthly magazine that replaced an earlier Church magazine, the Messenger and the Grapevine. In addition, the mission translated and published a new book of hymns in Japanese and also a translation of Recreational Songs. Although there was need for materials to be translated into Korean, the list of materials needing to be translated into Japanese was much longer. [^42]

During the Andrus years, the mission continued to serve the needs of a large servicemen's organization. Of greater long-range importance, the number of branches in Japan and Okinawa between 1955 and 1962 grew from 26 to 37, and the number of branches in Korea expanded to seven. This growth made it obvious to all concerned that chapels were sorely needed. To meet this need, President Andrus purchased twenty-three chapel sites. These properties, which were obtained at great expense and after considerable expenditure of time and effort, became the basis for a large building program during later years. [^43]

Without question, the most important property purchase made during this time, and probably the most profitable in the history of the Church, was the acquisition of the Yoyogi Street property in Omote Sando, Tokyo. President Andrus described the background of the purchase in this way:

As we organized our five branches in Tokyo we wanted a good central location not only for a stake center, but someplace that would be a showplace for the Church in all of the country and represent the Church in all of the Far East. After all, this is Tokyo. It's the largest city in the world.

So for years I looked for a place and finally found one in Tokyo that we thought would fill the bill. . . . We found this property just at the time that Brother Hinckley was coming [to Japan as part of his first tour of Asia]. The interesting part of the story is that this property, which was about 30,000 square feet in size [186 feet along the street and an average depth of 138 feet], was selling for $670,000 [plus $12,000 in real estate commissions]. Of course that was a very expensive price, and we couldn't consider it except for one thing: when President Mauss was president of the mission way back in 1952, he bought a piece of property that was serving as the Tokyo Branch meetinghouse site. It was an old residence, but it was about 30,000 square feet, and he paid $20,000 worth of yen to acquire it.

In the meantime we found this other property that was better located right on the entrance boulevard to the Meiji Shrine. Every person in Japan knows where it is. If you say Meiji Jingu, Omote Sando, they all know where it is. Just like saying it's on the boulevard that runs past the Washington Monument. [^44]

When Elder Hinckley looked at the property, he was impressed with its potential but staggered by the price. But before he had a chance to reject the property, President Andrus told him that the land President Mauss had purchased for $20,000 was now worth $500,000. Upon hearing this, Elder Hinckley immediately saw the possibility of gaining approval for purchase of this land. After prayerfully considering the matter and discussing it by telephone with President Henry D. Moyle of the First Presidency, Elder Hinckley recommended that the Church buy it. President McKay approved, [^45] and on June 3 Elder Hinckley and President Andrus completed the transaction.

Over the years, the house on the Omote Sando property served as the Central Branch meeting place. At the same time the land continued to appreciate in value. Various mission presidents and Elder Hinckley considered different possibilities for the site. It was too valuable for a meetinghouse alone. The Church considered building a six-story structure that would house not only a chapel but also apartments, offices, a distribution center, translating facilities, missionary quarters and offices, and so forth. [^46] But these ideas were not to be realized. After receiving offers of 5 million dollars, then 13.5 million dollars, the Church finally sold the property in 1973 for $24, 150, 943.40. The remarkable fact was that the net outlay from the Church was $150,000. The principal and interest from the transaction became available to help with the acquisition of hundreds of other chapel sites throughout Japan or however the leaders of the Church were inspired to expend the funds. [^47]

President Clissold laid the foundation, President Mauss constructed the walls, and President Robertson continued the project. But it was President Andrus who built the roof for the Japanese Church and peopled it. It remained for President Dwayne N. Andersen to educate and refine the new occupants.

NOTES

Mikiso Hane (see n. 1 above) writes: "People state their religious affiliations if asked, but most people do not have strong commitments to any religious institutions, as do Christians, Jews, and Muslims in other societies" (Eastern Phoenix, 182). Hane quotes Hayashi Chikio, who wrote: "It seems safe to say that perceptions of religion differ in Japan and the West. Westerners see religion as something objective that must be acquired through education or study. The Japanese, by contrast, think of religion as an internal state. It need not have the clear-cut contours of Christian or Buddhist doctrine; it can be simply a nebulous emotional predisposition lying undetected until the individual is made aware of it" (Hayashi Chikio, "The National Character in Transition," Japan Echo 15 [1988], pp. 8-9).

---
Notas:
[^1] See Dwayne N. Andersen Oral History, interviews by author, Provo, Utah, 1973, Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 47.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journal, 20 May 1961; in possession of President Hinckley.
[^3] Ibid., March 1962.
[^4] See Andersen Oral History, p. 47.
[^5] See ibid., 45-47; see also Mission Financial and Statistical Reports, Japanese Mission, LDS Church Archives (hereafter cited as MFSR).
[^6] Andersen Oral History, p. 15.
[^7] Ibid., p. 34.
[^8] In Terry G. Nelson, "A History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Japan from 1948 to 1980" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1986), appendix B, pp. 158-59.
[^9] Ibid., p. 26.
[^10] Kan Watanabe et al., "Japan: Land of the Rising Sun," Ensign 5 (August 1975): 42.
[^11] Although the Andersen Oral History is the primary source for this section, see also Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 78-83.
[^12] Success Messenger, June 1996, p. 116, LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Adney Y. Komatsu Oral History, interviews by author, Honolulu, Hawaii, and Salt Lake City, Utah, 1974, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 4.
[^14] Hugh B. Brown, "Prophecies Regarding Japan," BYU Studies 10 (winter 1970): 159-60; see Hinckley, Journals, 21 April 1967.
[^15] Hinckley, Journals, 21 April 1967.
[^16] See Komatsu Oral History, pp. 33-34; Don W. Marsh, The Light of the Sun: Japan and the Saints (n.p., n.d. [1969?]), p. 66.
[^17] See Komatsu Oral History, pp. 20, 29-30.
[^18] Hinckley, Journal, 16 October 1967, 26 April 1968.
[^19] See Gerald Joseph Peterson, "History of Mormon Exhibits in World Expositions" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1974), pp. 144-45.
[^20] See "Expo '70 Ground Breaking," Church News, 17 May 1969, p. 4.
[^21] See Peterson, "History of Mormon Exhibits," pp. 143, 146.
[^22] Bernard P. Brockbank, "The Mormon Pavilion at Expo '70," Improvement Era 73 (December 1970): 121.
[^23] For an extensive account of the production of the Japanese version of Man's Search for Happiness, see Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, pp. 9-15.
[^24] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Future of the Church in Asia," Improvement Era 73 (March 1970): 14; see his "A World Message," Improvement Era 73 (June 1970): 96.
[^25] See Spencer J. Palmer et al., "Educational Needs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Asia," report to the Church Commissioner of Education, 1972, LDS Church Archives, pp. 82-83.
[^26] See MFSR, Southern Far East Mission, 1962-1968, LDS Church Archives; see also Missionary Department Annual Report, 1978, p. 8, LDS Church Archives.
[^27] These statistics are according to Niiyama Yasuo, who formerly served as a Regional Representative in Japan.
[^28] See "Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi," Ensign 7 (November 1977): 101-102; Gerry Avant, "War's Tragedies Lead to Gospel," Church News, 29 October 1977, p. 5.
[^29] "Church Educational System, Overview," pamphlet (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), p. 38.
[^30] Hinckley, Journal, 8 August 1975.
[^31] Cherie Campbell, as quoted in "Temple to Be Built in Tokyo," Ensign 5 (October 1975): 86.
[^32] As quoted in "Japan Area General Conference," Church News, 16 August 1975, p. 5.
[^33] See "President Benson visits Asian countries," Church News, 10 June 1978, p. 4.
[^34] See "Three new missions formed," Church News, 4 March 1978, p. 3.
[^35] See "Choir to perform in Japan," Church News, 30 December 1978, p. 3; Dorothy Stowe, "Joy spans the Pacific as choir visits Orient," Church News, 22 September 1979, pp. 3, 8.
[^36] See "8 new missions formed," Church News, 16 February 1980, p. 3; "Area conferences in Far East planned," Church News, 22 March 1980, p. 3; and "Dedication dates set for temples in Tokyo, Seattle," Church News, 19 April 1980, p. 4.
[^37] Andrus Oral History, pp. 24-25.
[^38] Ibid.
[^39] The number of convert baptisms for the remaining years of Andrus's presidency was 735 in 1958, 596 in 1959, 896 in 1960, and 1290 in 1961. There were 1,622 baptisms in 1962, but that number belonged to President Andersen as well as to President Andrus. See MFSR, Japanese Mission, for applicable years.
[^40] See Andrus Oral History, p. 51.
[^41] Ibid., p. 19.
[^42] See ibid., p. 52.
[^43] See ibid., pp. 50-51.
[^44] Ibid., p. 30.
[^45] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 29-30 May 1960, in possession of President Hinckley.
[^46] See Ezra Taft Benson, "A World Message," Improvement Era 73 (June 1970): 97.
[^47] See Andrus Oral History, p. 32.
