R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

JAPAN 1962-1978

To the Building of the Tokyo Temple

When President Dwayne N. Andersen and his wife, Peggy, arrived in Japan to assume the reigns of leadership of the rapidly growing mission, he soon recognized that tremendous growth had taken place in the mission since he served there in the early 1950s. His first mission to Japan had been during the Mauss era. He had served as a counselor in the mission presidency and had directed the affairs of the LDS servicemen's organization. Because as a seventy he had accepted a call to serve as a special missionary for two years during the Korean conflict, he did not have enough time then to learn the Japanese language. Nevertheless, he had observed well the Japanese and the workings of the mission, and he had a good grasp of the responsibility held by the mission president.

When President Andersen reviewed the status of the mission with President Andrus, he learned that there were now close to seven thousand Japanese members, seven times the number when he left Japan in 1953. He also learned that although only ten or twelve branches had been added during that time, existing branches were much larger than before and were attempting to carry on the full program of the Church. The number of missionaries had grown, too, from 66 in 1953 to more than 180 in 1962. The magnitude of the growth and progress of the mission impressed President Andersen, but the very growth had created new challenges that needed considerable attention. By the end of President Andrus's period, there were sufficient members of the Church in Japan for leaders in Salt Lake City as well as in Japan to begin seriously contemplating the creation of a stake or stakes. But much would have to be done on many fronts before a stake could be organized. New modern chapels were sorely needed; more and better-trained priesthood leaders were required; and a group of solid families, of whom the husband and wife had been to the temple, would be desirable before a stake could be organized. It fell on President Andersen to move the Church forward in these areas and a number of others.

President Andersen arrived in Japan at a time of transition. The Korean area was divided off and made a separate mission at that time. And during the preceding months, the Church Missionary Committee had introduced the first uniform proselytizing plan that was used worldwide. Though this new plan was in use, some missionaries, recognizing they would soon be released, preferred not to expend the energy needed to learn the new discussions. This recalcitrance, along with some other problems, created some difficulty for President Andersen during the early months of his mission. Nevertheless, he worked to create a new spirit of enthusiasm (he fostered a program called PMA, or Positive Mental Attitude) and a heightened level of spirituality (he did this by example, by teaching, and by selecting senior elders and having them help new missionaries make the best possible adjustment to the pattern of missionary life). When President Andersen discussed success with his missionaries, he emphasized conversions rather than baptisms. "I felt that we shouldn't expand," said Andersen, "but should try to consolidate and build a strong foundation, and if they wanted more missionaries in Japan they should divide the mission and get more help, because one man just couldn't do it all." His greatest contribution was in consolidation, but he also stimulated considerable expansion. [^1]

BUILDING CONSTRUCTION

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley made his first visit to Asia and Japan in 1960. A year later he was officially appointed supervisor of the Asian missions. During his second visit to Japan, in May 1961, he noted the serious need for chapels. "This is most urgently true in Japan. I think we must go forward with one good building in Tokyo." [^2] But he did not hold to that number. By the next spring, Elder Hinckley had arranged for Wendell B. Mendelhall, chairman of the Church Building Committee, to go to Japan and make arrangements to start a substantial building program. [^3] The First Presidency and Council of the Twelve approved construction of five buildings under the building (or labor) missionary program.

When President Andersen arrived in Tokyo, he found Melvin Hales and Sam Kalama, who had arrived three days earlier, waiting to start on two chapels there. In August, President Andersen began calling labor missionaries, and the program was soon under way.

President Andersen found it difficult to find young Japanese members who would work as labor missionaries. One reason was the Japanese tradition that held that those who labor with their hands are of the lower classes. He noted that most of the Church members were white-collar workers, college or high school students, or business people. Because the members were not accustomed to working with their hands, they shied away from calls to service in the building program. This attitude was changed somewhat when Japanese members looked on as American servicemen and women gave freely of their time and energy to build chapels. It was not unusual to see colonels, captains, and other officers working side by side with young enlisted men.

The servicemen played another vital role in the construction program. Since the time of President Mauss, they had regularly contributed to the mission building fund. By the early 1960s they had donated thousands of dollars. These funds formed the financial foundation of the building program.

The building missionary program proved to be a success during the Andersen years and continued into the late 1970s. Many of the building missionaries in Japan have developed into fine leaders in the Church, including Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi of the First Quorum of the Seventy.

While President Andersen was in Japan, nine chapels were started. Two of these, the Tokyo North and Tokyo West Branch buildings, were completed and dedicated, and the Naha (Okinawa) Branch and the Gunma Branch were completed. Two other buildings, the Tokyo East Branch and the Fukuoka Branch, were completely remodeled. Four other buildings were under construction—the Abeno, Tokyo South, Yokohama, and Sapporo Branches. President Andersen also purchased seven building sites. [^4]

The new buildings did much to establish the Church as a permanent part of Japan. The Saints took new pride in their membership, for they now had physical proof of the Church's stability and respectability, which is important in Japanese culture. Moreover, the Japanese Saints were able to follow more completely the worship patterns of the Church in the new buildings.

ENLARGEMENT OF THE PRIESTHOOD AND LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

Japanese society is a closed society. No foreigners hold national political positions, and few foreigners hold positions of authority in other areas. Thus it would be incorrect to assume that the Japanese Saints would feel comfortable in their church for long if foreigners held the most important leadership positions. President Andersen quickly recognized this fact as well as the importance of building local leadership as soon as possible. With the large membership base created before his time, he was able to choose from among the best prospects and train them for later roles as stake and mission leaders. Only by developing a strong local priesthood corps and women of equal ability to lead the auxiliaries could the Church find a permanent place in Japanese society.

President Andersen chose Watanabe Kan and Yamada Goro as counselors. President Watanabe lived in Osaka, and President Yamada lived in the Tokyo area. Whenever he traveled west and south, Andersen took Watanabe along. Watanabe served as translator for President Andersen, but Andersen included him in almost everything he did. Andersen constantly explained Church policies, procedures, and organizations. But when he held conferences in Tokyo or places north, he always took Yamada along for the same reasons. It is important to note that both men have since served as mission presidents and in many other important capacities. Watanabe served as a Regional Representative over part of Japan.

At the other extreme, President Andersen saw the need to involve new male converts in meaningful Church activity soon after they were baptized. The missionaries developed several lessons for new converts that introduced the programs of the Church and explained the importance of the priesthood and its availability to worthy males. Within a month of a new male convert's baptism, his branch president was supposed to interview him and ordain him to the Aaronic Priesthood. During Andersen's three years, there was steady improvement. Six hundred and seventy males were baptized during 1964 and the first six months of 1965, and 67 percent of these people were ordained to the priesthood. This was a significant increase compared with earlier years. Between 1962 and 1965, the number of Melchizedek Priesthood holders rose from 355 to 584. [^5]

But having sufficient numbers of priesthood bearers was not enough. They and their female counterparts needed training in the policies, procedures, and order of the Church. President Andersen instituted many programs in leadership training, particularly at Saturday leadership meetings in conjunction with quarterly district conferences.

According to President Andersen, it was amazing to see the faith that some of the leaders developed. For example, "a district councilman would go to work on Saturday with a suitcase. As soon as he'd get off work he'd get on a train and travel all night to a district assignment, such as a branch conference or something. He would arrive at the branch Sunday morning, hold meetings all day Sunday, and take care of district business and matters, get on the train Sunday evening, travel all Sunday night, arrive back to his place of work Monday morning, work all day Monday and arrive home on Monday night. So he left home Saturday morning and didn't see his family again until Monday night. They were willing to make these kinds of sacrifices." [^6]

President Andersen also soon realized that if he would break with his usual pattern of taking his wife, Peggy, and Watanabe Kan to Okinawa by air, he could save enough money to take twenty mission leaders there by boat from Tokyo. The various mission auxiliary leaders and priesthood leaders contributed much more to the conferences than the Andersens and Watanabe could have done alone. [^7]

But although the Japanese Saints made considerable progress toward parity with the better-developed parts of the Church, there remained some problems that only time and growth could change. For example, shortly after the mission organized the first elders quorum in the Tokyo area, a decision was made to hold a social. It was announced that each elder was supposed to bring either his wife or a female friend. When the party took place, however, the only women present were Sister Andersen and a girl who was helping with the serving. It was not customary for Japanese married couples to go to social events together. On the contrary, it was traditional for men to go out together and leave their wives at home. Thus custom conflicted with a traditional American Mormon way of socializing. It was also not common for husbands and wives to sit by each other in Church meetings or to make much effort to be in the same vicinity.

Still another problem was home teaching, which was being introduced Churchwide at this time. Church procedure suggested that home teachers visit each family each month in their home. In the Japanese setting this did not work well, for at least two reasons. First, the typical male member was the only person in his family belonging to the Church (this pattern has changed somewhat since that time), and the other family members frequently did not want the home teachers bothering them. Second, home teachers had to travel far. Thus it worked best to have the home teachers visit their families at the chapel.

In spite of some difficulties and cultural adjustments, many Japanese Saints developed strong faith and became fine examples of the Mormon way of life. They kept the Sabbath day holy even though it was generally their only day off work. They followed the other commandments such as the Word of Wisdom. During the Andersen years, tithing, which was largely kept in the mission, rose high enough that the Northern Far East Mission no longer depended on funds from Church headquarters for operating expenses. This pattern has continued to the present. The Japanese Church is totally self-supporting.

THE FIRST TEMPLE EXCURSION TO HAWAII

For believing Saints, few earthly acts have more significance than participation in temple ordinances. The young leaders within Japan were no exception. They wanted to receive their own endowments or special blessings from the Lord and to be sealed to their wives or husbands and children for eternity. This hope notwithstanding, until 1964 no one had figured out a way to take a group of Japanese Saints to the temple.

The stimulus to organize a tour group to travel to Salt Lake City or to Hawaii came from Yamanaka Kenji, an older convert who, in addition to being a tour director, knew many people in influential places. He concluded that at least a small group of branch and district officers, thirty or forty people, could afford to go to Salt Lake City. At about the same time, early 1964, President Andersen learned that Flying Tiger Airlines would be willing to carry a charter of approximately 160 people for $300 each. With this possibility in mind, mission leaders sent word to all branches asking how many people would like to participate in an excursion to Hawaii during the summer of 1965, a year and a half away. One hundred and seventy people said they would make the financial and spiritual preparations for the trip. The mission sponsored a number of money-making projects to raise funds, such as selling pearl tie tacks and even recording a stereo record of Church music and Japanese songs. The musical endeavor is described in the following account. [^8]

JAPANESE SAINTS SING

Dwayne N. Andersen

[A] project for fund raising was a stereo record called "Japanese Saints Sing." This was a chorus of about 24 people singing Japanese songs and Church hymns. Brother Yamanaka knew the "top" man in the music field in Japan. This man arranged for a fine orchestra and the best recording studio to make the stereo record. This little group of singers, which included Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi (now of the Quorum of the Seventy), practiced for weeks to get ready. They were practicing at the Northern Far East Mission Home the night before the record was to be taped. They had not practiced with the orchestra yet and sounded quite poor. I wondered how they could ever make a successful record. The next morning the little chorus went to the recording studio early enough to practice a few minutes with the orchestra. Later in the morning I went to the studio to give them moral support.

Arriving just as they were going to start recording, I asked the chorister, young Brother Sato, if they had held a prayer. He said that the chorus group had prayed, but not with the orchestra or studio workers. I suggested that they pray again with everyone present, and he asked me to pray. As the recording light came on, everyone quieted down, and over the loudspeaker came the words: "It is time for prayer." I then stepped forward and gave a prayer in English, while the engineers, orchestra, and singers all stood at attention. As "amen" was said, many of the Church members were in tears. Later, one of the chorus women remarked: "My voice was tight and tense all morning, but when you prayed a feeling of calm came over me and I sang without tension." Others felt the same calmness.

After recording one song, they played it back so we could hear it. I could not believe my ears! It was just beautiful and sounded like a large chorus. One member told us that they felt like angels were singing with them! It was the first time that an entire record had been taped in one single day. Since the orchestra could only put in an eight-hour day, they taped the last few selections; and the chorus had to sing their numbers with the taped music. Earlier in trying to record, the orchestra's rhythm was very "swingy" for "Oh, My Father." So the chorus sang it a cappella to first show the orchestra how the rhythm should be. For the other songs, the orchestra leader tried to have his people follow the chorus. The entire day was just one big miracle. We had many people, after hearing the record, ask us if it was the Tabernacle Choir.

After the mission had announced its intention to follow through with the excursion, numerous problems arose, the most serious ones related to the cost of fare. The Civil Aeronautics Board would not allow Flying Tiger Airlines to come into Japan to pick up passengers. The mission leaders turned to Japan Air Lines. But Japan Air Lines was generally uncooperative until President Andersen pointed out that during 1964 the Church had done more than $70,000 business with them. The Church, in fact, was their largest single client. After that the airlines agreed to charter a jetliner for $273 per person, round trip.

Making charter arrangements was time-consuming, but more important and more time-consuming were the spiritual preparations. The participants studied the significance of temple work, made changes in their lives if necessary, and in every way prepared themselves to be morally and spiritually ready to enter the temple. When the First Presidency learned through Elder Hinckley that the trip was going to become a reality, they asked President Andersen to send a translator to the temple in Hawaii to prepare the entire temple ceremony in Japanese. Sato Tatsui was selected for this assignment. He also played one of the leading roles in the ceremony when it was recorded in Japanese.

When the jetliner was coming in over Pearl Harbor in July 1965, one of the 166 participants looked down and said to himself, "I wonder what kind of reception I will get since my fellow Japanese dropped bombs . . . on Pearl Harbor? How will I be treated?" When the plane landed, the Hawaiian Saints gave the Japanese Saints one of the greatest welcomes ever. They piled leis high on every neck and greeted the newcomers warmly. "I had heard about brotherly love," said the worried brother, "but I never really knew what it was. Now I know what brotherly love is. Now I want to share this brotherly love that I have felt among these people whom we tried to destroy, but in return they have shown kindness and love." [^9]

Elder Hinckley joined the group in the temple and sealed some of the couples. Many of the visitors had deeply moving experiences. In the words of Watanabe Kan, "The spirit that was there was just indescribable and it burned so strong that those offering prayers were choked up for lengthy periods of time before continuing in the supplications to the Lord." [^10] Of the 164 Japanese who went to Hawaii, 134 were adults who received their own endowments. The rest were their children.

An added benefit from this excursion was the opportunity for the Japanese Saints to participate in meetings of the wards and stakes of Oahu. Arrangements were made to have each Japanese member assigned to a person who was his or her counterpart in the Church. Branch presidents from Japan spent considerable time with bishops in Hawaii and attended all of their meetings. Likewise, district presidents went with stake presidents, district councilors with high councilors, and so on. The leadership training was of immeasurable worth to the Japanese Saints. [^11]

The 1965 temple trip was the first of many. The next one came in 1967, and after that the charter groups went to Hawaii almost yearly until the last group flew to Hawaii in July 1979. The Tokyo Temple was completed by the time the next departure would have taken place.

Hardly a week passed after the first temple group returned to Japan before President Andersen and his family departed from Japan for Hawaii, where he would take a position at the Church College (now BYU—Hawaii). His replacement was Adney Yoshio Komatsu and his wife, Judy.

THE KOMATSU YEARS: A PERIOD OF DEVELOPMENT AND MATURITY

When President Andersen left Japan, the formative period of Church history there was essentially over. But the contemporary era of the proliferation of stakes and missions was not quite ready to begin. President Komatsu's mission can best be characterized as a time of final preparation for the growth of the 1970s and 1980s. He saw it that way when he was there. When he had been in the mission for a year he wrote: "The Japanese people need stakes and wards. They need a temple. The full force and impact of the gospel on the lives of the Japanese will not be realized until the Saints here have the opportunity to receive their endowments and to perform other temple ordinances. The main thing which stands in the way of the organization of stakes and wards and the building of a temple in Japan is the lack of real strength in the Church here; not only in number of members, but in priesthood holders and real leaders." [^12]

President Komatsu devoted his major efforts to training local leaders and carrying on the programs that President Andersen had started. This is not to say that he did not bring changes and progress to the mission, for he did. It was during his era that Elder Hinckley first recommended that the Northern Far East Mission should be divided. It was also during this time that the Translation and Distribution Services program of the Church was introduced in Japan. And it was during this time that Elder Hinckley and President Komatsu began negotiations for the Mormon Exhibit at Expo '70, the Japan World Exposition. But his desire was to add stability to the Church, not to create new programs.

Adney Y. Komatsu was different from previous mission presidents in several ways. He was the first American of Japanese ancestry, or first nisei, to serve as mission president in Asia. He was also the first product of the Japanese—Central Pacific Mission to serve in that capacity. Unlike any of his predecessors, he had not served a full-time mission as a young man. He had, however, served as a counterintelligence officer in the U.S. Occupation Forces in Japan and had some fluency in the language. He was a convert, having found the Church through a basketball program directed by CPM missionaries. When he joined the Church in January 1941, he promised his widowed Buddhist mother, who was strongly opposed to his becoming a member of the Church, that he would be a good son. "I've associated with the missionaries," he said to her, "for a whole year and I know that in this church there is nothing but goodness, cleanliness, and purity. I believe the Joseph Smith story. If you let me join the Mormon Church I promise you that if you ever hear from your lady friends in your church that your number two boy is playing around and not doing anything good, his reputation is bad, and he is bringing embarrassment upon you because of his association with the Mormon Church, all you need to do is ask me to quit the Church and I will stop going." [^13] He joined the Church with her blessing and, in his words, "I think she saw me becoming a much better son, rather than the opposite."

Elder Adney Yoshio Komatsu from Hawaii was the first person of Asian ancestry to become a General Authority of the Church. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

Even before he was inducted into the military service in 1945, President Komatsu had served in a number of Church callings, including Honolulu District MIA superintendent and counselor in the Kalihi Branch. Following the war, he married Judy Nobue Fujitani on June 2, 1950, and in time they became the parents of four children. During the 1950s and early 1960s, President Komatsu held positions such as Honolulu Stake high councilor, ward clerk, and bishop, in which capacity he was serving when he received his call as mission president. Professionally, he was employed at Honolulu Savings and Loan Company, where he eventually rose to senior vice president and manager of the mortgage division. He held that position when he was called as an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve in April 1975. When his call as a General Authority came seven years after his mission, he became the first person of both Japanese and non-Caucasian ancestry to be called to that position.

In addition to supervising the growth of missionary numbers from approximately 200 in 1965 to more than 250 in 1968, completing and dedicating five chapels, starting three others, and guiding the labor missionary program, President Komatsu presided over or participated in other important developments and events, some of which follow.

REGARDING VISITS AND SUPERVISION FROM CHURCH HEADQUARTERS

Until 1967 very few Church leaders—that is, General Authorities and General Board members—had visited Japan and Asia. From 1960 until 1965, when Elder Marion D. Hanks was assigned to help supervise the Asian missions, Elder Hinckley handled that part of the world alone. In 1966 he recommended to the Council of the First Presidency and the Twelve that Japan should be divided into two missions. But this recommendation was not approved at that time. Nevertheless, in November 1966 Elder Hinckley asked President Komatsu to begin looking for suitable quarters for a new mission in Osaka-Kobe. Komatsu eventually found an appropriate building, but the mission was not divided until the time of his release in 1968.

Japan seems to have come into focus on the map at Church headquarters when President Hugh B. Brown, First Counselor in the First Presidency, toured Asia and Japan in April 1967. He was thrilled with the strength and numbers of members. The part of his visit that is most remembered by the Japanese Saints was his address at the dedication of Abeno Branch chapel in Osaka, Friday, April 21. He was deeply moved by the size and quality of the congregation and spoke of his amazement at the quiet but rapid growth of the Church throughout the world. He then made a prophecy that has been remembered by the Japanese Saints and others: "Now I want to tell you people here tonight something that I have not said before. Some of you who are listening to me tonight will live to see the day when there will be a Japanese man in the Council of the Twelve Apostles of the Church. And I do not know when it will be. I will not live to see it. But some of you young people will see it. Then you will realize that God loves the Japanese people. And you will join with other nations in forming a great united Church all over the world. . . . I feel it in my heart tonight and I dare to make this prediction in the name of the Lord." [^14]

President Brown did not live to see the fulfillment of his prophecy, but in 1975 and 1977 President Komatsu and then Yoshihiko Kikuchi were called as General Authorities. Both men are (or were) members of the First Quorum of the Seventy. An extraordinary incident occurred in connection with this prophecy. The night President Brown spoke these words, he and Elder Hinckley discussed what had been said. In the solemnity of their conversation, President Brown said to Elder Hinckley, "You are the apostle to these people and will be until one of their own is named an apostle." Elder Hinckley later noted, "This has been a sobering experience." [^15]

CREATION OF THE TRANSLATION AND DISTRIBUTION DEPARTMENT

Later in 1967 an important change was made in the operation of the mission. Until that time the mission had sole responsibility for the translation and publication of all Japanese language materials. In October, however, Bishop Victor L. Brown of the Presiding Bishopric and J. Thomas Fyans, then of the Translation and Distribution Department, visited the Northern Far East Mission and implemented the Church's new translation and distribution system. They hired Watanabe Kan, a counselor in the mission presidency, to be director of translation and distribution for all of Asia. This new system professionalized the translation process and also removed the responsibility for it from the mission president. It was more expensive than the previous program, but it was much better. The highly motivated employees of the new department produced more than four thousand pages of translated materials within five months of the opening of the facilities. Included were many priesthood, Relief Society, and auxiliary manuals, and the family home evening manual for that year. [^16]

A VISIT FROM ELDER SPENCER W. KIMBALL

Among visits from leaders in Salt Lake City, the tour of Japan by Elder and Sister Spencer W. Kimball in February 1968 was a highlight. Elder Kimball stopped off in Japan in a nonofficial capacity. He had not been assigned to tour the mission or to hold any meetings; he came because of personal interest, choosing to return from an official visit to Australia and New Zealand by way of Asia. By that time President Komatsu was working hard to duplicate stake organization in the districts of the mission, especially in Tokyo. He had taught the leaders how to hold priesthood executive meetings and other necessary meetings to correlate the programs of the Church. Elder Kimball arrived in Japan at a time when these programs needed encouragement from outside. In Tokyo Elder Kimball met with all district and branch presidencies—in fact, with all of the leadership at a general meeting. He addressed the congregation in a warm and comfortable way, saying, "I'm Elder Kimball. I'm seventy-two years old. I want to introduce myself to you. . . . I have four children." And so forth. Then he had each leader stand and introduce himself. He then noted the ages of the leaders and said, "How many of you have been to the temple?" After counting the hands, he said, "I average the age of leadership here to be in the early thirties. And ninety-five percent of you have been to the temple. This is better than many stakes of Zion that I know of within comparable distance of a temple."

Elder Kimball then leaned over to President Komatsu and said: "President, let's talk stake now, not a year from now. Let's talk stake organization now. In the stake we do these things this way. What are we doing? How can we get closer to the stake program? How can we implement the program most closely with our best abilities?" Then he told President Komatsu that if he followed this procedure, a stake would probably be organized two or three years earlier than was usual. [^17] From that time on, President Komatsu and President Bills, who succeeded him, constantly The first division of Japan as a mission came on 1 September 1968. Here President Edward Okazaki and Sister Chieko Okazaki with President Walter Bills and Sister Elsie Bills symbolically cut the map of Japan in half, forming the two missions. (Courtesy Chieko Okazaki) emphasized preparation for stakehood. Two years later, the Tokyo Saints were ready for Japan's first stake.

By mid-1968 Japan had nearly twelve thousand Japanese Mormons in fifty-one branches and ten districts. Missionary numbers were well over two hundred, and there was obviously too much for one mission president to handle. The First Presidency and Council of the Twelve decided to divide the mission. Shortly before President Komatsu was to return home, the First Presidency changed the General Authority supervision of the area. Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Twelve and Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of the Seventy were assigned to lead the Asian Missions. On June 15, 1968, Elder Benson, in a letter to President Komatsu, asked him to begin preparing for a division of the mission by adding another set of assistants, another mission secretary, and a commissarian, and by moving the missionaries around so that both missions would have people of equal ability.

Walter R. Bills, a former CPM missionary, replaced President Komatsu in mid-July 1968. The next month Edward Y. Okazaki, and his wife, Chieko, both converts of the CPM who now lived in Denver, Colorado, arrived in response to Edward's call to preside over a new mission in Osaka. On September 1, 1968, the Northern Far East Mission was divided to become the Japan Mission, with headquarters in Tokyo, and the Japan-Okinawa Mission, with headquarters in Osaka. With the division of the mission, Japan entered a new era of Church history, the contemporary period of institutional development. Following 1968, the missions in Japan grew so rapidly and the stakes multiplied so quickly that it is not possible here to plot the course and development of all missions and stakes.

EXPO '70, TOKYO STAKE, AND THE JAPAN EAST AND JAPAN WEST MISSIONS

Although the Church announced its participation in Expo '70, the Japan World Exposition, in November 1968, by that time more than a year of planning and negotiations had taken place. On October 16, 1967, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and President Komatsu went to the offices of the Osaka International World's Fair, where they discussed with officials the possibility of a Mormon exhibit. The officials told Elder Hinckley that they would sell space only on the outer perimeters, but he showed little interest in that idea.

Other meetings followed, with Komatsu and local leaders doing the legwork. Then, in April 1968, Elders Hinckley, Komatsu, Watanabe, Iami, and building supervisor Marvin Harding agreed upon a site, one thousand square meters, that was among the Japanese exhibits. Elder Hinckley was especially concerned that the Church would have a Japanese rather than an The Mormon Pavilion at the Osaka World's Osaka World's Fair—Expo '70—attracted over 6.6 million visitors during the fair's six-month run. The replica of Thorvaldsen's statue, The Christus, created a hallowed and sacred setting among the secular exhibits of the fair. (Courtesy Chieko Okazaki) American image. [^18] On May 2 the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve approved participation and allotted $300,000 for the project. Before long, final architectural drawings and plans were under way.

Emil B. Fetzer, Church architect, designed the pavilion, a modern Oriental building having two stories. Its main feature was its spire, capped with an eight-foot fiberglass replica of the angel Moroni statue that adorns the Salt Lake Temple and many other temples. The ground floor provided an assembly area, offices, and two displays, one on Japanese family life and the other a twelve-foot marble replica of Thorvaldsen's masterpiece, The Christus. On the second floor, visitors were conducted through rooms focusing on the Creation, the plan of salvation, the life of Christ, and the restoration of the gospel. They were then taken into one of two theaters that were showing the movie Man's Search for Happiness. [^19]

The ground breaking for the pavilion took place in May 1969. Elder Ezra Taft Benson presided while important civic and Expo '70 officials, as well as three hundred members and friends, looked on. He told the assembled crowd that the Mormon pavilion would give the Church the opportunity to explain its history, doctrines, and programs and to make clear that the Mormon Church was a world church with a world message. [^20] Nine months later the building, which was constructed largely of materials that could be reused in other LDS buildings, was ready for use. All that remained to be done was to install the displays and movable facilities. Everything was in readiness by March 13, one day before the official opening of the exposition. On that day President Hugh B. Brown offered the dedicatory prayer on the building. Other important Church leaders were also there: Elders Ezra Taft Benson and Gordon B. Hinckley of the Council of the Twelve and Bernard P. Brockbank, Assistant to the Twelve. Brockbank, who had directed previous exhibits in New York and Texas, was assigned to be commissioner for this pavilion. He was assisted by mission presidents Bills and Okazaki.

From a missionary point of view, the setting for the pavilion could not have been better. It was next door to the Japanese national exhibit and close to the Russian and United States exhibits. People thronged to the Mormon Pavilion. During the six months of the exposition 6,658,532 people went through the building and 780,000 left their names and addresses on the registers, expressing a willingness to have missionaries call at their homes. A total of 852,000 more people visited the Mormon exhibit in Japan in six months than visited the Mormon exhibit for the 1964-1965 World's Fair in New York in two years. [^21]

The message of the pavilion was different from those of all other exhibits. While national and business pavilions centered their messages on the material and technical progress of mankind, the Church centered on the divinity of Jesus Christ, the reality of a living God, the importance of the Book of Mormon, the plan of salvation, and the role of the family in that eternal scheme. The guides were missionaries, generally American, and Japanese members. The American missionaries surprised many with their fluent Japanese (as well as Korean and Chinese) and impressed them with their cleanliness, courtesy, and obvious love for the Asian people. Concerning these guides, Elder Brockbank wrote: "Our most impressive exhibit was the spirit of the dedicated, loving, inspired missionaries. The missionaries radiated a great love for the Oriental people and the Oriental people had great respect for the missionaries. One Japanese gentleman said to me, 'I can hardly believe that such fine, clean young people would leave their homes, pay their own way, and learn a new language. They must truly love us.'

"All the missionaries serving in the four missions in Japan will have additional opportunities to reach and teach the people as a result of the fair." [^22]

Beyond the attractiveness of the missionaries, the Church had gone to extra efforts to provide appropriate literature for the visitors from the major nations of Asia. Copies of the Book of Mormon were available not only in Japanese (fifty thousand copies sold) but also in Korean and Chinese. Tracts and pamphlets also were available, as were several other books. Undoubtedly the most impressive part of the pavilion tour was the showing of Man's Search for Happiness, a movie depicting man's journey through life and the meaning of that experience. W. O. Whitaker and the motion picture staff of Brigham Young University Studio traveled to Japan to produce the film in Japanese, with Japanese actors. After Expo '70 closed, the film became an important missionary tool in Japan. [^23]

Elder Brockbank and other Church leaders who were connected with the Mormon Pavilion were greatly pleased with it as a missionary effort. The numbers of people who toured it were greater than expected at the outset, but more important were the warm responses from thousands of people who wrote of their appreciation for what the Church was teaching. Moreover, the missionaries all over Japan had thousands of names of friendly people who said they were willing to talk with them. This alone made the entire project worthwhile.

The week from March 13 to 18, 1970, was exhilarating. The Mormon Pavilion was dedicated on the thirteenth; the Tokyo Stake was organized on the fifteenth; the Japan East Mission, with headquarters at Sapporo, Hokkaido, was created on the sixteenth; and the Japan West Mission, with headquarters at Fukuoka, Kyushu, was founded on the eighteenth. From that time onward, most of the leaders in the missions and virtually all stake leaders were Japanese. During the 1970s most of the mission presidents were nisei who had originally joined the Church in Hawaii. Russell N. Horiuchi, who started the East Mission, was from Lahaina, Maui, but was called from a position as professor of geography at Brigham Young University. Many other nisei followed as presidents of the various missions. In 1935 President Heber J. Grant had a vision of a later time when Japanese from Hawaii would take the gospel to their people in Japan. During the 1970s that vision was fulfilled through the nisei mission presidents. But, of course, nisei had been serving in the Japanese missions since 1948.

More important than the contribution of the nisei from Hawaii and the U.S. mainland was the coming-of-age of the Japanese Saints themselves. The first stake presidency was entirely Japanese. In most stakes throughout the Pacific, the first stake president or at least one of his counselors had been expatriate Americans; not so in Japan. Tanaka Kenji, who had joined the Church in 1952, was selected by Elders Benson, Brown, and Hinckley to be the first president. He chose Yoshihiko Kikuchi to be his first counselor and Sagara Kenichi as second counselor. The bishops of the six wards were all native Japanese. It is noteworthy that President Tanaka later served as president of the Japan Nagoya Mission.

Tanaka Kenji, first president of Tokyo Stake, has served the Church in many capacities, among them mission president and temple ordinance worker. (Photo by author)

At the same time, Watanabe Kan was called to serve as the first president of the Japan West Mission in Fukuoka. He was the first native Japanese to serve as mission president. Since that time the list of local Japanese mission presidents has become extensive. By the early 1970s the Church in Japan had come abreast of the Church in most other developed parts of the world.

Elder Ezra Taft Benson, who in his capacity as supervisor of all Asian missions visited that part of the world five times between 1968 and early 1970, was deeply impressed by the Church's progress throughout Asia. He was so impressed, in fact, that he wrote: "There has never been a time until now when the Church has had the strength and means to reach out effectively to the Asian nations. In the timetable of the Lord, the door is now open, and this is apparently the time for the work in Asia." [^24]

THE JAPANESE CHURCH BETWEEN 1970 AND 1978

In 1970 there were approximately 12,500 members of the Church in Japan. Although most of the stake and ward leaders were mature men and women, Church members in Japan were generally youthful. The feeling that the Church was a youth organization was fading by the mid-1970s, but a high percentage of converts came from the ranks of college-age students (83 percent between ages ten and thirty in 1972). This tendency has troubled many mission presidents. But it will probably never be overcome because of the natural inclination of youth to seek a better life through religious activity. Worldwide, with Japan being no exception, interest in religious values is highest among people between the ages of fourteen and twenty-three. Another reality is that college years present Japanese with their only opportunity to exercise agency regarding religion, politics, and other matters of choice. Earlier in life, parents usually closely control their children. Following college, companies, government offices and other employers, and coworkers usually control a person's options. At least until the 1970s, more women than men joined the Church (57.1 percent female to 42.9 percent male in 1972). This trend has generally been attributed to the elders' attractiveness to young girls. Although there is some truth to this assertion, the important fact is that Japanese women have more interest in religion than men and will probably continue to do so. [^25]

Aside from the strong tendency toward youth conversions and female converts, the general membership in the 1970s was quite typical of the Japanese people as a whole. But it is a troublesome fact that the Japanese members were about 10 percent below the national high school and college educational level according to age (in 1972) and that the converts do not come out of the national religious background in equal proportion to the various other religious groups. Whereas 99 percent of the Japanese claim affiliation with either Buddhism, Shinto, new religions, or no religion, and only 1 percent of the population is Christian, more than 12 percent of the LDS membership in 1972 previously had an alignment with some Christian group. The education level is difficult to explain, but the high percentage of converts from a previous Christian background indicates at least two things: first, people who are already familiar with the Christian message have an easier time relating to and understanding Mormonism; and second, by the 1970s—and really the mid-1990s—the missionary message was not geared to the non-Christian Japanese population of Japan.

During the later 1960s the success ratio per missionary in gaining convert baptisms declined from 8.9 baptisms a year in 1962 to 1.9 baptisms per missionary in 1968. There was some improvement in the later 1970s, but the unfortunate truth is that although the number of missions grew significantly, the rate of missionary success did not increase much during the 1970s. In 1978 the 1,311 missionaries in Japan baptized 2,967 people, or 2.25 converts per missionary. In other words, the Church in Japan grew not because the missionaries had found a success formula that worked well or because the Japanese people were somehow naturally attracted to the Church, but because of the sheer numbers of missionaries. [^26] It was encouraging, however, that whatever the cause, the Church was growing in Japan at a steady pace until 1978 and success was breeding success. The leaders of the Church were growing older (not just maturing in their callings), and as a result nonmembers who were older were finding it easier to accept the gospel. (In 1970 the average age of Japanese Mormons was 30.5 years. By 1992 the average age was 43.5.) [^27] The social group (family, job, club, religious unit) is extremely important in Japan. Until recently it has not been easy for older Japanese to find a comfortable place, a place where they could gain the needed social support, in the LDS Church. But with the growing maturity of the Church in Japan, it was more attractive to all age groups.

GENERAL AUTHORITY SUPERVISION AND CHURCH ADMINISTRATION

The creation of the Tokyo Stake helped the development of the Church in Japan in a number of ways. One of the most important was the regular visits General Authorities made to attend quarterly and, after the change, semiannual stake conferences. Whereas the number of General Authorities who had visited Japan until 1965 could be numbered on the fingers of one hand, with the interest in Expo '70 and the new stake, General Authority visits became not only frequent but almost commonplace.

Shortly after the founding of the Tokyo Stake, Adney Y. Komatsu was called to serve as Regional Representative over Hawaii and Japan. He held that position until April 1975, when he was called as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve. Soon after, he was assigned by the First Presidency to live in Japan and supervise the Church in all of Asia. As the Church grew, Elder Komatsu's area was changed to include only Korea and Japan, and Elder Jacob de Jager was assigned to supervise the Philippines-Southeast Asia area.

Elder Komatsu supervised the Japan-Korea area until the summer of 1978, when he was replaced by Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi. Elder Kikuchi, who was thirty-six years old at the time of his call as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, had previously served his fellow Japanese Saints in a number of important callings, the most recent of which was as president of the Tokyo Stake. The first Asian to serve as a General Authority of the Church, Elder Kikuchi received his call from President Spencer W. Kimball in a rather unusual way. A few days before general conference in October 1977, President Kimball phoned to ask Kikuchi if he was planning to attend conference. Kikuchi said he was not but that he was willing to come. He and his wife, Toshiko, had many frustrations to surmount, such as passport problems, traffic jams, a lost purse, and missed connections, but they finally arrived in Salt Lake City, late and exhausted. Nevertheless, the prophet extended a call for them to serve the Lord for the rest of their lives, and Elder Kikuchi was sustained as a member of the Seventy on October 1, 1977. After spending a few months in Salt Lake City at the Church offices, where he studied the workings of the Church in detail, Elder Kikuchi was ready to return to Japan to direct the work there. From the summer of 1978 until 1982, he presided over the Church in Japan and Korea. [^28]

After arriving home in Japan, Elder Kikuchi worked closely with his friend President Tanaka Kenji of the Nagoya Mission on a new lesson plan for missionaries. But his greater attention soon focused on the ideas and missionary teaching methods of President Delbert H. "Dee" Groberg, who was the founding president of the Tokyo South Mission in July 1978.

In addition to the assignment of resident General Authorities, the Saints in Japan were blessed with visits by members of the First Presidency. President N. Eldon Tanner, a counselor in the First Presidency, came in the early 1970s; then President Harold B. Lee visited there and marveled at the tremendous progress of the Church since his first visit in 1954. The most significant visit by a General Authority to that time came in August 1975, when President Spencer W. Kimball presided at the first Japan Area Conference.

FAMILY HISTORY, SEMINARY AND INSTITUTE, AND PRESIDING BISHOPRIC SUPERVISION

A number of important changes and developments took place below the level of the General Authorities. For example, Japanese microfilmers were engaged, and continue to be, in photographing thousands of pages of records from registers at civic repositories and Buddhist temples throughout the land. This has led to a well-organized genealogy program. Also, since 1972 the Church Educational System has operated seminaries and institutes in Japan. The home-study seminary was started by Robert T. Stout. The two programs grew quite rapidly: By 1978 there were 642 seminary students, 130 regular institute students, and 3,582 individual home-study institute students. These 4,354 pupils made up approximately 40 percent of all Asian seminary and institute students in 1978. [^29]

In June 1977 the Presiding Bishopric announced the creation of a number of branch offices called Presiding Bishopric International Offices. In each office an area supervisor, later called the director of temporal affairs, was given responsibility for all departments under the Presiding Bishopric. The Presiding Bishopric appointed Arthur K. Nishimoto, a convert of the CPM in Hawaii and a former Japan mission president, as the first director of temporal affairs for Japan, Korea, Southeast Asia, and the Philippines. He worked closely with Elder Kikuchi, who had stewardship for the ecclesiastical side of the Church.

THE FIRST JAPAN AREA CONFERENCE AND THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE TOKYO TEMPLE

In 1971 the First Presidency recognized the great benefits that Saints in areas distant from Salt Lake City could realize from participation in conferences similar to general conference. Because Church members in Manchester, Mexico City, São Paulo, and Munich could generally not travel to Utah, President Joseph Fielding Smith and, later, President Harold B. Lee traveled to the people. They and President Spencer W. Kimball, who succeeded President Lee, followed an intensive program of visits with Church members worldwide. The area conferences, as these meetings were called, included many General Authorities and General Board members in each instance.

The seventh in the series of area conferences was held August 8-10, 1975, in the Budokan, a large cultural arts facility that had been built for the Tokyo Olympics. Saints from all over Japan, including Okinawa, gathered in Tokyo for the three days of meetings and activities. At the request of President Kimball, the Japanese members prepared an elaborate cultural program for Friday evening, August 8. Songs, drum playing, dances, and brief dramatic performances by more than two thousand participants delighted both local people and the foreign visitors.

Earlier that day, however, a much more significant though not widely known event had taken place. President Kimball, along with his counselor President Marion G. Romney, Elders Benson, Hinckley, and Ashton of the Twelve, and Elder Adney Y. Komatsu, met with the three stake presidents and six mission presidents from Japan. There President Kimball announced that the Church would construct a temple on the site of the Tokyo mission home. Elder Hinckley, chairman of the Church temple committee, spoke to the assembled leaders concerning monetary contributions and then presented President Kimball with a $100 bill. This was the first financial contribution toward construction of the new temple in Japan. Elder Hinckley explained that the building would cost approximately four million dollars (this figure was later raised to nine million dollars), 20 percent ($800,000) of which the Japanese Saints would be asked to contribute. The stake and mission presidents accepted the challenge to raise the money. [^30]

The next morning, Saturday, August 9, at the first general session, President Kimball spoke to the 9,800 people in attendance. He laid a scriptural background for temple building and then dwelt on the sacrifices and hardships of those who built the Kirtland, Nauvoo, and Salt Lake Temples. He then said, "Now I bring to you a matter of great importance to all the people of the Asian world. We therefore propose to you that we build a temple in Tokyo for all the Church in Asia." There was applause from the congregation. Elder Hinckley noted that this was the first time he had been in a Church meeting when the people had broken into spontaneous applause. This was especially unusual considering the general restraint of the Japanese people. The announcement of the Church's eighteenth temple deeply moved the Japanese Saints. An observer wrote: "The few young people who understood English grasped their chests and held their breath waiting for the translation to affirm what they had heard.

"A few of the older Saints had been listening to the prophet's address with their eyes closed. When they heard the translation of the prophet's announcement, they slowly opened their eyes and then, as if suddenly realizing what they had heard was true, folded their arms, bowed their heads and cried." [^31]

Elder Kikuchi, then president of the Tokyo Stake, held up a large framed architectural rendering of the temple. Though the building appeared large, it would be relatively small in comparison with other Mormon temples. The mission home lot was small but well situated in relation to public transportation facilities. It was in a fine section of the city.

On Sunday, a day free from employment, 12,300 people attended the last and largest session of the conference. The devoted and attentive audience deeply appreciated the counsel given by their leaders. Elder Hinckley, who had directed the work in Asia for eight years, told the people: "No one seeing what I have seen transpire in this land could deny the workings of the Almighty. He has laid His hand upon this nation; His spirit has brooded over the people. Their hearts have been touched as they have listened to the testimony of His witnesses." [^32]

Japanese are sometimes characterized as stolid and unemotional people. This description does not apply to the Japanese Mormons. After the choir sang "God Be with You Till We Meet Again" and the closing prayer ended the conference, President Kimball observed the weeping people and was reluctant to leave. The Saints spontaneously sang the hymn "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." President Kimball and the General Authorities remained on the stand for about twenty minutes while the emotional congregation sang, smiled, and wept. The events of the conference had truly been historic.

Following 1975, the Church grew more rapidly in Japan. Five new stakes and two new missions were added in the next four years, and the membership increased by close to fifteen thousand. Chapel construction continued in many cities. But of course the new temple received the main attention. The ground breaking was held on April 10, 1978. The local Saints had contributed many thousands of dollars more than what had been required of them. Not only Japanese Latter-day Saints but also members from many Asian lands had contributed to the building fund.

Some rather miraculous happenings occurred in regard to the temple grounds. For example, after President Kimball had announced that the temple would be built on the old mission home property, Elder Hinckley and others still considered some other sites. Elder Hinckley had been convinced for a long time that the mission home property was best, but it was so small that the architect and builders hoped for a larger lot on which to build. Better property could not be found elsewhere, but for unexplainable reasons the Church succeeded in acquiring land on both sides of the mission home. One property, owned by the Nomura Investment Company, was offered to the Church for 2.6 million dollars, even though the company had already been offered more than 3 million dollars for it. With the additional room, Emil B. Fetzer, Church architect, was able to make adjustments that provided a more beautiful and more functional building and adjoining annexes for worker apartments and rooms for visitors.

Construction of the new temple began in April 1978 and moved forward on schedule. The old building had to be razed, a tedious and demanding job in a very high-class neighborhood. Building codes in Tokyo required great attention to detail. Earthquake and typhoon precautions had to be structured into the 78,000-square-foot building. The Church architects were as concerned as anyone and designed the building to withstand the highest shocks on the Richter scale.

But more important than actual construction of the temple was the preparation of the members of the Church in Japan, in Asia, and in the United States. It was as though a great spotlight was trained on Japan, a spotlight that focused the eyes of the Church and its leaders on the accomplishments and potential of the Church in that land. The call of Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi, a Japanese, as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy and as Area Supervisor (and later Executive Administrator) of Japan and Korea symbolized the coming-of-age of the Church in Japan. But other developments kept Japan and its importance before the eyes of the Church. New stakes were organized in several cities. In May President Ezra Taft Benson, President of the Quorum of the Twelve, dedicated a new seven-story area administration headquarters of the Church two blocks from the temple site. [^33] And the Japan Tokyo Mission was divided into the Japan Tokyo North and the Japan Tokyo South missions on July 1, 1978. [^34] In December 1978 the Church announced that the Mormon Tabernacle Choir would perform in Japan and Korea the next September, a tour that was very successful from a musical and public relations standpoint. [^35] In that same month, December 1978, the BYU football team played in Japan, an event that brought the Church recognition among a different Japanese audience.

During 1979 and 1980 Church members worldwide were kept abreast of the developments in Japan as reports on temple construction, the Tabernacle Choir visit, and other items appeared in the Church News, the Ensign, and in other Church periodicals. In February 1980 the Church announced that on July 1, 1980, the Japan Kobe Mission would be divided to create the Japan Osaka Mission, the sixth mission in Japan. A month later the Church announced that six area conferences would be held in the Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, and concluding in Japan (Tokyo and Osaka) during October 1980. Four weeks later, on April 19, the dates for the Tokyo Temple open house and dedication were made public. In the same announcement the new temple president and matron, Dwayne N. Andersen and his wife, Peggy, were made known. The open house would be held from September 15 to October 18, with dedication services scheduled for October 27-29. [^36] The stage was set. Only the final construction work and many local plans remained to be completed before the events of September and October 1980 could take place.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "VIPs impressed by tour of Tokyo Temple," Church News, 20 September 1980, p. 3.
[^2] "A Temple in Japan," Church News, 25 October 1980, p. 16.
[^3] As quoted in "Dedication prayer for the temple," Church News, 8 November 1980, p. 12. President Spencer W. Kimball dedicated the Tokyo Temple on October 27, 1980.
[^4] See Jerry P. Cahill, "Times of Great Blessings: Witnessing the Miracles," Ensign 11 (January 1981): 72.
[^5] Yoshihiko Kikuchi, interview by the author, Tokyo, Japan, 21 September 1995, tape recording.
[^6] See Dell Van Orden, "'Tremendous' future for Church in Japan," Church News, 8 November 1980, pp. 4, 10.
[^7] For further study of missionary work in Japan between 1978 and 1996, see the following: Cyril I. A. Figuerres, "Demographic Study of Converts in Japan," research report of the Research and Evaluation Division of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987; Cyril I. A. Figuerres, "The Ammon Project: Establishing Real Growth and the First Generation Church in Japan," 1994, n.p., Japan and U.S. versions; Delbert H. Groberg, "Toward a Synoptic Model of Instructional Productivity," a study of missionary productivity during Groberg's years as mission president in Japan (Brigham Young University, Ph.D. dissertation, 1986); Todd S. Larkin, "The Tokyo South Mission Miracle: Experiences and Methods," unpublished manuscript, copy in possession of the author; Terry G. Nelson, "A History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Japan from 1948 to 1980" (Brigham Young University, master's thesis, 1986); and Masakazu Watabe, "Inner Unification and Outer Diversity," in Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference of the International Society (Provo: David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies, 1995), pp. 66-70. I am grateful for Niiyama Yasuo's help in providing articles in Japanese. Niiyama, a friend of many years, has been stake president, mission president, and Regional Representative in Japan.
[^8] Eugene M. Kitamura, interview by the author, Tokyo, Japan, 19 September 1995, tape recording.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] The Guide to the Scriptures, English version (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1993), p. 3.
[^11] This information was provided by CES administrative assistant "J" Stephen Jones, 25 October 1996.
[^12] James Fallows, "The World Beyond Salt Lake City: Mormons in Japan may lose the battle for converts—but they are helping to win the war for American competitiveness," U.S. News and World Report, 2 May 1988, p. 67.
[^13] Jiro Numano, "Transition in the Reception of the Mormon Church in Japan: An analysis in terms of newspaper and magazine articles," paper presented to the Mormon History Association, Park City, Utah, 20 May 1994.
[^14] "Saints in Kobe Rally after Quake," Ensign 25 (April 1995): 75. See also "Church assists victims of earthquake," Church News, 28 January 1995, p. 4.
[^15] "Church assists victims," p. 4.
[^16] David E. Sorensen, Rex D. Pinegar, and L. Edward Brown, "The Church in Japan, Korea, and Far-East Russia," Ensign 26 (November 1996): 111.
[^17] See Watabe, "Inner Unification and Outer Diversity," p. 68.
[^18] Ibid., p. 66.
[^19] Masakazu Watabe, "The Unspoken Words," Ensign 10 (December 1980): 23.
[^20] Kitamura interview.
[^21] Kiyoshi Sakai, interview by the author, Tokyo, Japan, 22 September 1995, tape recording.
[^22] Kan Watanabe et al., "Japan: Land of the Rising Sun," Ensign 5 (August 1975): 43.
[^23] See "Former 'closed city' visited by Elder Wirthlin," Church News, 7 December 1996, p. 5.
[^24] Mike Cannon, "Many families in Russia blessed by relief effort," Church News, 28 January 1995, pp. 3, 7.
[^25] Sorensen et al., "The Church in Japan," p. 110.
[^26] See "Kim Ki Yong," in Spencer J. and Shirley H. Palmer, The Korean Saints: Personal Stories of Trial and Triumph, 1950-1980 (Provo, Utah: Religious Education, Brigham Young University, 1995), pp. 664-69.
[^27] These statistics are according to Niiyama Yasuo, who formerly served as a Regional Representative in Japan.
[^28] See "Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi," Ensign 7 (November 1977): 101-102; Gerry Avant, "War's Tragedies Lead to Gospel," Church News, 29 October 1977, p. 5.
[^29] "Church Educational System, Overview," pamphlet (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), p. 38.
[^30] Hinckley, Journal, 8 August 1975.
[^31] Cherie Campbell, as quoted in "Temple to Be Built in Tokyo," Ensign 5 (October 1975): 86.
[^32] As quoted in "Japan Area General Conference," Church News, 16 August 1975, p. 5.
[^33] See "President Benson visits Asian countries," Church News, 10 June 1978, p. 4.
[^34] See "Three new missions formed," Church News, 4 March 1978, p. 3.
[^35] See "Choir to perform in Japan," Church News, 30 December 1978, p. 3; Dorothy Stowe, "Joy spans the Pacific as choir visits Orient," Church News, 22 September 1979, pp. 3, 8.
[^36] See "8 new missions formed," Church News, 16 February 1980, p. 3; "Area conferences in Far East planned," Church News, 22 March 1980, p. 3; and "Dedication dates set for temples in Tokyo, Seattle," Church News, 19 April 1980, p. 4.
