R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

JAPAN 1978-1996

From Temple Dedication Onward

By 1996 the LDS Church in Japan had grown to more than one hundred thousand members in twenty-five stakes and twenty districts. Although these numbers appear relatively large, they do not reveal the kind of growth that Church leaders projected in 1980.

Unquestionably the greatest statistical Church growth in Japan was the period from 1978 to 1982. During those years, official membership grew from around thirty thousand to near seventy thousand and the number of wards, branches, stakes, and districts more than doubled. But in the years that followed, baptismal rates have returned to previous levels and activity rates have been low.

Church growth in Japan since the late 1970s created many difficult questions. Leaders in Salt Lake City as well as in Japan struggled with the question of why Japanese join the Church in such small numbers and why so many of that small number fall away after baptism. Different proselytizing methods and programs were forwarded by mission presidents and Area Authorities, some with remarkable success and others with less favorable results; but in 1995 and 1996 the leaders of the Church in the Asia North Area pulled back, reducing the number of missions and missionaries, evidently because they did not believe anyone had answers to the problem of low baptism and retention rates.

THE TEMPLE OPENS

Five years passed between President Kimball's announcement of the temple and its completion. A high level of planning and preparing was required in order to be ready for the open house and dedication, but on September 13, 1980, ribbons were cut and "about 650 businessmen, politicians, university professors, ambassadors and media reporters" visited the temple as part of a VIP tour. [^1] In the opening ceremony, David M. Kennedy, special representative of the First Presidency, gave a message from President Kimball. On September 15, the public phase of the open house began. Between that time and October 18, forty-eight thousand visitors walked through the ten-million-dollar edifice.

"On Monday Oct. 27 one of the most significant events of this dispensation will take place. It will be the dedication of the House of the Lord in Tokyo, Japan." [^2] So began the editorial of the Church News issued in Salt Lake City only a few hours before President Spencer W. Kimball gave the prayer dedicating the first temple of the Church in an Asian country, the eighteenth operating temple of the Church. The editorial went on, asking, "When in world history has a temple of the Lord ever graced that part of the world? There is no record of such a thing."

In a way the editorial seemed to exclaim, "This is a world church, a global church. The Church is moving. Let's move forward with it!"

Many time zones ahead of Salt Lake City, the Saints in Japan and Asia gathered to hear words of counsel and the sacred prayer of dedication and sanctification that were offered by President Spencer W. Kimball. His counsel followed themes similar to those he spoke throughout the world—the importance of rearing good families, being sealed in the temple as couples and families, teaching the gospel to the children in regular family home evenings, attending the temple regularly, and so on. The 860 members who assembled in the temple for the first dedicatory session were deeply moved by the carefully worded prayer. In the first paragraph, President Kimball read: "We present to Thee this beautiful temple, provided by the sacrifice of Thy people in the Orient who love Thee and Thy Son." [^3] As the prayer went on, he uttered many carefully selected phrases of affirmation and praise to Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, words of gratitude for the Church, the priesthood, and for the thirty thousand missionaries who were then serving worldwide. He prayed for the rulers and governments of nations "that any barriers which stand in the way of the spread of Thy gospel may be removed." He prayed that peace might "abide in the homes of all Thy saints. Bless the poor and the needy of Thy people. Let not the cry of the widow and the orphan, the lonely and oppressed go unheeded." President Kimball prayed for the youth of Zion in all the world. And he remembered the women of the Church: "Wilt Thou richly endow the sisters of the Church, our wives, our mothers, our daughters, with the spirit of their exalted callings and responsibilities." The prayer could have been spoken in England, in Canada, in South Africa, or in Sweden. In the eyes and mind of the prophet, the members of the Church in Japan and their new temple were as important as anywhere else.

The Tokyo Temple, announced in 1975 and dedicated in 1980, was the first temple built by the Church in Asia. (Photo by author)

Six additional dedicatory sessions were held during the next two days in the Tokyo Stake Center in order to accommodate larger audiences. A total of around seventy-five hundred people attended the seven sessions. President Kimball gave the same address and read the dedicatory prayer in each session. Other General Authorities and members of the temple presidency also spoke. [^4]

The first president of the temple was Dwayne N. Andersen, former missionary and mission president in Japan. His wife, Peggy, was called as matron of the temple. Andersen was the mission president who helped so much in the effort to take the first group of Japanese Saints to the temple in Hawaii in 1965.

The entire dedication process was an exhilarating spiritual experience. The Japanese members were thrilled to be in the presence of the prophet and so many General Authorities of the Church. The temple served as the engine to move the Church forward at an increasing pace.

Over the years since the temple opened, President Andersen was the only president lacking a Japanese heritage. He was followed in 1982 by Elder Adney Y. Komatsu and several other converts from the Japanese-Central Pacific Mission in Hawaii. In 1994 Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi of the Seventy was called home to Japan to preside at the temple.

Through the years the Japanese Saints have been steady in their temple and genealogy service. Not surprisingly, 1981, the year following the temple dedication, was the banner year for live endowments—1,247. The average per year since then has been 660. During the 1980s, as the total number of endowed members grew, the annual number of endowments for the dead rose steadily, topping out at 46,801 in 1988. Between that year and Elder Kikuchi's presidency, the numbers of participants dropped slowly to an average of 42,000 endowments per year. In 1995 enthusiasm picked up and the Japanese Saints performed over 50,000 endowments—no small feat for 7,300 recommend holders who were spread all over the country. [^5] In 1993 the total number of endowments performed in the Tokyo Temple since it opened exceeded 500,000.

Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi, called to the First Quorum of the Seventy in 1977, was the first Japanese to serve as a General Authority of the Church. Elder Kikuchi and his wife, Toshiko, served as president and matron of the Tokyo Temple during the 1990s. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives)

The Japanese members have been concerned for the salvation of their ancestors. Through the years since the opening of the temple, they have submitted significant numbers of names for temple ordinance work. As of 1993, the total number of family names submitted passed 300,000. The temple symbolizes the Japanese Saints' faith.

The annex to the Tokyo Temple, an important addition, was completed and put into use in July 1986. Through good fortune, the Church was able to acquire another lot beside the temple. On this land the Church constructed a multipurpose building that included several apartments for temple missionaries and the Japan Missionary Training Center (JMTC) president and his wife, a small chapel and other facilities for a Tokyo ward, dorm rooms and classrooms for the JMTC, and dorm rooms for members from out of town who were there to do temple work. A small parking area was also added for Church employees and Sunday use.

Following the dedication services in Tokyo, the visiting authorities held area conferences in Tokyo (October 30-31, 1980) and Osaka (November 1). The crowds were not as large as the 18,000 who had attended in Manila, but the 10,000 in Tokyo's Budokan Hall and the 6,387 at the Matsushita Center in Osaka were enthusiastic and inspired by the messages from a large array of Church leaders. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley said, "This is a place where the Church has a tremendous future." The Church News reported that Elder Hinckley "then issued a challenge to the Japanese members to increase their number to 100,000 within the next five years." At that time there were 48,627 members in Japan. All fifteen hundred missionaries serving in Japan were blessed to meet with and hear from President Kimball and other leaders of the Church on the morning of the first day of the Tokyo conference. They too were encouraged to move the work forward more rapidly. [^6]

MISSIONARY WORK IN JAPAN FROM 1978 TO 1996

During the 1970s baptismal rates for the Japanese missions were modest, reflecting growing difficulty among the missionaries in influencing a society that was becoming ever more materialistic and economically successful. The relatively short amount of time missionaries spent in the country (two years for elders, eighteen months for sisters) made it difficult for them to learn the Japanese language well enough to communicate effectively. For a time, from 1979 to 1982, new and unusual proselytizing methods raised the number of baptisms throughout Japan and Korea, but especially in the Tokyo South Mission, to new heights. Line graphs illustrating growth in baptismal numbers shot up like Mount Everest compared to the low and unimpressive foothills that preceded and followed from 1983 on to the present. Although the total number of members on record in Japan had grown to an impressive 106,000 by 1996, baptismal rates per missionary were not impressive and large numbers of less-active and lost members continue to cause headaches and heartaches for leaders in Japan. [^7]

GENERAL AUTHORITY SUPERVISION AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION

On July 1, 1984, the world was divided into thirteen administrative areas, of which three were outside the United States. The Asia Area was created with Elder William R. Bradford, who had replaced Elder Kikuchi in 1982 and was already in charge in Tokyo, as the first Area President, with Elder Jack H Goaslind Jr. and Elder Robert B. Harbertson as counselors. A year later he and his new counselors, Elder Jacob de Jager and Elder Keith W. Wilcox, moved the headquarters for all of Asia to Hong Kong. Hong Kong remained the center of all Asian operations until 1987, when the Philippines/Micronesia Area was created with Elder George I. Cannon as its first president. The Asia Area was divided once again on September 1, 1992, when the Asia North Area Presidency was created to administer affairs in Japan and Korea. Elder W. Eugene Hansen was the new area's first president. His counselors were Elder Han In Sang, from Korea, and Elder Sam K. Shimabukuro, from Hawaii. A year later Elder Merrill J. Bateman replaced Elder Hansen as Area President, but he was soon called as Presiding Bishop of the Church and replaced by Elder David E. Sorensen. In 1996 the Area Presidency consisted of President Sorensen, and counselors Elder Rex D. Pinegar and Elder L. Edward Brown. Many Japanese members felt that the creation of the Asia North Area was a reaffirmation of the importance of their part of the world.

Since the 1970s, the Church in Japan has provided its own Regional Representatives. In August 1995 three men, two of whom are native Japanese, were called to serve as Area Authorities. They were Kashikura Hitoshi, Katanuma Seiji, and Gary Matsuda. Elder Kashikura, from Kanagawa-ken, was formerly a Regional Representative, stake president, and bishop. He was a department head at an engineering firm. Elder Katanuma had previously served as Regional Representative, stake president in Sapporo, mission president's counselor, and stake mission president. He was a professor at Hokkaido Kyoiku University. Elder Gary Matsuda was a U.S. Navy employee who was serving in Japan. In the Church he had formerly served as a Regional Representative, district president, bishop's counselor, and branch president.

Since the first stake was created in Tokyo in 1970, the Japanese Saints were blessed by frequent visits from General Authorities and general officers of the Church. The most important occasions for visits—area conferences—have been noted. But many regional and stake meetings have been important locally and, as is true throughout the Church, have kept the leaders and members in harmony with the movements, changes, and concerns of the leaders of the Church.

PHYSICAL FACILITIES AND TRANSLATION SERVICES

In 1995 the 106,000 Japanese Latter-day Saints were living in 300 wards and branches that were part of 25 stakes and 20 districts. Providing meetinghouses (building and maintaining them, or leasing them), furniture, teaching materials and leadership manuals, scriptures, and equipment for all of these units and members was the responsibility of the director of temporal affairs, who was also responsible for all Church finances. The temporal affairs operation began in 1977, with an office in Tokyo. Korea has a branch country office that carries out similar operations.

Providing meetinghouses and meeting places in Japan and East Asia has been a difficult and expensive proposition. By the mid-1990s the Church had constructed 160 meetinghouses in Japan. One hundred and eighty-four wards have their own buildings; in other words, 15 percent of the chapels are used by more than one ward. The remaining units meet in leased facilities.

Most of the wards and branches in Japan are in metropolitan areas. Meetinghouses are generally spaced forty minutes to one hour apart from each other. When members move to smaller cities or towns, they may find it necessary to travel up to two hours in order to attend Church meetings.

Many meetinghouses are freestanding, much like LDS chapels in North America. But most recent buildings have been constructed following what might be called an Asian model. Land Although the Okamachi chapel is typical of many LDS chapels in Japan, newer structures are more vertical, with limited space demanding that chapels go up, not out. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) is so expensive in Japan that wisdom demands that buildings be built up more than out. The latest meetinghouses have parking on the ground floor and the chapel and classrooms and other facilities on two floors above. The main hall, usually thought of as the chapel, is now used as a multipurpose room. Folding chairs are used in place of permanent benches. The Church is well housed throughout Japan, and the necessary features of LDS buildings are present. [^8]

The translation of Church materials has a long history in Japan. By the beginning of the period under consideration, a well-managed office of capable translators had been in operation for more than ten years. The most important project in recent years was the retranslation and publication of the Book of Mormon. It was done by a committee that operated under the supervision of the Quorum of the Twelve. Eugene M. Kitamura, directory of temporal affairs, was chair of the committee during most of the process. It was necessary to create a more modern version because the older one by Brother Sato used language now considered a bit "too classic." [^9] The new version brought consistency between Bible names that appear in the Book of Mormon and the standard biblical Japanese translations of those names. The Sato version used his own transliterations of biblical names along with his, or Alma O. Taylor's, transliterations of Book of Mormon names. (The standard Holy Bible used by the Church in Japan is the 1955 edition by the Japanese Bible Society. The Church is now the biggest buyer of this conservative version.) In addition to changes in expression, additional study helps were included, such as the Guide to the Scriptures. This guide "defines selected doctrines, principles, people, and places found in the Holy Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. It also provides key scriptural references" for study of each topic. [^10] New second-edition translations of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price were also published in 1996. Other recent publications in Japanese include Elder M. Russell Ballard's Our Search for Happiness and President Hinckley's Be Thou an Example.

Japan and Korea are a Phase III translation area. This means that all materials that are provided to the Saints in North America are also translated into Japanese and Korean, including Church Educational System materials that are necessary for seminary and institute classes. In Japan, videos of CES firesides that originate in the Marriott Center at Brigham Young University, as well as other important events, are also dubbed with Japanese and distributed to the institutes around the country. The Church provides a magazine in Japanese, Seito no Michi (The Voice of the Saints), which, in addition to articles provided by the International Magazines office in Salt Lake City, contains sixteen pages of material dedicated to Japanese concerns and interests.

THE CHURCH EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IN JAPAN

The seminary and institute program of the Church was begun in 1972. In Japan seminary courses were instituted that first year, and institute classes followed in Tokyo, Kobe, and Nagoya in 1973. Growth in the number of programs has continued since that time. The Church Educational System has leased some office space for institute directors in Hiroshima, Nagoya, and Sapporo; leased a building in Ikebukuro; and built special areas in meetinghouses in Tokyo, Shibuya (Tokyo), and Osaka. A number of Latter-day Saints are involved in seminary and institute as professionals and as volunteers. In 1995 fourteen coordinators were working full-time under a country director for CES. In addition, there were 575 volunteer teachers throughout the country. Of the potential seminary students in 1995, some 1,421 (55 percent) were enrolled. In that same year, 847 (85 percent) of 1,002 potential LDS college students were enrolled in institute classes. Because all Latter-day Saints between the ages of eighteen and thirty are encouraged to participate in institute courses, an additional 2,869 students took part. [^11] The institute program did much to solidify the commitments and testimonies of the gospel of young Latter-day Saints. It also did much to bring LDS young people together in a wholesome environment that often led to temple marriages. The full-time CES personnel have set a strong example of service to the Church. Six of them have served as mission presidents in Japan as well as in other callings such as bishop and stake president.

MEDIA AND PUBLIC RELATIONS

Since the dedication of the Tokyo Temple, the Church and Church members in Japan have received a considerable amount of media attention. Kent Gilbert and Kent Derricott, missionaries who returned to Japan to work in law and business, respectively, attracted considerable attention. Both Kents surprised Japanese TV audiences with their ability to speak Japanese and with their wit and understanding of Japan. Gilbert even published two or three books of his opinions about life and the world. Mormon missionaries in Japan received sporadic Japanese media attention during the 1970s and 1980s, but they also received notice from American news people who were stationed as foreign correspondents in Japan. In May 1988 James Fallows of U.S. News and World Report wrote about the growing number of former Mormon missionaries who were living in Japan (and elsewhere in Asia) and having success in Japanese business. Fallows wrote, "Of the Americans I've met in Asia who can operate deftly and successfully in the local language, a disproportionate number have been Mormons." [^12] By 1996 there were three English-speaking wards in the Tokyo area, made up primarily of returned missionaries and their families.

In 1985 a Japanese television corporation traveled to Los Angeles to videotape footage on Mormon lifestyles, among other things. In that same year the Tabernacle Choir made its second tour of Japan and created a good deal of media attention. Other famous Mormons, for example Wally Joyner and Dale Murphy of major league baseball, were also recognized by the Japanese media. These two gave a fireside for the Church in November 1986 that generated considerable attention. In the 1990s the Church's own efforts to use media more effectively included a video about family home evening. More than five thousand copies were distributed to members of the Church, and another five hundred copies were distributed to nonmembers who wrote in asking for a copy.

But there was also a negative side to media attention. The Church was occasionally criticized from various quarters. Blatantly anti-Mormon materials were distributed by some other Christian churches in an effort to discredit the Church and its members.

Church member Numano Jiro of Tokuyama University has studied the Japanese media response to the Church. He calls the period from the 1980s to the present a "mixed media treatment of Mormonism. While the same friendly treatment continued, news of a critical nature also began to appear." [^13] Numano believes that increasing secularism and disregard for religion, which he says bears "a connotation of something negative," have damaged the Church. However, Brother Numano says that all things considered, the Church is tolerated if not positively heralded in the media.

THE KOBE EARTHQUAKE OF 1995

In 1923 Tokyo was struck by a massive earthquake that destroyed thousands of homes and other buildings and left between 120,000 and 150,000 people dead. Seventy-two years passed before the quake of January 17, 1995, struck Kobe. It was the second-largest earthquake in Japan, in terms of damage, in this century. Far fewer lives were lost in 1995, around 5,000, and fewer people were injured, 26,000, but the totals were staggering nonetheless. More than 20,000 homes were destroyed, and 56,000 buildings were damaged. Fortunately, even though the epicenter of the quake was only fifteen minutes' walking time from the Kobe Ward chapel and the Kobe Mission home, these buildings were not damaged. They were available to serve as a center for preparing meals, distributing food and supplies, and organizing relief efforts. One member, 76-year-old Nagai Kimiko, and her nonmember husband were killed. Two children of an investigator family also lost their lives. Considering the number of Latter-day Saints in Kobe, the Church was fortunate in not losing more lives. Among the 300,000 Kobe residents left homeless were thirty-five member families. The ward and stake moved quickly to provide shelter and to meet their other needs.

Stake president Donomoto Tsutumo and Kobe Ward bishop Takagi Kenji took charge of Latter-day Saint help and rescue operations. Kobe mission president Curtis P. Wilson was also very much involved. All three men were impressed with the untiring labors of the Japanese people, members and others, and their willingness to share and help each other.

Either working independently or in efforts organized by the Church, many Japanese members drove trucks supplied with water or other essentials such as food, blankets, and clothing. These services went on for many days after the quake. The Church also sent supplies of food into the distressed area. "Church volunteers," reported the Ensign magazine, "took shifts around the clock to unload trucks, inventory supplies, assess needs, and deliver the items. Most of those deliveries were done by bicycle, motorcycle, or on foot." [^14]

Elder David E. Sorensen, Area President, paid special tribute to the women of the Church. He said: "The sisters were valiant in putting their hands to the plow. They carried water, prepared food, took care of the children. I just can't say enough. I must give praise to the sisters who have done so much to relieve the suffering not only of the Saints, but also of the neighbors in surrounding neighborhoods." [^15]

When the crisis period was over, the Saints of Kobe and Japan had shown Christlike love to one another and to many others who were in need. Almost two years later, the Area Presidency summarized the efforts of the Japanese Saints this way: "Members helped set up temporary housing and soup kitchens, and food, clothing, and medical supplies poured in from members all over Japan. For three weeks, members filled five-gallon containers with water and brought them into the devastated areas. On the first Sunday in February 1995, members throughout the area held a special fast and earmarked their donations to help quake victims, including the sixty members who lost their homes." [^16]

LIVING THE GOSPEL IN JAPAN

Japanese and Americans share many important values and customs. The human family is truly a family. No one understands this truth better than the members of the Church. But it is also true that cultures differ on many points that matter, not just on trivial or unimportant beliefs and ways of doing things. American Mormons and Japanese Mormons are different in a number of subtle ways and a few that are not so subtle. American English is much more casual than Japanese. The Japanese language reveals more concern for status and hierarchy than does English. Within the Church as well as without, Japanese people have more interest than Americans usually have in who is senior and who has been there for the shortest time, and who has held the most important positions and who is least experienced. New converts are sometimes not easily absorbed. A long period of "apprenticeship" seems to be expected for a person to be accepted into the LDS group.

American Mormons can be too casual regarding accepting the divorced into important positions such as a bishopric, while some Japanese Mormons, largely based on loss of face and shame, question a divorced person's right to hold a temple recommend, to say nothing of holding an important office in the Church. While most American members feel a sense of regret if their children seriously misbehave, some Japanese parents feel obligated to "resign" their Church positions in shame, as though they were the leader of a political party or a major corporation in which corruption has been discovered. According to Masakazu Watabe, there is frequent confusion among Japanese between the concepts of sin and shame. Too many members worry more about being shamed before the group or ward than being contrite and repentant because of sin. The atonement of Jesus Christ is to take away the effects of sin from those who repent and are baptized. Shame, on the other hand, is a social problem that can be put away by following socially prescribed solutions. [^17]

Many Americans tend to expect all people in all cultures to follow American cultural norms. Some American Mormons expect all other Mormons worldwide to accept American mores as though they were commandments and part of the gospel. BYU professor Masakazu Watabe once asked, "Why should the priesthood brethren have to be taught to say 'I love you' to their wives in front of their children or in testimony meetings?" [^18] Such an action is based on American preferences, not on gospel principles. The following excerpt from an essay [^19] underscores this point.

THE UNSPOKEN WORDS

Masakazu Watabe

An old Japanese saying aptly characterizes the Japanese way of communication: "Ichi o kiite, J&ubar;o shiru," meaning, "If you hear 'one,' you must know 'ten'" or "I do not say all that I feel." For example, in Japan one rarely, if ever, hears what one hears often and is encouraged to say in other parts of the world: "I love you." This is true even between husband and wife or parents and children.

I have been a member of the Church all my life, and my parents have been excellent members and examples for me in the gospel. Yet I cannot recall ever hearing my father or mother say to each other or to me, "I love you." Neither have I ever told either of them that I love them. But there is not a single doubt in my mind that they love me and know that I love them.

Here [is an example] of my [father] saying "one" and my understanding "ten." Just before I left on my mission, my whole family came to the United States and we visited Church historical sites and temples. After the tour across the United States, I said good-bye to them in Los Angeles to leave for the mission home in Salt Lake City. Much to [my] surprise, I had been called to go to Brazil, a distant and unknown country, rather than to Japan, my native land. The departure would have been less emotional had I received a call to Japan. As I said good-bye to my mother, my brothers, and my sisters, I saw that each of them was crying. When finally my father extended his hand and said, "Masakazu, gambatte" ("Son, try hard"), I noticed tears in his eyes, too. As if trying to hide them, he turned around, and I drove away, for I knew that, according to the customs of my country, I should not see my father's tears or show mine to him.

I could not stop crying, so I asked my brother to drive. As he drove, I reflected on my father's words and the tears in his eyes. I had never seen my father cry in public. But even with the cultural restraints, he felt he could not stop his tears because of the love and concern he had for me. I knew he meant more than he had said. I knew that in every one of his long prayers he would, as he had throughout my two older brothers' missions, plead for me and my success as a missionary. He would write me often and encourage me to be the best missionary there. And he would have complete confidence that I would do my very best for the Lord.

Mormon Japanese are caught up in the same tide of secularism, materialism, and economic growth that other Japanese are. And they are also having trouble rearing their children in a society that holds most of its school activities—athletics, clubs, special interest groups—on Sundays. Pornography is more available in Japan than in the United States, and parents and young members of the Church have to fight such influences. Sexual promiscuity, especially among males, is not considered an issue by most Japanese. Some members of the Church have expressed regret over "the failure of the Japanese moral system." [^20] Following World War II, many Japanese discarded not only the questionable parts of their former moral and ethical system but also the good features, of which there were many. One observer called Japan a "moral wasteland" because the postwar generation does not have confidence in its moral, ethical, or spiritual roots. This situation has a bearing on the lives of all Japanese.

The Japanese quest for economic success has created strenuous demands on most husbands, but on other family members as well. It is typical to see trains and subways late in the evening filled with large numbers of white-collar workers in business suits riding home after a long day's work. Many Japanese live considerable distances from their places of work and spend several hours on public transportation going to and coming home from work. Mormon husbands and fathers are not exempt. Evening and Saturday work make fulfilling responsibilities in the home and in the Church difficult.

Hawaii native Elder Sam K. Shimabukuro was called to the Second Quorum of the Seventy in July 1991. Prior to that call, he served as bishop and stake president, mission president, and Tokyo Temple president. He served in the Asia North Area Presidency from 1991 to 1996. (Author photo)

Because travel was expensive and time-consuming, and in an effort to spend more time at home but still do their Church callings well, President Sakai Kiyoshi and his counselors in the Machida Stake in Tokyo experimented with stake presidency and high council meetings by conference call. They met together in person once a month, but on an appointed Wednesday at 10:00 P.M. they commenced their meeting by phone. Before they started, they sent by fax machine a copy of the agenda to all who were involved—up to twenty-nine people. They also used the Internet to share information. President Sakai's stake of thirty-six hundred members in five wards was typical of Japan in 1995. (Unfortunately, President Sakai had nearly one thousand members on his books as "lost" or "address unknown," making the actual total forty-six hundred.) [^21] The Church was mature in his stake, the youngest bishop being just under forty years of age. About 20 percent of his stake members attended sacrament meeting each week. Most of his active members held more than one calling in their wards or in the stake. The point, however, is that this group of leaders was trying to make the best of a difficult situation and seemed to be making a difference through the innovative use of technology.

Fortunately, in spite of the realities of contemporary life in Japan, at least twenty thousand people are solid members of the Church, and a number of others may yet return to full activity in the Church. Despite the high number of less-active and lost members, there has been real growth over the years. The Church in Japan is led by many priesthood leaders and sisters who are as knowledgeable, experienced, dedicated, and spiritual as members in any other land. Perhaps Elder Watanabe Kan, as a Regional Representative in 1975, said it best: "We in Japan haven't scratched the surface yet. As the great concepts of Mormonism become better known and more fully understood among the Japanese people as a whole, the potential of the Church in Japan, and likewise throughout Asia, will be of unlimited magnitude. Thousands of testimonies witness that the sun of faith has risen in the Land of the Rising Sun; and in these testimonies the promise of the future is sure!" [^22]

NEW BEGINNINGS IN FAR-EAST RUSSIA

In 1995 a new geographical region, everything east of 126 degrees east longitude, was added to the Asia North Area of the Church, headquartered in Japan. Formerly called Eastern Siberia, Far-East Russia occupies a vast area bordering the Sea of Japan, the Sea of Okhotsk, and the Northern Pacific Ocean. In 1995 and 1996 several Latter-day Saint families and individuals were assigned to Vladivostok and Magadan by multinational corporations, and branches of the Church were created in each city. The first district of the Church was organized in Far-East Russia on March 8, 1996, with Michael Williams as president of the Vladivostok District and Kevin Matthews as president of the Vladivostok Branch. [^23]

Area President David E. Sorensen was actively involved with developments in this new area of the Church. In the fall of 1995 the city of Partizansk, which is about eighty miles east of Vladivostok, was hit by devastating floods that destroyed crop and fuel storage and created an extremely serious situation. Through President Sorensen's efforts, along with the Humanitarian Services Department of the Church (now called LDS Charities), the Church was able to send food, clothing, blankets, and medical aid to more than five thousand needy families. In total, the Church sent four large shipping containers of food and two containers of blankets and clothing. In addition to helping many needy people, Church leaders believed the gift "generated goodwill for the Church as well." [^24]

As a result of relationships developed during the flood-relief effort, Russian government officials invited the Church to send humanitarian-services missionary couples "to teach English, business, law, and accounting at a university in Vladivostok." [^25] Three American couples and a Korean couple were the first to go to Vladivostok to teach. Kim Ki Yong and his wife, Kim Kum Jae, arrived in early summer 1995, and the other three couples, after orientation at Church headquarters in Tokyo, arrived in September 1995. Brother Kim is an uncommonly talented linguist, speaking four languages, Korean, Japanese, Russian, and English. As a young man just out of high school, he was inducted into the Japanese army. While there he learned Japanese. When World War II ended, he was captured by the Russians and learned their language. After returning home to North Korea in 1949, he was forced to join the army of that nation. Being a Christian, Kim's father decided that in order to have religious freedom, they should flee to the south. His father said, "My sons, my sons! Even if we are punished for going to the south we must go, for only there will we be free to worship our Lord! We must go for your future and your children's future." So during the height of fighting of the Korean War, they escaped by night and sailed to Pusan in a very small boat. Once there, Kim found work with the American military and had to learn English to succeed. [^26] Twenty years later, in July 1970, Brother and Sister Kim joined the Church. His father had encouraged him to believe that the Lord's true church was on the earth. Since he found it, Kim has served well in many capacities. In 1995 he was called by the Lord to serve in Vladivostok, a place where both Russian and English are useful languages.

In addition to the humanitarian-services missionaries, by late 1996, ten full-time elders were serving in Vladivostok under the Asia North Area Mission. The future appeared to be bright when Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve visited there in November 1996. He was the first Apostle to visit Far-East Russia on official assignment in his calling. City by city, and nation by nation, the Church is being planted in the nations of the earth. The population of Far-Eastern Russia is not large in comparison with China, Japan, and the other great nations of Asia, but the millions who inhabit that part of the earth are now closer to hearing a witness of the restored gospel.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] J. Herbert Kane, A Global View of Christian Missions, rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1975), p. 268.
[^2] Stephen Neill, Colonialism and Christian Missions (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), p. 219.
[^3] Much of the research for this section, which covers the years 1951-61, was done by David K. Crook.
[^4] See Denny Roy, "Kim Ho Jik: Korean Pioneer," Ensign 18 (July 1988): 18-23. This article was reprinted in Tambuli 12 (February 1989): 8-13.
[^5] See Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 95-96; and Paul C. Andrus Oral History, interview by the author, Honolulu, Hawaii, Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 15-16.
[^6] See Calvin R. Beck, "History of the Seoul LDS Group, August 1953 to May 1954," LDS Church Archives, typescript. See also Spencer J. Palmer and Shirley H. Palmer, eds. The Korean Saints: Personal Stories of Trial and Triumph, 1950-1980 (Provo, Utah: Religious Education, Brigham Young University, 1995), pp. 23-25.
[^7] Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, p. 93.
[^8] Beck, "History of the Seoul LDS Group."
[^9] Brief versions of Han's and Rhee's conversion stories are printed in Ensign 5 (August 1975): 44-50. See also "Han In Sang" and "Rhee Ho Nam" in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, pp. 89-98, 184-89; and Robert H. Slover Oral History, interview by author, Provo, Utah, 1976, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 5-6.
[^10] See Andrus Oral History, p. 14.
[^11] Harold B. Lee, as quoted in "Miraculous Power of Divine Intervention Present in Orient," Church News, 9 October 1954, p. 8.
[^12] See Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, p. 100; Slover Oral History, pp. 7-8.
[^13] Andrus Oral History, pp. 15-16.
[^14] Ibid., p. 18.
[^15] Slover Oral History, p. 14.
[^16] In Shirley and Spencer Palmer's book Korean Saints, it is clear in biography after biography that Confucian respect for parents and tremendous respect for education are among the highest values of the Korean members of the Church.
[^17] See In Sang Han, "Encounter: The Korean Mind and the Gospel," Ensign 5 (August 1975): 47.
[^18] See Korean Mission Historical Reports, LDS Church Archives. See also Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, pp. 103-4.
[^19] The first Korean to serve full-time was Lee Young Bum, who was called to replace one of the first foreign elders in 1956. Lee was originally called by President Andrus to serve for six months, but that call was extended to a year and a half. He was financially supported by donations from U.S. servicemen. See Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 158.
[^20] See Dong Sull Choi, "A History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Korea, 1950-1985" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1990), pp. 138-39.
[^21] As quoted in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 93.
[^22] Unless otherwise noted, the information in this section is derived from Spencer J. Palmer Oral History interview by S. Brad Jenkins, Provo, Utah, 1977, LDS Church Archives; Robert H. Slover Oral History; and Korean Mission (later called the Korea Seoul Mission) Historical Reports, LDS Church Archives. I am grateful for the research of S. Brad Jenkins.
[^23] Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, p. 109.
[^24] Slover Oral History, p. 15.
[^25] Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, p. 110.
[^26] See Korean Mission: The White Field, mission newsletter, September 1968, pp. 7-9, LDS Church Archives; Korean Mission Historical Reports, LDS Church Archives.
