R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

KOREA 1950-1977

Pioneering in the Land of the Morning Calm

As was true in Japan following World War II, war with its miseries, sufferings, and heartaches was responsible for the introduction of Mormonism to the people of Korea. Because millions of soldiers and civilians died in the Korean conflict and untold damage and destruction ravaged the lives of the Korean people from 1950 to 1953, it is ironic that the message of the restored gospel, a message of peace, found its way into the lives of some Korean people at a time of so much woe.

The people of the Republic of (South) Korea (ROK), an anomaly created by the political ideologies of modern times, grieve for their own people who are now part of a Communist state. Although the Koreans had sought for isolation from the outside world (their country is often called the "Hermit Kingdom"), a sad fact is that the racially homogeneous Koreans, a people who share a common language and heritage, have been controlled by both the Chinese and the Japanese. The period of Japanese occupation lasted from 1910 to 1945 and is remembered as a time of national humiliation. Harsh Japanese army officers ruled with little concern for the antiquity and value of Korean culture. They imposed the Japanese language on Korean students. The bitter feelings generated during the Japanese era have waned somewhat, but they have not disappeared.

The dignified and conservative Korean people have created a unique culture and social system. Although Koreans are related racially to Chinese, Japanese, and other Mongoloid peoples, their culture, even though strongly influenced by Confucianism and Buddhism, is different from any other. Korea is not a replica of China or Japan. At the most basic level, Korean homes, foods, clothing, and language are different from those of China and Japan. The list of differences is long.

The religious history of Korea is also unique. At present, 70 to 80 percent of the people believe in Shamanism, although only about 10 percent list themselves as such. Shamanism, focusing on the power of mediums to contact spirits from the world of the dead, originated in unremembered times. Buddhism claims about one-fourth of the South Korean populace, although estimates vary between 19 and 47 percent. Confucianism, which is more a social and political philosophy than a religion, influences most Koreans, particularly in their personal interactions, family relations, and acts of protocol. Protestants and Roman Catholics constitute 27.1 percent and 6 percent of the populace, respectively—surprisingly large numbers considering that Korea is an Asian country.

Korea's first introduction to Christianity came in 1631, with a book written by a Jesuit missionary to China. About one hundred years later, a group of Korean scholars used that book and others for study and ultimately began practicing its teachings. The first Roman Catholic priest to enter Korea was astonished to find an established Catholic community of more than four thousand members. A number of noble Catholic workers taught their form of Christianity during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and some died martyrs' deaths.

Protestants began proselytizing in 1832 but did not remain long. They did not obtain a permanent foothold until the 1880s. By then, however, working outside the country, they had already translated and published significant portions of the New Testament in the Korean language. They published the entire Holy Bible in 1889.

In 1884, two years after the U.S.—Korea Treaty of 1882, Protestant workers began entering Korea, known as the "Land of the Morning Calm." Within two decades, they had converted large numbers of people. Christianity grew almost as much by word of mouth from Korean to Korean as through missionary efforts.

In 1910, however, the Japanese annexed Korea and imposed many restrictions on the people. A few Christian converts weakened under the Japanese yoke, but most became stronger and more devoted to the new religion. American missionary workers continued to serve by teaching Bible classes, opening hospitals, teaching schools, and offering other social services. Christianity continued to grow during the entire Japanese colonial period.

The Japanese may have unwittingly done Christianity a great favor in Korea. Whereas in Africa and other parts of Asia Christian missionaries were identified with colonialism, in Korea colonialism was instigated by Japan, a non-Christian, Asiatic power. "Not only were the missions not identified with colonialism," writes J. Herbert Kane, "they took their stand against it. The vast majority of the missionaries were Americans, and the United States was the only Western power that offered even token resistance to Japanese encroachments on the continent." [^1] In short, the missionaries and Christianity were identified with nationalism, not colonialism.

Furthermore, as historian Stephen Neill points out, Korean Christians led the resistance movement: "In many countries the Christian, because of his association with the West, was suspect and in danger of being regarded as a second-class citizen. In Korea exactly the opposite was the case; to be a Christian was to be a patriot; the Churches were widely identified with the Korean national cause." [^2]

This remained true after the Japanese annexation ended. When the Communists from North Korea invaded the south, Christians were again identified with the war because they were persecuted by the Communists and because they were well represented in the ROK forces. Considering this, it is not surprising that American Mormon servicemen were well received by the Korean people. They were respected both as Americans and as Christians. Many of the early Korean converts to Mormonism were strongly affiliated with the Korean nationalist movement during the Japanese occupation as well as during the Korean War.

The Korean War was a terrible period. As the opposing forces fought their way back and forth, down and up the peninsula, thousands of Christian refugees fled from the north. Homeless and fearful people moved as far south as was possible. Pusan became the center for refugees. Here it was that many Koreans observed LDS servicemen as they lived lives of honor and devotion amid the generally loose circumstances of war; here some Koreans attended meetings with the servicemen and learned of the restored gospel. [^3]

THE CONVERSION AND SERVICE OF KIM HO JIK

While the war continued in Korea, a man of unusual talent and prestige was attending Cornell University in New York. He was Kim Ho Jik, a high-ranking government and educational figure. [^4] While at Cornell, Kim not only earned master's and doctoral degrees in nutritional science, but he also became acquainted with several Latter-day Saints who taught him the essentials of the restored gospel. He was baptized—the first native Korean to join the Church—on July 29, 1951, near the place where the Prophet Joseph was baptized in the Susquehanna River. As he came out of the baptismal waters, he reported hearing a voice saying to him, "Feed my sheep; feed my sheep." He followed this injunction until his death.

From the time he returned home to Korea in September 1951, he never hesitated to use his power or influence to benefit the Church. Before his untimely death by a cerebral hemorrhage in 1959, he attained many high positions, including those of university president and vice-minister of education under President Syngman Rhee. Politically, he was undoubtedly the highest-ranked person the Church has had in Asia to the present. [^5] A son and daughter of Brother Kim were among the first four Koreans to be baptized in their native land. This special event took place on August 3, 1952. By September 1953, more than twenty other Koreans had joined the Church in Pusan.

Between 1952 and 1955, Dr. Kim and many servicemen combined their efforts to establish the Church in Korea. Brother Kim was ordained an elder on May 17, 1953, and he was set apart as a special counselor in the Korea servicemen's group presidency at about the same time. [^6] As Spencer J. Palmer, a professor of world religions at BYU has pointed out, they "attained success without the aid of any full-time missionaries or the benefit of Church literature of any kind in the native language." [^7] Young men and women of quality came into the Church.

After the cease-fire brought stability to South Korea in 1953, the refugees in Pusan and the South went back to their homes farther north. The new members of the Church moved north too. Almost all members of the Pusan group, twenty-six of twenty-seven, returned to Seoul. This bombed-out city once again became the center of the government and the center of LDS Church activity.

From September until December 1953, the Korean Saints met with the servicemen's group at an air force base in Seoul. Then they had to move to the Eighth Army chapel in the Yong San area. Because of security problems (the Korean members had trouble entering the compound), the Korean Saints had to move their place of worship again. This time, however, the group leaders decided to create a Korean Sunday School, with Kim Ho Jik as superintendent. Thus in February 1954 the first truly Korean organization of the Church was created. By April more than sixty people were attending regularly. [^8]

Dr. Kim Ho Jik (bottom right), who had just addressed the congregation, listens attentively while Elder Harold B. Lee of the Quorum of the Twelve speaks to LDS servicemen and Korean Saints assembled for conference at the 8th Army chapel in Seoul, 3 September 1954. Others pictured include (left to right) Chaplain Richard H. Henstrom, Northern Far East Mission president Hilton A. Robertson, Chaplain Spencer J. Palmer, and Chaplain Grant E. Mann. (Courtesy Spencer J. Palmer)

The early converts in Seoul were mostly young men, many of them students. Some of these members have since become less active, but others—among them Rhee Honam, Han In Sang, Oh Kehi, Park Jae Am, and Sister Kim Do Pil—remained faithful to the present or until death. They have served as stake presidents, mission presidents, Regional Representatives, and, in Han In Sang's case, as a General Authority of the Church. They and their families have been the foundation of the Church in Korea. [^9]

In 1954 the Japanese Mission (or Far East Mission, as it was called for a short time) encompassed a vast amount of territory, including Japan, Korea, Okinawa, Guam, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. Although proselytizing missionaries were assigned only to Japan, servicemen's districts and groups were organized throughout the area. In Japan alone, more than fifteen hundred members of the Church were in servicemen's organizations. There were more servicemen's groups than Japanese branches. [^10] Because of the heavy burden carried by the mission president in Japan, and because local people were coming into the Church in all areas, especially in Korea, the Council of the First Presidency and the Twelve assigned Elder Harold B. Lee to tour East Asia and recommend necessary changes and organizational divisions in that area. He spent almost two months, during August and September 1954, meeting with LDS servicemen, local members, and Church leaders in Asia.

Elder Lee visited with the Saints in Korea in September. As noted in chapter 5, when he returned home to Salt Lake City, he reported to the Church at large that "the signs of divinity are in the Far East. The work of the Almighty is increasing with a tremendous surge." [^11] His positive report to the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve led to a similar visit to Asia the next summer by President Joseph Fielding Smith.

THE DEDICATION AND OPENING OF SOUTH KOREA TO FULL-TIME MISSIONARY WORK

In July and August 1955, President and Sister Joseph Fielding Smith visited East Asia. They were accompanied by H. Grant Heaton, who had been called to preside over the Southern Far East Mission, which was created at that time. Japan, Korea, and Okinawa were to be called the Northern Far East Mission. President Smith expressed to Robert H. Slover, LDS servicemen's coordinator, a strong desire to visit the Latter-day Saints in Korea. Because Korea was still totally under military administration, Slover arranged for President Smith to have a simulated rank of brigadier general, a move that enabled the two, along with President Hilton A. Robertson and H. Grant Heaton, to travel in Korea. President Smith flew to many places to meet with servicemen. Far East LDS servicemen's coordinator Col. Robert H. Slover, Northern Far East Mission president Hilton A. Robertson, Southern Far East Mission president H. Grant Heaton, and Korean LDS servicemen's supervisor Rodney W. Fye are shown here with President Joseph Fielding Smith (center) on their arrival at Kimpo Air Base in Seoul, Korea. On this visit President Smith dedicated Korea for the preaching of the gospel, 2 August 1955. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) In the process he also became acquainted with a number of local converts.

On the morning of August 2, 1955, President Smith told Robertson, Slover, and Heaton that he believed it was time to dedicate the land of Korea for the preaching of the restored gospel. These four men, together with Kim Ho Jik and three other servicemen, climbed a hill (behind what is now the national capitol building) overlooking the war-torn city of Seoul, and President Smith offered the prayer that turned the key to the preaching of the restored gospel in Korea. Korea servicemen's supervisor Rodney W. Fye, who was present, reported that "President Smith literally commanded Satan to free the land from his chains that it might become choice through the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ." President Smith further blessed the Korean members that they could prepare well for leadership responsibilities in the future. He also promised that stability would return to the country. [^12] An interesting sidelight is that the first area conference in Korea (1975) was held in a large arena and activity center that was built at the bottom of the hill where the dedicatory prayer was said.

The Church was not then recognized by the government, and no official ecclesiastical organization had yet been created among the local Saints. On the day of dedication, however, President Smith set Kim Ho Jik apart as president of the Korean District of the Northern Far East Mission. He also suggested that the servicemen's district and the local Saints should be separated in preparation for the coming of full-time missionaries. Under Smith's direction, branches were organized in Seoul and Pusan. At the time of the dedication, there were sixty Korean members of the Church.

In December 1955 Paul C. Andrus, one of the first postwar missionaries in Japan, began his six-plus years as mission president over the Northern Far East Mission. Only two or three weeks passed after his arrival in Japan before he went to Korea to investigate the possibility of assigning full-time missionaries there. Dr. Kim, the local Saints, and the leaders of the LDS servicemen were strongly in favor of this idea. But several problems had to be solved before missionaries could come: obtaining the government's legal recognition of the Church, arranging for housing for the elders, and acquiring visas to enter the country. Dr. Kim helped President Andrus organize a religious corporation, leased a house, and demanded of bureaucrats that the missionary visas be approved. Without his influence, much more time would have passed before the Church could have sent missionaries to Korea. [^13]

Two elders, Richard L. Detton and Don G. Powell, arrived in Korea in April 1956. During the following summer, they were joined by six other missionaries, and four of them moved to President Paul C. Andrus of the Northern Far East Mission (center of back row) stands with the earliest elders assigned to proselytize in Korea. Back row, left to right: Gail E. Carr (who later served as the first mission president in Korea); Don G. Powell and Richard Detton (on both sides of Andrus), who were the first missionary companionship to serve in Korea; and Larry Orme. Front row: Newell E. Kimball, Clyde W. Newman, Karl C. Fletcher, and Dean M. Anderson. (Courtesy Spencer J. Palmer) Pusan. Although the Korean Saints and the LDS servicemen did their best to make the missionaries' lives pleasant, conditions were difficult for them during the first few years. Korea was in a period of reconstruction. Food, clothing, building materials, and other supplies were hard to obtain, and health conditions were poor. During the summer of 1958, five of the ten elders in Korea were stricken with hepatitis, but they insisted that the missionary cause was worth the sacrifice and continued on.

Possibly more serious than health and housing problems was the difficulty of the language. Aside from the help that Brother Kim and other Korean Saints gave them, the missionaries were on their own in learning Korean, one of the world's most difficult tongues. They had no translated materials such as tracts, the Book of Mormon, and hymnbooks for more than a year after full-time missionary work began. Dr. Kim translated the Articles of Faith and the sacrament prayers, but communicating with nonmember Koreans proved to be a strenuous task for the missionaries. Finally, in September 1957 the first missionary pamphlets printed in Korean came off the press. These seven new tracts and pamphlets replaced materials in the Japanese language. (One wonders how the elders convinced anyone that they should read the Japanese materials, considering the general feeling of animosity the Koreans held toward the Japanese.) Some of these anonymous translations were still in use in the late 1970s.

In spite of harsh living conditions and language difficulties, the Korean District of the Northern Far East Mission produced remarkable results. "In Korea," commented President Andrus, "we were getting about eighteen converts per missionary per year. If Korea had been a separate mission at that time they would have had the highest rate of conversion of any mission in the world." [^14] This high rate of baptisms continued until about 1964 and then tapered off. By 1962, when Korea became an independent mission, there were more than sixteen hundred Korean Latter-day Saints.

A somewhat surprising fact, considering LDS missionary experience in other parts of the world, was that the vast majority, perhaps four out of five of those baptized, were male. In the late 1970s the conversion ratio was still 55 percent male to 45 percent female. During the early years, this anomaly could be explained on the basis of contacts between servicemen and young Korean men. But in the decades following the mid-1950s, the best explanation for this trend was the fact that society in Korea is male-oriented. As Robert H. Slover said, "You have to reach the men before you reach the women." [^15] For this reason, it was mission policy to work with males rather than females.

Compared with other non-Christian areas of Asia, Korea was a land where the restored gospel was well accepted. The Latter-day Saints reaped the benefits accrued by other Christian missions. In addition, however, were several other reasons for LDS success. The Korean people, because of the influence of Confucianism, have maintained some of the best genealogies of any people in the world. Mormon doctrines concerning the eternal nature of the family, and especially concerning temple work, have had much appeal to Korean Saints. Education, too, is highly important to the Korean people. They prize education for its civilizing effects and also because of the obvious benefits it can bring financially. [^16] But Korean members of the Church carry even further the importance of learning. They take literally the scriptural statement "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6).

Elder Han In Sang, who served as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy in the 1990s, suggests that Mormonism appeals to Koreans because of similarities between it and popular Korean beliefs. He feels that Mormonism is "the native" church. How far this should be carried is uncertain, but there is evidence that some popular Korean ideas about God correlate well with Mormon beliefs. [^17]

Another reason for LDS success in Korea during the 1950s and early 1960s was the social, economic, and political situation in Korea during those years. Millions of people were displaced by the war. Families were disrupted, and some old norms were cast aside. Undoubtedly, in Korea as in Japan many people found themselves looking for new answers to the age-old problems of loneliness, sickness, old age, suffering, and death. LDS doctrines provided answers to the questions.

After about 1965, however, the ratio of baptisms per missionary per year began to drop. As the economy improved and misery became a distant memory, so did Korean interest in religion wane. Nevertheless, with the exception of the Philippines, a Christian nation, Korea has remained the Church's most fruitful Asian missionary field.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE KOREAN MISSION

During the summer of 1962, President Andrus completed nearly seven years of service as mission president. At the time of his release, the First Presidency divided the mission and created the Korean Mission. They called Gail E. Carr, who had served as a missionary in Korea from 1956 to 1959, as mission president. He, along with his young wife, Gwyneth, and their new baby, arrived in Korea in July, and the new mission was created on the eighth. There were 1,603 Korean members, five branches, and nineteen missionaries at that time.

Obviously the Church in Korea was far more advanced than many new missions are at the time of their creation. For instance, the branches were almost entirely in the hands of local Saints. Even so, President and Sister Carr had many hardships to overcome and many problems to solve. The first was to find a mission office and a place to live. They stayed in a hotel for more than two months while President Carr searched for suitable real estate. He had one major disappointment when the seller of a fine piece of property in the Anam-dong area tried to impose some illegal stipulations in the final contract. Carr refused to deal on this basis, and the transaction fell through.

Before long, however, President Carr found another piece of property that was far better than the first, and by mid-October 1962, the mission was in its new headquarters. This property, called Paegun-jang, was situated in the Ch'&obreve;ngun area, an excellent part of the city, only ten minutes from the heart of the business district and major government offices. The old original buildings were gradually razed, and in their place rose over time a mission home and office, a chapel, a translation and distribution building, and a missionary dormitory. The entire complex was an attractive credit to the Church.

In addition to the headquarters complex, President Carr also purchased land for chapels in Seoul, Pusan, and Taegu. In combination with Church construction supervisors Rex A. Cheney and Kenneth Roos, Carr had work well under way toward completion on one of the first LDS chapels on the Asian continent, the Seoul East Branch. [^18]

During Carr's presidency, he organized two new branches, one of which was in Taegu, Korea's third-largest city. He also encouraged translation work. In 1963 the mission published a hymnal with 130 hymns, most of which were translated by a former Protestant seminary student, Chung Tai Pan. At about the same time, President Carr assigned Chung to translate the Book of Mormon. Later, Elder Bruce K. Grant and Elder Ronald K. Nielsen helped with the project, but these men did not complete the book. In 1964 President Carr assigned Han In Sang, the first Korean called to serve full-time in the new mission, [^19] to revise the completed portions of the translation and to complete the work. Han reworked most of it and concluded his draft after his release in February 1966. The Book of Mormon in Korean was published in Seoul in March 1967, after Carr's release. During Carr's time, he also supervised the introduction of a new language study program.

Sister Carr, under priesthood direction, organized the first women's Relief Society in Korea. Initially, the sisters met together to discuss homemaking issues, but before long Kim Jung Sook, daughter of Kim Ho Jik, translated each lesson from English and taught them to the Korean sisters. [^20]

Years later, Han In Sang paid the following tribute to his own mission president. He wrote:

"President Carr . . . was a man like John the Baptist in the wilderness. He was not a fancy man, but he was a real Christian. He was dynamic and hot-tempered. He made things happen. He suffered through tough living conditions. He was a great man who laid the early foundations of the Church in Korea. He exercised leadership in the purchase of initial properties at Yurak-ton, Samch'&obreve;ng-dong, Ch'ongun-dong, and elsewhere. He was instrumental in establishing the first branches of the Church in Seoul, Taegu, and Pusan." [^21]

When President Carr completed his mission in July 1965, the foundations of the Church in Korea had been suitably laid. The Church was a legal religious corporation, missionaries were in the country, the Church had acquired property, local Saints administered most organizations, and translation work was well under way. Beginning in 1965, the Church in Korea entered a period of maturation and naturalization. Between then and March 1973, when the Seoul Stake was organized, the three mission presidents, the local leaders, and the missionaries did much to solidify and strengthen local organizations and to improve the public image of the Church.

In a land where education and academic accomplishment mean much, it was of great benefit to the progress of the Church that the three mission presidents after President Carr each had strong academic backgrounds. Spencer J. Palmer, who became mission president in August 1965, held a Ph.D. in history, with emphasis on Korean studies and world religions, from the University of California at Berkeley. Robert H. Slover, who took over the mission in the summer of 1968, held a Ph.D. in political science from Harvard University. Both men were on the faculty at Brigham Young University when they received their calls. L. Edward Brown, who became president in 1971 and who now serves in the Second Quorum of the Seventy, held an Ed.D. in educational administration and supervision from the University of Kansas and had served for a number of years as an LDS institute of religion teacher at Idaho State University. Palmer and Slover had both served in the military in Korea during the early 1950s, when the Church was newly established there. President Palmer was a chaplain; President Slover was an army officer and servicemen's coordinator for the Church. President Brown had been one of the early missionaries in Korea from 1957 until 1960. [^22]

Each of these three mission presidents had their areas of strength. President Palmer emphasized public relations and interactions with people who had scholarly and political influence. Through his participation in the Korean Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, he did much to enhance the image of the Church. He also hosted numerous social gatherings at the mission home in which government and academic leaders, as well as diplomatic officials from other countries, learned something of the goals, principles, and aspirations of the Church in Korea.

President Palmer also initiated contacts with the major radio Elder Richard L. Evans of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visits Korea in 1965 as part of his around-the-world tour as president of Rotary Clubs International. He is shown here with district presidents (left to right) Song Jung Sup, Han In Sang, and Cha Jong Whan. Mission president Spencer J. Palmer completes the group. and television stations and with the Korean press. Through personal appearances, interviews, missionary choir performances (especially around Christmastime), and weekly broadcasts of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir program with translations of Richard L. Evans's "Spoken Word" (begun in May 1968), the name of the Church became well known throughout the peninsula. After President Palmer left Korea, President Slover continued many of the public relations efforts, especially the Christmas broadcasts. In addition, he also gave many speeches to civic and social groups. President Slover also strengthened organizational and administrative aspects of the mission and the local Church structure, thus paving the way for the later creation of stakes and wards. From two districts he created four. He also supervised the growth of the number of missionaries from 75 to approximately 125.

Presidents Palmer, Slover, and Brown shared a concern for "naturalizing" the Church. They were uncomfortable about the Church's transplanted American tone and wanted to make it seem more truly Korean. This was a difficult task, but they did do much to help the local people learn how to lead their fellow members.

Expected goals for all mission presidents are to expand the faith through proselytizing and to establish new units of the Church wherever possible. During the Palmer years, the number of baptisms sagged below the level of the previous ten years. As mentioned, one probable cause for this drop was the growing Korean affluence of the mid-1960s. Another reason was the change in emphasis in the proselytizing procedure. President Palmer asked the missionaries to "seek out heads of families, older investigators, and friends of the Church." As a result, the average age of new converts rose by more than five years between 1965 and 1968. Before that time, the Church had some of the appearance of a youth movement. Now, as families came into the Church, it took on the feeling of a solid organization. [^23] This solidity came, nevertheless, at the expense of a lower baptismal rate. During Carr's presidency the missionaries averaged 8.85 baptisms per missionary per year, but during the next three years the average dropped to 4.55 baptisms per missionary per year. Between 1968 and 1970, the average number of baptisms rose to 5.64, and in 1971 the number of baptisms per missionary rose to 8.5.

One reason that the number of baptisms began to increase in 1969 was the creation that year of the Language Training Mission at the Church College of Hawaii (the name changed to Brigham Young University—Hawaii Campus in 1974). This facility, which was established for the purpose of giving new missionaries training in languages, helped the incoming elders and sisters to enter Korea with the advantage of some language ability. Before that time, new missionaries had learned the Korean language from their companions in Korea. Another reason for increased success was President Slover's determination to organize the missionaries along standard lines, with missionary areas, districts, and zones. This procedure enhanced the quality of proselytizing because the elders were better trained, better supervised, and more highly motivated than before. President Slover also devoted much time to the improvement of missionary housing. "I found them [the elders] in very poor housing," recalled Slover, "very poor sanitary conditions." [^24] He insisted, after nearly losing some missionaries to carbon monoxide asphyxiation, that all elders had to sleep in beds and not on the floor as Koreans do. Better organization and living conditions helped the missionaries to improve yearly.

Palmer, Slover, and Brown all pushed expansion into new areas. This was made possible by a steadily rising number of missionaries. Whereas President Carr had an average of thirty-five missionaries under him, by the end of President Brown's mission the number had risen to about 180. The additional missionaries were used to open new cities and towns during the Palmer-Slover years and to help advise local branch leaders. By 1968 the Church was established in every provincial capital and in all major cities throughout South Korea. President Brown, however, believed that concentrating the missionaries in the major cities and building larger, stronger branches and wards was wiser than sending elders to smaller towns where only weak branches could be organized.

The mission presidents made a conscious effort to call Korean men and women to leadership positions. President Palmer, for example, called Koreans to serve as counselors in the mission presidency and to lead the two districts and seven branches that existed in 1966. These Korean leaders were, according to Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, "men and women of genuine ability." [^25] President Slover and President Brown further emphasized the move to use only Koreans in leadership positions. By mid-1970 President Slover had divided the two districts into four. During Brown's time, a stake was organized in Seoul.

THE TRANSLATION AND PUBLICATION PROGRAM

One of the most important ingredients in "Koreanizing" the Church was the production of language materials. The Book of Mormon, published in 1967, was by no means the only publication project during this era. Also of significance was the translation of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. In March 1966 President Palmer called Chung Tai Pan, president of Shinch'un Branch, to retranslate a 1961 version that had been done by Hong Byung Sik. Because part of the old manuscript had been lost, Brother Chung had to start almost from the beginning. Although it required only six months for Brother Chung to do his initial work, it took until August 1968 for the manuscript to pass through revisions, editing, proofreading, and finally printing and binding. President Slover, who had just commenced his mission, presented one of the first copies of the Doctrine and Covenants to Elder Ezra Taft Benson on his first tour of the Korean Mission.

By the time the Doctrine and Covenants was published, the Church had created the Translation Services Department in Korea. Han In Sang, one of the translators of the Book of Mormon, was hired in 1967 to act as head of the new department. During the first four or five years of the department's existence, its mission was confined to translation and printing work. Later its purposes and responsibilities were expanded to handling and distributing many kinds of Church materials. Under Elder Han's coordination, but with the direction of the mission presidents, the Translation Services Department began producing manuals for auxiliary class work, a Relief Society magazine with all lessons translated into Korean, and a unified Church magazine, Sung Do We Bot (the Saints' Friend). In December 1970 the first complete translation of the family home evening manual came off the press in time for distribution to the members at Christmas. The publication of the standard works of the Church in Korean, along with the magazines and manuals, did much to strengthen the local members and to help the Church become a Korean institution. [^26]

Koreans love music. When the small paperback songbook wore out during President Slover's era, he asked the Church Music Committee for permission to publish the full hymnal in Korean. Although the committee was not in favor of this suggestion, believing that the smaller book was adequate, Slover persisted and finally gained permission to publish the entire book. An impressive hymnal is of unusual importance in Korea. This is underscored by the fact that investigators often ask LDS missionaries to see the Church's hymnbook.

CHURCH CONSTRUCTION AND HOUSING

The extreme density of population in Korea has created high land values. As in Japan and Hong Kong, the Church has had great difficulty acquiring property in Korea. While he was a missionary district president, L. Edward Brown, after considerable difficulty, acquired the land on which the first chapels in Seoul and Pusan were built. President Carr acquired the mission compound land and several other properties. Presidents Palmer, Slover, and Brown each bought some property and supervised, under the direction of Church construction personnel, the building of several significant structures. Although the first four mission presidents worked regularly on the problem of construction, they had so many other responsibilities—and the Church's Korean real estate purchases sometimes took so long to complete—that fewer buildings were constructed than any of the presidents would have liked.

Throughout the years since the creation of the mission, money had been in short supply. Until 1971, only one Korean member of the Church, Dr. Kim Chang Sun, owned an automobile. Had it not been for the generosity of the LDS servicemen, the early chapels could not have been constructed. The servicemen contributed most of the local share required by the Church to undertake a building project. Only following the creation of the Seoul Stake in 1973 did the building program really come to life. All of the wards in the original Seoul Stake had separate, Church-constructed chapels by 1979. Additional buildings have been added almost continuously since. Although money was more readily available later on than in the early 1970s, the servicemen continued their contributions until the program was changed and headquarters paid for all construction costs.

Two or three buildings were unique when they were constructed. The mission home, although rather simple by the standards of many parts of the world, was constructed at a time (1966) when Korea was just getting back on its feet economically after the Korean War. In an effort to show the Church's loyalty to the Korean people and local industry, President Palmer insisted that to the extent possible every part of the mission home be made in Korea. This included carpets, attractive wall coverings, chandeliers (after a government official saw them and learned they were made in Korea, he had the same company manufacture some chandeliers for the Blue House, the Korean equivalent of the U.S. White House), furniture, draperies, roof tiles, and so forth.

Seoul 4th Ward was among the first LDS chapels to be constructed on the Asian mainlaind.

President Palmer bought a property in Shinch'un (in Seoul) that he envisioned would one day be the site of Korea's first temple. It is situated on a hill overlooking Ehwa, Yonsei, and S&obreve;gang Universities to the south, east, and west and the Kimpo International Airport expressway to the north. It was like owning land overlooking Harvard, Yale, and Stanford Universities. [^27] In 1975 and 1976 the Church Educational System constructed an LDS institute of religion building there, the first outside North America. And in 1985 the Church dedicated the Seoul Korea Temple there, a story that will be told in chapter nine. On the same property stood a modern chapel and missionary quarters. Between the time this land was bought and when the Church decided to build on it, a number of serious difficulties arose concerning the legality of the original contracts and regarding the property taxes on the land. The mission financial man, Koo Jung Shik, worked almost around-the-clock to resolve these problems. Through his efforts and the blessings of the Lord, the government capitulated to the Church's position and the buildings were constructed. [^28]

Related to construction was the problem of missionary housing. Since the early days, the missionaries had lived in leased homes and generally had hired cooks and houseboys. This was a workable arrangement while the mission staff was small, but when the numbers grew to almost two hundred, the cost of leases mounted to close to five hundred thousand dollars and the problems of hiring and dismissing numerous domestic helpers became enormous. The financial involvement was so large because in the late 1960s and 1970s Korean landlords required between two and five thousand dollars for deposit. This ch&obreve;nse, or "key money," was invested by the landlord at a high rate of interest, then returned to the lessee (in this case the Church) when the lease expired. The landlord keeps the profits from the investment. This system was so complex that President Slover had a legal adviser, Brother Koo Jung Shik, on his mission staff full-time to handle lease arrangements. To reduce these problems, President Brown asked the missionaries to move in with families, eat at their tables, and rely on the woman of the house to do the necessary cleaning. Because of housing shortages, this would have been impossible earlier. This procedure reduced both costs and administrative difficulties for the mission.

TEMPLE EXCURSIONS TO HAWAII

For many of the Saints in the United States and other parts of the world, going to the temple is a relatively easy matter. But in Korea at that time, the late 1960s, going to the temple was fraught with difficulties. The matter of personal worthiness seems almost insignificant in comparison with the other walls that had to be scaled. More than a year of planning and preparation was required to get the first temple group ready. President Slover conducted a series of temple preparation seminars to help with personal preparation. The Korean Missionary Association, under Spencer Palmer at BYU, raised enough money to pay two-thirds of each participant's transportation costs. Great efforts were expended by Brother Palmer to have the temple ceremony translated into Korean. A basic translation was completed, and a group of Koreans were invited to the Los Angeles Temple to record the sacred script. Brother Hong Byung Sik flew to Hawaii with the tape recording in time to meet the group coming from Korea. [^29] But the biggest obstacle was the Korean government. Immigration department policy did not allow couples to leave the country except in extremely unusual circumstances. For more than a year, President Slover and the Church legal advisor, Brother Koo, met with virtually everyone with any influence to beg for permission for the six temple-bound couples to leave the country. Finally, the restrictive policy was relaxed, and the couples flew to Hawaii on July 31, 1970. About a year later, shortly after President Brown arrived, a second group was allowed to go. To get a third group out of Korea, President Brown agreed to stop applying for passports. Only years later was the policy finally changed.

The six original temple couples were Brothers and Sisters Koo Jung Shik, Cha Jong Hwan, Choi Wook Hwan, Bae Young Chun, Kim Chang Sun, and Ho Choi. The six men were either branch presidents or district presidents. Doctor Kim and Brother Choi later served as stake presidents in Seoul; the others have been bishops, high councilors, or members of mission presidencies or mission presidents. [^30]

THE FOUNDING OF THE SEMINARY AND INSTITUTE PROGRAMS IN KOREA

The organization of the seminary and institute of religion programs in Korea is one of the grand successes of the Church in recent years. The idea of starting these programs was first brought to President Slover by Dr. Joe J. Christensen, Associate Commissioner of Education for Seminaries and Institutes, in March 1971. [^31] Even before President L. Edward Brown left the U.S. to take over the mission, Dr. Christensen contacted him concerning the proposed program. Once in Korea, President Brown pursued the concept and worked with CES officials to implement the program.

The initial CES plan was to send a returned missionary—one who had served his mission in Korea—to Korea to start the program. Brown objected to this proposal, contending that some Korean priesthood holders were capable of handling the program from the beginning. Because President Brown had had experience in the institute system, he felt confident that he could help the first local director administer the program as the CES head office desired. The leaders in Salt Lake City were not easily convinced but finally decided that Koreans should be able to do the job. Korea was a test case. Since then, most non-American institutes and seminaries have been placed in the hands of local administrators and teachers.

President Brown recommended Rhee Honam as institute director. Brother Rhee, who had joined the Church in the mid-1950s through the influence of his "Mormon buddies during the war" and who had by this time served as counselor to four mission presidents, was now a professor of English and Spanish at a university in Seoul. As President Brown said, "For Brother Rhee to resign his position was almost as difficult as Abraham taking Isaac to the mountain." [^32] Because communications were slow between Seoul and Salt Lake City, Brother Rhee was not sure for some time whether or not he had a job with CES. Brown, seeing that something had to be done, assumed the CES leaders were going to move ahead with Rhee, and he opened an office at the mission home and gave Rhee a budget to run on. It all worked out well.

Brother Rhee hired Dr. Seo Hee Chul, Ph.D., who had been working for Church Translation and Distribution, as a teacher in Seoul. Years later Brother Seo described the development of the early team of institute teachers:

Brother Rhee Honam was called as the first area director of CES. I and Brother Kim Chong Gyun worked with him. Six months later Brother Pak Byung Kyu began lecturing in Kwangju, and another year and a half later Brother Do Gil Whoe in Pusan and Brother Kim Cha Bong in Seoul joined the staff and served diligently. At first there were 350 students and, in addition, over 500 students were enrolled in the seminary program which opened in each area. At first, because there weren't many people teaching, one would have to teach in Seoul during the day, then in the afternoon go to Inch'&obreve;n, Ch'unch'&obreve;n, Taej&obreve;n, Kunsan, Ch&obreve;nju, or another outlying town, and teach a class, returning to Seoul around 1:00 or 2:00 A.M. and, if later, often staying the night and returning the next morning. [^33]

In the beginning President Brown and Brother Rhee leased four rooms in a fine downtown building for classrooms. Both the students and teachers were happy to be associated with the "Mormon Institute." It was a prestigious institution from the start. In 1978 there were 1,504 regular and 112 individual-study students registered in classes in various cities of Korea. In addition to the institute students, 1,068 home-study seminary students were also enrolled in the program. [^34]

Although institute classes are important to most young Latterday Saints who enroll in the United States and elsewhere, many Koreans take their religion courses extremely seriously. For example, when the first institute graduation was held in Seoul in the mid-1970s, the valedictorian was Min Tong-Keun, a member who already held a Ph.D. and who was teaching philosophy at Ch'ungnam National University. Brother Min placed attendance at institute classes above all other priorities. His dedication to learning the gospel was not unlike many other Koreans. [^35]

THE CREATION OF THE SEOUL STAKE

Whereas public relations were Spencer J. Palmer's greatest strength, and organization and administration were Robert H. Slover's major contributions, L. Edward Brown emphasized family love within the priesthood framework. President Brown and his wife, Carol, worked tirelessly teaching the importance of family home evening, home teaching, priesthood executive committee meetings, and branch council meetings. He constantly taught the reasons for these programs and meetings and how they were supposed to function.

Brown, like his predecessors, was determined to make the Church a natural part of the Korean Saints' lives. However, he saw his purposes somewhat differently. He viewed the gospel as a third culture—a culture different from that of either America or Korea. He recognized the strength of the Korean family tradition but worked to re-create it along the love-centered lines of the gospel. Perceiving that Korean males, and especially husbands and fathers, tend to be quite dictatorial, President Brown taught the meaning of equal love and respect.

Sister Brown, too, taught the principle of love. The story is told of how she traveled from conference to conference with her husband, preaching at each meeting that Mormon husbands should tell their wives at least once a week that they love them. Doing such a thing would have been highly unusual for a Korean husband. Sister Brown's translator for each of her talks was President Park Jae Am, a counselor in the mission presidency. After hearing Sister Brown's admonition six times, he decided he would follow her counsel. On a beautiful spring day when the rice was coming up and the air was clean and fresh, Brother Park decided, as he walked home from work, that this was the day he would tell his wife he loved her. As he approached his house, Sister Park slid open the door and greeted him warmly. He tried to say the words but couldn't. Finally he said, "When I look at you, you remind me of spring." Needless to say, he startled her and moved her deeply. The next year he recounted this experience as he spoke at each conference.

In the Korean-Confucian order, not only are females considered inferior to males, but also, depending on education and wealth, males are stratified. An example of how one leader learned the Christian concept of God's equal love for his children occurred when President Brown suggested to district president Kim Chang Sun that a chapel custodian should be called as branch president. President Kim, a highly respected psychiatrist and professor of medicine, balked at the suggestion, reluctant because the candidate was only a custodian. President Brown suggested to Kim that they pray together about the matter. After their prayer, President Kim told President Brown that he knew the Lord wanted the custodian to be branch president. This experience had a remarkable impact on President Kim. President Kim became a powerful leader in the Church. He served as president of Seoul Korea West Stake, and the custodian served as stake patriarch. In the years that followed, Kim Chang Sun also served as a Regional Representative. [^36]

Another concept that the Korean Saints have had to learn—a concept that troubles people everywhere—is the idea that all positions in the Church are important and that, in theory at least, one position is not superior to another. This problem is exaggerated in Korea by the concept of losing face. During the early years of the Church in Korea, it was sometimes the case for district and branch presidents to become less active when they were released and given less "prestigious" callings. President Slover said that he knew the Korean Saints were reaching maturity when after the release of Bae Soo Yul as district president, he remained strong in the faith even though he became "only" a Sunday School teacher. Brother Bae later served as a counselor in the Korea Pusan Mission. [^37]

Perhaps even more important than making the Church a Korean institution was the molding of the Korean leaders into true Latter-day Saints. When this happened, Korea was ready for its first stake.

Stakehood was first seriously talked about in Korea during Robert H. Slover's brief return to Korea as Regional Representative in the area during 1972. He established a target date of 1974 for the organization of the Seoul Stake. Although President Brown Seoul Stake, the first stake in Korea, was organized by Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve, 8 March 1973. Members of the stake presidency were (left to right) Kim Chang Sun, first counselor; Rhee Honam, president; and Choi Wook Hwan, second counselor. (Courtesy Rhee Honam) was working steadily on matters of organization and administration, he did not know the stake would be created so soon. Nevertheless, in February 1973 President Brown received word from Church authorities in Salt Lake City that Elder Spencer W. Kimball, President of the Council of the Twelve, would be coming to Korea in early March to organize the stake.

After President Kimball interviewed a list of candidates, he selected Rhee Honam as stake president. The Seoul Stake was created on March 8, 1973. President Rhee, who had served as counselor to four mission presidents and who was seminary and institute director for Korea, chose Kim Chang Sun, a doctor of psychiatry, and Choi Wook Hwan, a dentist, as counselors. The new stake consisted of seven wards and two branches. Because of his years of apprenticeship under excellent leaders and because he knew the gospel well, President Rhee led the stake with vision, authority, and love.

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE KOREA PUSAN MISSION

Korea is small geographically, but the population in the mid-1970s was approximately 33 million people. Because the Church was growing rapidly, the Church Missionary Committee sent increasing numbers of elders and sisters (lady missionaries first came to Korea in 1972, an indication that health conditions had improved greatly) to Korea during Brown's time and continued to do so after Eugene P. Till became president in July 1974. In April 1973 President Brown received notice that the mission was going to be divided. But because of visa problems (the Korean consulate in San Francisco refused to allow thirty visas at once) the plan to divide was suspended until the problems with the government could be worked out. The actual basis for the visa slowdown has never become known, but President Till assumed it was because of anti-government statements by members of other Christian churches at that time. He believed the LDS Church was lumped together with other Christians who were outspoken in their criticism of government.

Whatever the cause, President Till chose to counter the visa problem by using several public relations approaches to establish the image of the LDS Church as a family church, a concept that he rightly supposed would appeal to the government. He did this through the use of bumper stickers, a new device in Korea, and through performances by a missionary quintet, the New Horizons, and a choir of orphan girls, the Tender Apples. These singing groups performed frequently on radio and television and did much to enhance the image of the Church and to make the name of the Church familiar to the Korean people. (There is much more to the story of the Tender Apples Orphanage. It was owned and operated by Hwang Keun-Ok, a devout Latter-day Saint. Her story reveals a life of selfless service to Korea's poor, as well as to the orphans who lived with her and learned about the gospel and how to live useful, productive lives.) [^38] After Till's public relations campaign of 1974—75, he had no more visa problems. Evidently personnel changes at the consulate in San Francisco also helped the Church get along better with the people there. [^39] When President Till began his period of service, he found that about 10 percent of the people in Seoul recognized the name of the Church. At the end of his three years in Korea, "more than 70 percent of the people in Seoul recognized the Church's name." [^40]

In the spring of 1975, the First Presidency called Han In Sang to be the first president of the soon-to-be-created Korea Pusan Mission. President Han was the first native Korean to serve as a mission president. On July 1, 1975, President Han officially opened the new mission. Under his leadership the districts and branches grew, and the missionaries brought many people into the Church. In the summer of 1978, President Han was succeeded by Rhee Honam.

GENERAL AUTHORITY SUPERVISION AND THE FIRST AREA CONFERENCE

Since Elder Harold B. Lee's 1954 visit to Korea, the General Authorities carefully watched over and supervised the progress of the Church there. During the 1960s and 1970s many General Authorities visited Korea, among them President Ezra Taft Benson, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, Elder Marion D. Hanks, and Elder Adney Y. Komatsu. But the man who was known as "Mr. Asia" to the people and friends of the Asian missions was Elder Gordon B. Hinckley. After his appointment as supervisor of the Asian missions in 1960, a position he held until the late 1960s and again in the 1970s, he never lost interest in or concern for the Asian Saints. Korea received parentlike attention from this great leader. Elder Hinckley visited Korea numerous times during those two decades and every leader in the country felt his personal concern.

Of great significance to the Korean Saints was the first area conference, held in Seoul on August 15 through August 17, 1975. Ko Won Yong, executive secretary in Seoul Stake, was assigned to organize the performance events to be held on Friday, August 15, in the Changch'ung Gymnasium. A thousand members participated in a President Spencer W. Kimball was the first president of the Church to visit Korea. In August 1975, more than nine thousand members participated in the first Korean area conference. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) two-hour performance. According to Brother Ko, the program included a traditional Korean fan dance, a farmers' dance, and others. [^41] The nine thousand people who attended the cultural program and other sessions were well taught by the thirteen General Authorities of the Church who were there. In one of his talks, President Spencer W. Kimball announced plans to build the Tokyo Temple. He had already revealed these plans while in Japan a week before, but his request for the Korean Saints to raise money to help build it met with mixed reactions. The reason for hesitation was the Korean government's policy of not allowing married couples to leave the country together. The question of their ever being able to go to the temple as husbands and wives coursed through many Korean minds. Knowing of the government's policy, however, President Kimball promised the Saints that if they would send their children on missions, pay their tithes, attend their meetings regularly, keep the commandments of the Lord, and contribute to the temple fund, the Lord would provide a way for them to go to the temple when it was completed. According to President Till, many Korean Saints talked about this promise and determined to follow President Kimball's counsel. In the summer of 1977 Park Chung-Hee, president of the Republic of Korea, announced that in 1980 Korea would open its doors and allow its people to leave as tourists. As a matter of course, couples would be allowed to leave the country together. Significantly, the Tokyo Temple, which was started in April 1978, was scheduled for completion in May 1980. [^42]

According to Brother Park Byung Kyu, who was in attendance, on the final day of the area conference President Kimball stood at the door of Changch'ung Gymnasium and warmly greeted the audience members as they arrived. He shook hands until moments before the session was scheduled to begin. Such acts permanently endeared President Kimball to the Korean Saints. [^43]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] See Dorothy Stowe, "Joy spans the Pacific as choir visits Orient," Church News, 22 September 1979, pp. 3, 8-9.
[^2] Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward With Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), p. 376.
[^3] Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 403.
[^4] See Dell Van Orden, "Saints throng to area meetings in the Far East," Church News, 1 November 1980, pp. 3-4, 9.
[^5] Dew, Go Forward with Faith, pp. 222-23.
[^6] Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 403.
[^7] See The Saints' Friend, February/March 1986, p. 54. I am indebted to my former research assistant Cory Turner for reviewing this Korean periodical and providing a summary of important historical events.
[^8] "Plans announced for 9 new temples," Church News, 4 April 1981, p. 3.
[^9] Gerry Avant, "Their prayers are answered, a temple in their midsts," Church News, 11 April 1981, p. 23.
[^10] Dew, Go Forward with Faith, p. 437.
[^11] As quoted in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 97.
[^12] Shirley-June Younger, "Seoul Temple Dedicated," Ensign 16 (February 1986): 74-75.
[^13] The Saints' Friend, December 1985, p. 53.
[^14] As quoted in Gerry Avant, "'Land of Morning Calm' brightened by Korea temple," Church News, 22 December 1985, p. 6.
[^15] As quoted in Dew, Go Forward with Faith, p. 438.
[^16] "Dedicatory prayer recognizes small beginnings of work," Church News, 22 December 1985, p. 7.
[^17] See Shirley-Anne Younger, Gregg Newby, and Marylouise Le Cheminant, For Those Who Dare to Dream (Korea: n.p., n.d. [1990?]), pp. 59-60.
[^18] Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 288.
[^19] See James B. Allen et al., Hearts Turned to the Fathers (Provo: BYU Studies, 1996), appendix 2, p. 348.
[^20] Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, pp. 178-79.
[^21] Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 784.
[^22] See ibid., p. 370. Kim San's records dated to A.D. 927. The biographies mentioned in the prologue of Korean Saints are good samples of the kind of interest that Korean members have in genealogy. See the biographies of Choi Dong Sull, Cho Joong Hyun, Hwang Chung Youl, and Kim Jung Shik. Kim Jung Shik, for example, had submitted by 1991 "approximately 887 family group sheets, containing about 3,725 names" (p. 7).
[^23] The most available sources on Han In Sang are "Han In Sang," in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, pp. 89-98; the somewhat adulatory article by Gerry Avant, "Korean is like a 'living treasure' among members," Church News, 2 February 1986, p. 6; "Two new General Authorities called," Church News, 1 June 1991, p. 3; Gerry Avant and John L. Hart, "His shoulders are used to heavy tasks," Church News, 6 July 1991, p. 6; "Han In Sang of the Seventy," Ensign 31 (August 1991): 75; and his first general conference address, "Take Up His Cross," Ensign 32 (May 1992): 81-82.
[^24] See Choi, "History of the Church," p. 316.
[^25] See Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 503.
[^26] David E. Sorensen, Rex D. Pinegar, and L. Edward Brown, "The Church in Japan, Korea, and Far-East Russia," Ensign 26 (November 1996): 111.
[^27] See ibid. See also Merrill J. Bateman, Han In Sang, and Sam K. Shimabukuro, "Church Progress Continues in Japan and South Korea," Ensign 24 (May 1994): 112.
[^28] Information for this paragraph is derived from material supplied by Spencer J. Palmer. A longer version is part of a manuscript for a forthcoming article for the Ensign magazine, tentatively titled "Korean Pioneers Who Have Prepared the Way."
[^29] As quoted in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 94.
[^30] Information supplied by "J" Stephen Jones of the Church Educational System, 25 October 1996.
[^31] As quoted in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, p. 503.
[^32] Kellene Ricks, "Korea, Land of the Morning Calm," Ensign 32 (July 1992): 36.
[^33] See John L. Hart, "Korean sings Italian opera: LDS baritone wins spot at Seoul Olympics," Church News, 27 August 1988, p. 14; Claudia L. Bushman, "Member wins Tchaikovsky prize," Church News, 6 October 1990, p. 13; and Sheridan Sheffield, "Gospel peace brings strength to opera singer," Church News, 22 August 1992, p. 5.
[^34] I have freely abridged Brother Joo's writing. A fuller account will appear in the Ensign in 1997 as part of an article by Spencer J. Palmer. Further information regarding Joo Duck Young is found in Ricks, "Korea, Land of the Morning Calm," pp. 36-37; and "Joo Duck Young," in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, 297-99.
[^35] See "South Korea," vol. 2 of Culturgrams: The Nations Around Us (Provo, Utah: Publications Office of the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies, 1995), pp. 138, 140.
[^36] For full publication information, see chapter 8, note 6.
[^37] The three preceding examples are drawn from personal discussions with Robert H. Slover and the interview with L. Edward Brown.
[^38] See Shirleen Meek Saunders, "Whang Keun-OK: Caring for Korea's Children," Tambuli 15 (October 1992): 32-41.
[^39] Eugene P. Till, interview by S. Brad Jenkins, October 1977, tape in possession of author.
[^40] Ibid.
[^41] See Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, 392-93.
[^42] Till interview.
[^43] See Choi, "History of the Church . . . in Korea," 202-3.
