R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

KOREA 1977-1996

Balancing Traditional Values with Gospel Service

THE LATE 1970s

The growth of the Church in Korea during the 1970s was impressive. Church membership at the end of 1978 stood at 12,971, up a thousand from the year before. Approximately three hundred missionaries were in the two missions. Membership growth in the Seoul area continued to be greater than anywhere else in Korea. Because of the growth of the Seoul Korea Stake, it was necessary in May 1977 to create the Seoul Korea West Stake from the original unit. President Kim Chang Sun was called as the new stake president. President Rhee remained president of the mother stake until 1978, when he was called to lead the Pusan Mission. He was replaced by Choi Wook Hwan, his first counselor.

By 1978 the local Saints occupied every major position in the Church with the exception of the presidency of the Korea Seoul Mission, which was held by F. Ray Hawkins. The Regional Representative, Han In Sang, was a native-born Korean. The Church in Korea continued to grow and mature in every way—more missions (the Seoul West Mission was created on July 1, 1979), more members, more wards and branches, more stakes (the Seoul East Stake was formed April 18, 1979, with Ko Won Yong as president; the Pusan Stake was created on September 6, 1979, with Chang Jae Hwan as its first president; the Seoul North Stake was organized three days later, September 9, 1979, with Hong Moo Kwang as its leader; and the Kwangju Stake was constituted on October 25, 1980, presided over by Pak Byung Kyu—all between April 1979 and October 1980—and eight more stakes were created by 1986), and more buildings. But most important, the Korean Saints received the blessing of a temple in Seoul in 1985.

The Mormon Tabernacle Choir made its first visit to Japan and Korea in September 1979. The impressions left by this great musical organization were deep and lasting. Music is an important cultural tradition, and the quality of the music performed in the National Theater touched the hearts and lives of many nonmembers as well as Korean Latter-day Saints. When the choir returned a year or so later, the effect was equally positive. [^1] The second tour came shortly before the second area conference.

THE AREA CONFERENCE OF 1980

In March 1980 the First Presidency announced a second series of conferences to be held in various Asian nations, including Korea. This tour started from the south and ended in Japan, where the new temple was dedicated. Korea was the penultimate stop. The area conference in Seoul was held on October 25 and 26, 1980. A hall large enough to hold the expected crowd could not be arranged, so the conference planners, hoping for good weather, opted to hold the general sessions outside at the Ch'&obreve;ngun-dong church grounds.

Sheri L. Dew, author of President Gordon B. Hinckley's biography Go Forward with Faith, described the event in these words: "The temperature . . . plummeted to 28 degrees F., forcing the first session of conference inside the Seoul 4th Ward chapel. Thousands of members who couldn't find seats in the building sat outside and listened to the message over a public address system. The afternoon session was moved outdoors so that those who couldn't squeeze into the building could see President Kimball and the other visiting leaders, all of whom sat huddled on the stand in heavy coats and blankets." [^2] A "cold and violently blowing wind" [^3] raced through the six thousand conferencegoers, but the crowd was grateful and happy to be in the presence of the Lord's prophet and many other General Authorities and leaders of the Church. [^4]

THE SEOUL KOREA TEMPLE

Immediately following the area conference, a number of Korean Church leaders traveled to Tokyo for the dedication of the temple the next day. Some Korean members had been asking for a temple since the early 1960s. Rhee Honam recalled when his friend Park Jae Am asked Elder Hinckley in 1960 or 1961 if there would ever be a temple in Korea. According to Brother Rhee, "Elder Hinckley just smiled and in a very encouraging tone promised us that if we stayed close to the Lord and were obedient to the Church there would one day be a temple in the Land of the Morning Calm." [^5] During the area conference "many people were in great anticipation that the revelation for the building of the Seoul Temple would be given, [but] it was not." [^6] Excited by the spirit of the event, the Korean Saints who traveled to the dedication in Tokyo became even more desirous of having their own temple. Elder Han In Sang, Regional Representative, gave the benediction at the first dedicatory session. In his prayer he asked the Lord for a temple in his land so that the Korean members might also be able to enjoy the blessings received therein. [^7] In the months following the dedication in Tokyo, the stakes began conducting temple preparation classes and numerous articles appeared in the Saints' Friend, the Korean Church magazine, encouraging Korean members to prepare themselves spiritually for the day when they could have a temple in their own land.

They did not have to wait long. Less than six months later, a few days before general conference, on April 1, 1981, President Kimball announced plans for nine new temples, including one in Seoul, Korea. The Church News made an interesting observation regarding temple building in the Church: "The first nine temples of the Church took 97 years to construct, the second nine 47 years. The third nine were announced within seven years, and the last nine in one news conference." [^8] The Korean priesthood brethren who were in Salt Lake City for the announcement and conference were deeply grateful to have their temple among the latest nine. Expressing the thoughts and feelings of other Regional Representatives and stake presidents who were there, Elder Han In Sang said: "We have more than 20,000 members of the Church in Korea. Only 100 have received their endowments; only 20 couples have been sealed." (It had been expected that the policy that restricted couples from traveling outside the country would be relaxed in 1980, but with the assassination of President Park Chung Hee in 1979, martial law was declared and the old policy remained in force until 1981.)

Ko Won Yong, president of the Seoul East Stake, and now an Area Authority, said he attended the Tokyo Temple dedication and heard President Kimball encourage priesthood leaders to tell their members to go to the temple. "I wondered," remembered President Ko, "how I could deliver the prophet's message to my people when we had no temple and they couldn't leave the country to be sealed as man and wife." [^9] Joy and gratitude were the universal responses among the Korean Saints. When asked if the Korean Saints would contribute their share of the building's cost, the Korean leaders answered in the affirmative. Months later, they had given four times the amount asked by President Kimball.

Following the announcement, the Korean members began to fervently prepare to enter the temple. As General Authorities visited for stake and regional conferences and other training meetings, temple preparation became the common theme in their talks and lessons. The Korean members felt a renewed spirit as they strove to make themselves worthy to enter the house of the Lord. The rise in Church membership witnessed the increased dedication and spiritual growth.

The site chosen for the temple is known as the Shinch'on property. It had been acquired in 1965, during Spencer J. Palmer's mission presidency. Elder Paul Dredge and his companion had come across the property and encouraged Palmer to look into purchasing the land. President Palmer had moved quickly and incurred "the displeasure of the Church's real estate office." But as Sheri L. Dew recorded, "Elder Hinckley had intervened, and on a subsequent trip to Korea with President Hugh B. Brown he had inspected the property. President Brown had suggested that it would be a wonderful place to build a temple," and now, nineteen years later, his suggestion became a reality. [^10] Since its purchase by the Church, the property had been well used for other Church purposes; a mission office and chapel had to be razed to make way for the new building. The temple's location is quite remarkable, being situated close to three of Korea's greatest universities. Over the years an added blessing was the construction of a major subway entrance only two blocks from the temple hill, making it convenient for members to travel there quickly and economically from throughout Seoul.

The architects and planners required a good deal of time to plan the new building and to make legal arrangements for constructing it. Zoning and building-code restrictions created a number of problems. For example, the Church was required to drill a well for water to aid in fire protection. Fortunately a seam found in the underlying granite 112 meters deep brought forth clear spring water. This water is used in the temple and does not require purification. Two years passed before ground-breaking services were held and the construction phase could begin. The Seoul Korea Temple was redesigned three times chiefly because the Korean Saints had given up their savings to build their temple. "Originally," said Han, "it was designed to be a very simple structure— just a couple of endowment rooms and one sealing room. Then it was expanded and expanded." [^11]

Early in the morning of May 9, 1983, Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Quorum of the Twelve conducted the ground-breaking ceremonies. In his prayer Elder Ashton asked, "May this temple be an ensign of truth, a beacon of peace and security."

Two years later the completed building was 12,000 square feet, with an 18,000-square-foot auxiliary building nearby. The architecture reflects distinctively Latter-day Saint lines and purposes while manifesting the beauty of Korean granite and a traditional 100-year black-tile roof. The temple has four ordinance rooms and three sealing rooms surrounding the celestial room. The completed edifice was appointed with furnishings built in Korea and reflected Korean traditional arts and culture. Similar to the annex beside the Tokyo Temple, the auxiliary building contained dorm space for twenty-two men and twenty-two women, as well as other working and mechanical space necessary to operate the temple. The auxiliary building is underground and may serve as a bomb shelter. It also provides parking space for sixteen cars. Shirley-June Younger, historical chairman for the Seoul Temple committee, described the setting in these words: "The grounds are so meticulously landscaped that the building seems to be nestled in a natural garden. Six shining white pillars circle the building; the pillar in front is topped by a statue of the angel Moroni.

"Despite the urban location of the temple, not far from downtown Seoul, those who visit the grounds enjoy a marked feeling of peace and serenity recognized by members of the Church as the influence of the Spirit of the Lord." [^12]

The Seoul Temple was completed during the fall of 1985. While the final work was under way, preparations were completed for the open house and dedication. Members and missionaries were prepared to serve as tour guides, ushers, and hosts. More than thirteen thousand visitors toured the sacred structure between November 26 and December 7.

Another small but significant project was also under way that Announced in April 1981, the Seoul Korea Temple was dedicated on December 14-15, 1985. It was the first temple of the Church to be constructed on the mainland of Asia. (Photo by Shin Jae Koo) fall. Choi Dong Heon, first counselor in the Seoul West Stake presidency, was busy studying the Korean word for temple. The local temple committee decided to follow Choi's recommendation and change the word from sinj&obreve;n to s&obreve;ngj&obreve;n. The word s&obreve;ngj&obreve;n better fit the meaning of "house of the Lord." Sinj&obreve;n, which had been used for many years before that time, had a meaning closer to "house of the gods." [^13]

December 14 and 15, 1985, had been planned for many months as the days for the dedication. During the previous month, however, President Spencer W. Kimball passed away and President Ezra Taft Benson was ordained as President of the Church. He selected Gordon B. Hinckley as his first counselor and Thomas S. Monson as his second counselor in the First Presidency. For about three years President Hinckley had been the only member of the First Presidency who was able to function in his office. Now, with President Benson as the Lord's prophet, there was a question whether President Hinckley would still be assigned to dedicate the new temple in Korea. But because the plans had been made, President Benson sent President Hinckley to Seoul to preside and conduct the ceremonies.

The weather was extremely cold, near zero degrees Fahrenheit, when he, Sister Hinckley, and other Church leaders arrived. President Hinckley recalled his first winter visit: "Snow was flying through the sky and the winds from Siberia were blowing across the land. . . . I walked the streets of this city and saw many people without housing, living in boxes trying to keep warm." In one of his addresses during the dedicatory services, he said he had "shed more tears for Korea than any other place in the world." [^14] His love for the Korean Saints was open and obvious. He had been going to Korea for twenty-five years, and, as he said, had grown old while coming there.

In December 1985 there were more than forty-one thousand members of the Church in Korea. The number of missions had grown to three and the stakes to thirteen. Although the Church was relatively young, there were many leaders who had been seasoned well in Church service since the 1950s and 1960s. More than fifty-five hundred members participated in six dedicatory sessions—five sessions in Korean and one in English for American military people and others who were working in Korea. After the sixth session, President Hinckley was tired but satisfied that the Lord had accepted the new temple. In his journal he wrote: "We have experienced a great outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord. There will never be another occasion like this in the history of the Church in Korea." [^15]

Although President Hinckley disliked being the central figure at any event, his loving spirit, warm counsel, and historic remembrances made the dedicatory services as wonderful as they were. The words he fashioned for the dedicatory prayer reflected his deep love of Korea and his appreciation for the history of the Church there. In the dedicatory prayer, he said:

Our hearts are filled with gratitude for this long awaited day. This is the first such house of the Lord ever constructed on the mainland of Asia. . . .

The seeds of thy work were planted in Korea only a third of a century ago, when amidst the thunders of war, a few of thy faithful sons in military service exemplified the teachings of the gospel in their lives and shared them with a few of those they met. Then thou didst touch the heart of a great and good scholar and leader, Kim Ho Jik, while he was studying in the United States. When he returned to his native land, having experienced the inspiration of the Book of Mormon, and having received a testimony of the prophetic call of Joseph Smith, he shared with others the beauty of his newly found treasure. Missionaries were invited to Korea, and here they taught with faith and inspiration, finding one soul here, another there.

From those times of small beginnings and serious privation thy work has moved forward, its numbers have increased many fold, and it has prospered under thy Church, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and has become firmly rooted in the soil of this beautiful land, and become the spiritual home of many thousands of good people in Korea.

Thou hast smiled with favor upon thy work here. The government of this nation has been hospitable to thy servants. Now, crowning all, is this beautiful edifice in which we meet and which we dedicate to thee. [^16]

In addition to dedicating every part of the building to the Lord and for its sacred purposes, President Hinckley also prayed for the safety of the building—"May this, thy house, be preserved from the effects of storm and tempest, from the tremblings of the earth, from the desecration of enemies, from the destructive forces of war and civil strife"—for those who would enter therein, for the righteousness of the Korean Saints and their families, and so forth. In comparison with every historical event since that time, President Hinckley was right—no other occasion in the history of the Church in Korea compares with the temple dedication.

The first endowment session was held on December 17, 1985. The Seoul Korea Temple, unlike other temple districts, did not have adequate numbers of endowed members to officiate because so few couples had been allowed out of the country to obtain their endowments. Thus it was necessary to first endow couples who had been called to serve in the temple. Rhee Honam officiated as the first eleven couples received their temple blessings. Fortunately, a number of members in the servicemen's district were experienced in temple work and were able to assist in training the Korean workers. Regular sessions commenced in February 1986. [^17]

TEMPLE PRESIDENCIES

The first president of the Seoul Korea Temple was Robert H. Slover, who had previously served as the third mission president in Korea. His wife, Rosemarie W. Slover was called to serve as temple matron. President Slover selected Huo Chae and Park Jae Am as counselors. Like Brother Slover, Huo and Park were men of long experience in the Church. Their interest in genealogy and temple work ranged back to their early years in the Church. Part of Brother Huo's biography [^18] illustrates his depth.

THIRTY-THREE GENERATIONS

Huo Chea

In 1985, I was released as the Inch'&obar;n stake president and called to serve in the first Seoul Temple presidency as Robert H. Slover's first counselor. I could not be lazy in a place as unique and holy as the temple, where the saving work for the dead and the living is performed. So I worked from early in the morning until eleven or twelve at night. As is emphasized in the temple, even though we do genealogy, without a temple we cannot receive the saving ordinances—these are all accomplished together.

My forefather's name is Huo Sun-mun. There are thirty-three generations between my son and him, which is approximately one thousand years. I have, from my forefather's time down, done four generations, and all have received their ordinances and have also been sealed in the temple. I have a future goal to bring salvation to the relatives of my direct family line by doing temple work for them. I have obtained twenty-seven of thirty-three volumes of genealogy and am extracting names from them. I have extracted about two thousand names so far [circa 1992].

In Inch'&obar;n I had a lot of interest in welfare work. When winter came I would buy about five hundred y&obreve;nt'an [coal bricks used as fuel for heating] and stored it for distribution to poor people. When I visited families, I would give one or two hundred y&obreve;nt'an to each, or I would pack one or two sacks of grain on my back to give to families that were struggling. At times the children would come out to greet me, as they were so happy to see me. When doing this type of work I would think, "Small works are the works of God," and keep working. Also, at times certain member families were faced with the dilemma of having to withdraw their children from school because the parents couldn't afford the registration fees. Without anyone knowing, I would pay the registration fees, and I did so on many occasions. And there was once a neighbor girl without any parents that was sentenced to life in prison. Seeing her unjustly accused, I helped her get acquitted through a retrial. For her, this was an act of great value.

Also, I have relatives with families of seven or eight children that live in the countryside, where making a living is difficult. I would choose one or two children from among each family and would make sure they received their education, from elementary all the way to high school. I took care of them even until they married. Up to now, I have helped eighteen or so family members. When I do things like this, I think that it is a small thing, but I get a great sense of joy knowing that I have done something valuable in behalf of God's work. We need to follow God's words, "Love thy neighbor as thyself," even if just a little. I have even provided for the treatment of members or of children with heart problems that were waiting in the hospital for surgery but could not afford it. I think I will continue doing things like this.

In the future, I think I will spend the remainder of my days focusing on God's work and serving as a steward in the temple.

As mentioned earlier, Park Jae Am, second counselor in the temple presidency, had asked Elder Hinckley many years before if Korea would have a temple. Over the years, Brother Park did not let this desire lie fallow. He was active in helping organize genealogy work in Korea, and he helped make arrangements for the Church Genealogical Department to do microfilming in Korea beginning in 1972. [^19] He was also involved in having many rolls of microfilm placed in the Central National Library for the use of his fellow Church members. During the brief time he served in the temple presidency—he passed away in July 1988 at the age of fiftyfour—he carried the normal duties of his office, but he especially loved work in the baptistry. "In the Seoul Temple he performed over twenty-thousand baptisms for the dead." [^20] Brother Park was also the founder of LDS Social Services in Korea in 1977.

Spencer J. Palmer and his wife, Shirley, were the second couple to preside at the Seoul Korea Temple. He chose Lee Joon Taek and Park Nam Soo as counselors. Park Nam Soo "consecutively served as a temple sealer, a temple missionary, an assistant to the temple presidency, second counselor in the temple presidency, and first counselor in the temple presidency since the Seoul Temple first went into operation." [^21] In August 1990 Pak Byung Kyu, who had served as countrywide director of CES since 1986, was the first Korean called to lead the Seoul Korea Temple. His wife, Rhee Young Ji, served as temple matron. In 1993 Pak returned to his former position with CES and was replaced by Bae Young Chun and his wife, Kim Soon Sung, who served by his side as matron of the temple. In the fall of 1996, following five years as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy, Han In Sang and his companion, Lee Kyu In, were called to be the president and matron of the temple.

Temple and genealogy work play a major role in the lives of many Korean members. In the book Korean Saints, a number of Korean members mention their love for the temple and their efforts to trace their genealogies and to submit names to the temple. Virtually every biography begins with genealogical information that places the writer in their family and gives some information regarding their forebears. A number have traced their roots back hundreds of years, and some, like Huo Chea, have records going back thirty-three or more generations. One well-known member, Brother Kim San, a great nationalist and freedom fighter, was reported to have family records going back sixty-six generations. [^22]

CHURCH ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION

Administratively, the Church in Korea has remained closely tied to Japan since the first missionaries entered Korea in 1956. Throughout the years, area supervision has come either from A younger Han In Sang with three of his five children outside his home in Seoul in 1972. (Photo by author) Japan or Hong Kong. Nevertheless, since 1978 Korea has had its own Regional Representatives, and in 1995, when Regional Representatives were discontinued and Area Authorities took their place, Koreans have held these positions. The first two Korean men to serve as Area Authorities were Kim Chong Youl and Ko Won Yong. They were men of considerable experience in Church administration. Elder Kim, a department head for the dental college at Yonsei University, had previously served as bishop, stake president's counselor, mission president's counselor, and Regional Representative. He is married to Hong Young Sook. Elder Ko had served in a bishopric when the Seoul Stake was first organized, then as executive secretary to stake president Rhee Honam, and so on. Over the years he served as a stake high councilor, stake president, and Regional Representative. His wife is Kim Eun Hee.

Many members of the Church in Korea were honored when one of their own, Han In Sang, was called as the first Korean to serve as a General Authority. His call, which became effective on June 1, 1991, was to the Second Quorum of the Seventy. While in that calling he served in the Asia North Area Presidency, stationed in Tokyo, and in the temple department in Salt Lake City. He was released after the standard five years in October 1996. As noted before, his next assignment was president of the Seoul Korea Temple.

Elder Han has been blessed with unusual abilities as a translator and as an administrator. During his years of Church membership, among other callings, he has served as a missionary in Korea, as a branch president while on his mission, as a district president, mission president, and Regional Representative. Even before he became a General Authority, he had the opportunity of associating closely with many members of the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve, and other General Authorities as he served as interpreter for them at area, regional, and stake conferences. Quick of mind, he has used his talents to translate for the Church in Korea, to manage the Church distribution center in Seoul, and to carry out his duties as regional manager for temporal affairs in Korea. [^23]

MISSIONARY EXPANSION

The growth of the Church between 1979 and 1985, when the temple was dedicated, was impressive. The number of members grew from about eleven thousand in 1977 to more than forty thousand in 1985. Enthusiasm for the new temple was a significant impetus for the missionaries. They were able to refer to the new structure and explain gospel truths regarding the eternal nature of families and other principles related to temple worship. The year 1981 was the peak year in missionary productivity, with around 2,500 converts being brought into the Church. Eleven new stakes were created in Korea between 1979 and 1983. Subsequently, in 1986, another new stake was added. And two more stakes were created in 1992, bringing the total then (and in 1996) to sixteen. In 1986 the Korea Taej&obreve;n Mission, Korea's fourth, was organized.

In 1986, as part of the growing pattern throughout the world, the Church organized a Missionary Training Center in Seoul. By 1989 an average of fifteen Korean elders and sisters were trained every month. [^24] It is noteworthy that 94 percent of Koreans serving missions have either graduated from the CES institute program or participated in it. [^25] Local missionaries have a tremendous advantage over American and other foreign elders and sisters because they understand the language, culture, beliefs, and persuasions of their own people.

Ever since President Kimball encouraged young priesthood holders throughout the world to serve missions, numbers of Korean missionaries have grown. In 1996 more than 25 percent of the missionary force in Korea were native Koreans. According to the Area Presidency, "In Korea, students who interrupt their university studies to serve a mission often face significant hurdles to resume their studies when they return, yet many choose to make this sacrifice." [^26] All young Korean males also have a three-year military obligation that often delays their availability to serve a mission until they are twenty-five or twenty-six years of age. Nevertheless, many Korean Saints still serve missions. [^27] A growing number of Koreans who serve missions are second-generation members of the Church. Since the 1970s, most of the presidents of Korean missions have been native members.

In October 1993 a young Latter-day Saint returned missionary, Kwon Young Joon, distinguished himself by placing first in the Korean National Judicial Examination, an examination that is taken by approximately 20,000 people annually and of which only 280 pass. Similar to the bar exam in the United States, the exam is used to select future judges and lawyers. Brother Kwon made some very difficult decisions before reaching this important place in his life. After being accepted in the law program at Seoul National University, Korea's most prestigious school, he received a call to serve a mission. Many teachers, fellow students, and even some Church members tried to dissuade him from accepting the prophet's call. But he had made up his mind while a seminary student to keep the Lord's commandments and had saved money to help support himself while on his mission. After serving a successful mission, he was readmitted at Seoul National University, went on to distinguish himself in the exam, and received legal schooling. After graduation he began three years of military service as a legal officer. Subsequently he married in the Seoul Korea Temple, and he and his wife, Lee Yeonshin, daughter of a stake president and herself a dentist, became the parents of a son, Kwon Jihyuck. It is expected that Brother Kwon will be appointed a judge when he leaves the navy. [^28] The Korean media has given considerable notice to Brother Kwon's membership in the Church. He is striving to set the kind of example that will bring credit to the Church and glory to his Father in Heaven.

The place and importance of the Book of Mormon extends beyond the topic of missionary work and expansion of the Church, but it is also central to missionary work. The first three thousand Korean copies printed in 1967 were distributed, mostly to members, by 1970. Elder Han described the remarkable magnitude and distribution of the Korean Book of Mormon by the 1990s in these words: "Today, of course, the English edition of the Book of Mormon is largest by volume by far. Second is Spanish; third is Portuguese. But the fourth largest edition is Korean. This is surprising because membership in other countries is so much larger. There are 2.2 million English copies a year; in Spanish we are approaching a million; in Portuguese two hundred and thirty-five thousand; and in Korean two hundred and twenty-five thousand. At the end of 1991, the one millionth copy of the Korean-language Book of Mormon was sold at the distribution center in Seoul." [^29]

Koreans are a book-loving and a book-reading people. Not only is the Book of Mormon deeply appreciated by the Korean Saints, but the other standard works of the Church are appreciated as well. The Korean Book of Mormon is an important tool in spreading the restored gospel.

PROGRESS IN THE CHURCH EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM

The seminary and institute programs of the Church Educational System in Korea have steadily grown in numbers of participants and in the quality of education that has been provided. Few places in the worldwide Church have been favored with so many stalwart, able, and dedicated seminary and institute teachers and administrators. Their lives have been wonderful examples of service to the Church as Regional Representatives, stake presidents, bishops, branch presidents, and in other priesthood callings. The present country director, Pak Byung Kyu, who replaced Rhee Honam in 1986, has served in these callings as well as temple president. Dr. Seo Hee Chul, who has twice been country director while colleagues have served as mission president and temple president, is also a man of great talent and dedication.

In 1995 the CES organization in Korea was staffed with a fulltime country director and twelve full-time coordinators, all of whom teach seminary or institute classes or both. In addition, 190 volunteers teach around the country. The CES office is in Seoul. There are four institute buildings (some are part of chapels)—two in Seoul, one in Kwangju, and one in Pusan—but institute classes are offered in a number of other cities.

During the period since seminary and institute were started in 1972, seminary courses have been offered by home study. In recent years, however, a growing number of students (174 in 1995) have been able to participate in early-morning classes. In 1995 a total of 1,417 students were enrolled in seminary classes.

In 1993 the First Presidency asked the Church Educational System to include all members between the ages of eighteen and thirty in the institute program. CES in Korea has been very successful in including large numbers of members of this target age-group. In 1995 there were 1,687 nonstudents participating in the institute program, and 986 college students were enrolled, making a total of 2,673 young people who were engaged in formal weekday study of the gospel. [^30] "The majority of Korean Church leaders today," wrote Seo Hee Chul, "or those people who have remained and served diligently in the Church, have participated in the Church institute program. . . . Also 87 percent of all stake leaders in Korea have had some special relationship with the institute programs." [^31]

THE GOSPEL AND THE SAINTS OF KOREA

Of all the Asian people, the Koreans place the greatest emphasis on education. Korean members hold more higher degrees per capita than any comparable number of people in the entire Church. These highly educated, status-conscious people have chosen in significant numbers to submit themselves to the yoke of membership in the Church of Jesus Christ and are living lives of great devotion and sacrifice to the principles and expectations of the Church. In Korea, as in Japan, businesses and society apply immense pressure upon employees to work extremely long hours and to dedicate their lives almost completely to organizations outside of the family and church. Obeying the Word of Wisdom is also a big challenge. "Drinking and smoking is a way of life here, especially part of the business and social world," states government official Joo Duck Young. "After business hours, men go and drink together socially. It is an established and accepted part of work." [^32] Yet many leaders and members have chosen to change jobs or to make other sacrifices in order to remain active in the Church.

In addition to leadership service in the Church, a number of Korean Saints have distinguished themselves in the world. Three examples of significant service or high attainment are Choi Hyun-Soo, Joo Duck Young, and Hwang Keun-Ok, who was noted in chapter 8.

Choi Hyun Soo, known in America and Europe as Hans Choi, has distinguished himself internationally as an opera singer. A baritone, he first emerged as a prominent singer when he was invited home from Italy, where he had been studying, to perform at the 1988 Olympics in Seoul. Two years later he won first prize in the Ninth International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow, Russia. "He [was] the first singer from Asia and the first non-Russian and first Latter-day Saint to win first place in the vocal competition." Among other places, he has since performed with the Tabernacle Choir, with the New York Opera, at the Teatro al Scala in Milan, Italy, and at Carnegie Hall in New York City. Brother Choi and his family are active members of the Korean Branch in New York City. [^33]

Joo Duck Young is the highest-ranking government official in the Church in Korea, and perhaps throughout Asia. He joined the Church while in high school in Seoul in January 1960. Educated at Seoul National University, he has continued to use his talents to benefit his country and the Church. The following is an excerpt from his own story: [^34]

My life of faith over the more than thirty years that I have been a member of the Church attests to the fact that if we honestly make an effort, keep the commandments, and remain faithful the Lord will greatly bless us. In my case, I have been given an exceptional opportunity for service in the Ministry of Trade, first as Deputy Director of the Machinery and Industry Division. Later I was promoted to the position of Director General, which deals with the automobile, aircraft, and aerospace industries in Korea, and which is comparable to Deputy Assistant Secretary [of] the Department of State of the United States. . . .

Korea has changed drastically during the past thirty to forty years, from one of the poorest countries in the world to a strong and modern industrial economy. The country has changed and so has the development of the Church. In the '50s and '60s and '70s the Church grew very rapidly in Korea. Until now, the growth has been marvelous and impressive. But now . . . with Korea's prosperity and secularization, we are having problems in retaining our members in full activity. For some, the attractions of the material world are diverting them from full faithfulness in the Church. . . .

When I attended George Washington University [1979-1981] I learned for the first time that the Church had become an American [as opposed to a Utah] Church. . . . I began to realize that under the leadership of President Spencer W. Kimball, the Church was beginning to change from a national to a global organization. The internationalization of the Church was already under way. . . .

I realized as never before that the image and influence of the Church within Korea was lagging. . . . I decided that Church members in Korea should collect accurate information about the Church worldwide and bring this to the attention of the people of Korea. I decided that we must introduce the worldwide Church to the Korean public so that they may have clear and accurate information and photographs at their disposal to replace the deficient and inaccurate materials that have been heretofore available. . . .

In all of my Church positions, the one that has given me the most satisfying opportunity to further the cause of Zion in Korea has been my activity of recent years as Director of Public Affairs for the Church in Korea. It has allowed me and other Korean leaders to spread the light of the restored gospel with Korean Society, and to enhance the image of the Church in my native country.

As director of public affairs, Brother Joo has led out in the compilation of a book, intended for his own people, titled Work of Miracles: Emergence of a New World Religion Seeking to Build Utopia on Earth, which outlines the historical emergence of the Church, its missionary successes throughout the world, gospel doctrines, and the fruits of Mormonism.

Members with dedication like Brothers Kwon and Joo and Sister Hwang are helping to build the image of the Church in Korea. They are not alone. Thousands of Korean members are striving to overcome the world and live exemplary lives.

In 1996 the population of South Korea exceeded forty-five million, with 72 percent living in urban centers. Most of the populace was Korean, making it one of the most homogeneous countries in the world. In the American press, seldom a day went by without news of problems between North and South Korea, or regarding some other problem with unions, wages, education policies, public demonstrations, and so on. The Korea of the 1950s—with wars, suffering, poverty, and underdevelopment—was gone. South Korea had become one of the "little tigers," one of the small nations of East Asia with enormous ability to produce steel, ships, automobiles, electronics, and anything else the world market desired. South Korea's Human Economic Index placed it thirty-second among 173 countries. [^35] But Korea was still Korea, and Koreans were still trying to be faithful to their heritage while they struggled to integrate the old conservative ways with those of a world economy and, to a great extent, a world culture.

In 1992 Shirley and Spencer Palmer published in Korea a book of biographies of Koreans who joined the Church between 1950 and 1980. Three years later a translated and revised edition was published in English under the title The Korean Saints. [^36] Even a cursory reading reveals much regarding the heart and soul of the Church and Church members in Korea. Examples abound regarding filial sons and daughters who desire nothing more than to be a credit to their aged or dead parents and to be truly faithful to the restored gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Evidence is also abundant regarding the tremendous importance education plays in the lives of those who are featured in the Palmers' book, as well as in their hopes and dreams for their children. Also, seeming to go against Korean tradition, there are frequent statements by men regarding their love and respect for their wives and how much they have contributed to the success of their families, their service in the Church, and to their growth as human beings. Clearly, the gospel has had a positive effect in the lives of many Korean members.

At the end of 1996 there were approximately seventy thousand Korean members in Korea, plus a large but unknown number in the United States. The Church in Korea, along with Japan, is one of the few countries throughout the world that is financially self-supporting. The members have paid their share of the almost ninety buildings that serve 161 wards and branches and 22 stakes and districts.

Another lesson from The Korean Saints is the evidence that many Korean members have successfully amalgamated the best of their Confucian background with the teachings and life patterns of the restored gospel. Respect for ancestors and genealogy work has tied Korea's past traditions closely with temple work, family history, and genealogy as taught in the Church.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Spellings of Chinese words vary greatly depending on the transliteration system used. Before the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC), the Wade-Giles system was the accepted means of transliteration. Today, however, the Pinyin system of the PRC has gained almost universal acceptance among scholars and in the print media. The major exceptions are found in Taiwan and Hong Kong. In this book the locally accepted spellings are used. From time to time the Pinyin spelling will be added in parentheses for the convenience of the reader. In this example the word Ch'ing in Wade-Giles is given in Pinyin in parentheses as Qing.
[^2] Hugh J. Cannon, as quoted in Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia, p. 35.
[^3] As quoted in ibid., p. 37.
[^4] As quoted in ibid.
[^5] Hugh J. Cannon, "The Chinese Realm Dedicated for the Preaching of the Gospel," Improvement Era 24 (February 1921): 445.
[^6] Matthew Cowley, as quoted in "The Language of Sincerity," Improvement Era 52 (November 1949): 715.
[^7] See Steven N. Talbot, "A History of the Chinese Mission of the Church . . ., 1949 to 1953," (unpublished paper, Brigham Young University, 1977).
[^8] See Hilton A. Robertson, Diary, 28 February 1949; copy in possession of the author.
[^9] See ibid., 12 July 1949.
[^10] Robertson, Diary, 14 July 1949.
[^11] See "Consul advises Americans to get out of Hong Kong," Salt Lake Tribune, 10 January 1951, p. 1.
[^12] As quoted in Chinese Mission Historical Reports, 31 March 1951, LDS Church Archives.
[^13] See Mission Financial and Statistical Reports, Chinese Mission, 1951, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as MFSR.
[^14] See Gordon Irving, "Numerical Strength and Geographical Distribution of the LDS Missionary Force, 1830-1974," Task Papers in LDS History, April 1975, LDS Church Archives, pp. 23, 26.
[^15] See Southern Far East Mission Historical Reports, 30 September 1955, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as SFEM.
[^16] See ibid.
[^17] Jerry D. Wheat, interview by the author, Hong Kong, 6 September 1995, tape recording.
[^18] See "Missionary System Set Up on Hong Kong," Church News, 29 October 1955; see also "Mormon Church in H.K.," South China Morning Post (Hong Kong), 19 October 1955.
[^19] See SFEM, 30 September 1955.
[^20] H. Grant Heaton, "Missionary system set up in Hong Kong," Church News, 29 October 1955, p. 6.
[^21] See Diane E. Browning, "The Translation of Mormon Scriptures into Chinese" (unpublished paper, Brigham Young University, 1977), p. 2; in possession of the author.
[^22] SFEM, 31 December 1955, LDS Church Archives.
[^23] H. Grant Heaton delivered this testimony in the Ho Man Tin chapel, Kowloon-Tong, Hong Kong, 26 May 1996.
[^24] Unless otherwise noted, the basic source for this and the following section is SFEM, by date. President Heaton kept a thorough record of mission developments and activities.
[^25] See Hong Kong Standard, 1 September 1957.
[^26] A survey made while Elder Mark E. Petersen was in Hong Kong in June 1959 "indicated that only about 20 percent of the membership in this area is unemployed. Many have low wages, and low standard of living, but they are self-supporting. Those not employed are cared for by relatives and friends, not by the Church. The average income for our employed Saints is about $218 per month Hong Kong dollars. One American dollar is worth 5.85 Hong Kong dollars. Therefore in terms of American dollars the income would be about $27.40 per month. The average income for the people of the city generally is $130 per month, Hong Kong. Our people therefore are well above the average. The average size of L.D.S. family is 5.4 persons." See Mark E. Petersen to First Presidency, Tour of the Southern Far East Mission, General Observations, 6 July 1959, LDS Church Archives.
[^27] SFEM, 30 September 1958.
[^28] A useful introduction to Christianity in Taiwan is David Woodward's "Taiwan," in Donald E. Hoke, The Church in Asia (Chicago: Moody Press, 1975), pp. 609-21.
[^29] See "Mormon missionaries now labor in Formosa," Church News, 23 June 1956, p. 19.
[^30] W. Brent Hardy, interview by the author, Las Vegas, Nevada, 2 June 1975, tape recording.
[^31] SFEM, 30 September 1958.
[^32] Ibid., 30 June 1959.
[^33] See John L. Hart, "Korean sings Italian opera: LDS baritone wins spot at Seoul Olympics," Church News, 27 August 1988, p. 14; Claudia L. Bushman, "Member wins Tchaikovsky prize," Church News, 6 October 1990, p. 13; and Sheridan Sheffield, "Gospel peace brings strength to opera singer," Church News, 22 August 1992, p. 5.
[^34] I have freely abridged Brother Joo's writing. A fuller account will appear in the Ensign in 1997 as part of an article by Spencer J. Palmer. Further information regarding Joo Duck Young is found in Ricks, "Korea, Land of the Morning Calm," pp. 36-37; and "Joo Duck Young," in Palmer and Palmer, Korean Saints, 297-99.
[^35] See "South Korea," vol. 2 of Culturgrams: The Nations Around Us (Provo, Utah: Publications Office of the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies, 1995), pp. 138, 140.
[^36] For full publication information, see chapter 8, note 6.
