R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE CHINESE REALM 1949-1959

Founding the Church in Hong Kong and Taiwan

Almost ten decades passed between the time when Elder Hosea Stout and his companions left Hong Kong in 1853 and the arrival in 1949 of the next group of LDS missionaries. The intervening years had not been kind to China and her people. Few parts of the world had endured more suffering, wars, rebellions, and revolutions than China. Foreign powers dismembered the once-glorious empire during the years following China's first treaty with a Western nation in 1842. From then until the turn of the century, the Ch'ing (Qing) [^1] Dynasty steadily lost control. Token measures intended to bring China technologically abreast of the West failed, and the Boxer uprising in 1900 also fell short of its objective of driving all foreigners, especially Christian missionaries, from the country.

Continued degeneration finally brought the fall of the Manchu Ch'ing regime in the Chinese revolution of 1911. But the new government was unable to establish stability, and by 1916 the nation had fallen into the hands of warlords who ruled parts of the country for their own benefit. This situation continued until Chiang K'ai-shek consolidated most of the country under the Kuomintang, the Nationalist government in the mid-1920s. By that time, the Chinese Communist party had been founded, and in the late 1920s it was a growing force. In the mid-1930s the Chinese Communists, with Mao Tse-tung (Mao Zedong) as leader, were established in the northwestern city of Yenan.

In 1937 war broke out between China and Japan. This protracted conflict finally ended in 1945, but it brought untold hardships to the Chinese people. Before China was on its feet, another war, this time between Mao's communist forces and the nationalist armies of Chiang K'ai-shek, ravaged the country. On October 1, 1949, the Communists established the People's Democratic Republic of China (PRC). Chiang and his followers retreated to the Island of Taiwan (Formosa), where they transplanted the Republic of China (ROC) government.

The history of Christianity in China largely parallels the foregoing political events. Protestant missions began in earnest after 1842, when five treaty ports were opened to Westerners. Although times were difficult and a number of missionaries died martyrs' deaths (the worst massacre took place during the Boxer uprising when 188 missionaries, missionary wives, and children were killed), thousands of Christians, both Protestant and Catholic, devoted their lives to the cause of Christ in China. The high watermark for the Protestants was 1925, when 8,158 missionaries and wives of missionaries were engaged in the work. Possibly as many Roman Catholics were there at the same time.

The Sino-Japanese War of 1937-1945 forced many missionaries to retreat to western China and some to leave the country. The missionaries who remained provided hospitals and medical centers and tried to help the Chinese people. Following the war, large numbers of Protestant and Catholic missionaries returned to China or entered for the first time; but before the Christian schools, hospitals, and teaching stations were fully organized again, the Communists defeated the Kuomintang forces. Christianity was in a grave situation. Some missionaries withdrew immediately when the Communists took over, but most decided to take the risk and see whether some kind of working relationship could be arranged. In 1951, however, the missionaries began leaving in large numbers. By 1953 most missionaries were out of the country. Christianity in Communist China was not dead, but it was in serious danger. Before "liberation" there were more than four million Chinese Christians.

When the LDS Church established its second mission in Hong Kong in July 1949, the Communists had not yet taken complete control of the mainland. No one knew that the end of the civil war would come so soon. At that time many informed observers believed that Chiang would somehow destroy Mao's forces. But history was not on the side of the Church, and the second mission was closed after only eighteen months. Taiwan was not a suitable alternative at that time because of the extreme difficulty the Kuomintang forces were having establishing their new government on that island.

But the LDS Chinese Mission of 1949 cannot be counted a failure in the sense of the 1853 experience. Much was accomplished that had lasting influence.

ELDER DAVID O. McKAY DEDICATES THE CHINESE REALM

China was obviously on the minds of the leading Brethren of the Church when in 1920 they sent Elder David O. McKay on a world tour of missions. The First Presidency asked him to visit China and the surrounding countries and to evaluate these areas as possible mission fields. They also asked Elder McKay to dedicate China for the preaching of the gospel if he felt impressed to do so.

After visiting Japan during December 1920, Elder McKay and Hugh J. Cannon, his traveling companion, went to Korea, Manchuria, and Peking (Beijing), China, arriving there on January 8, 1921. They were disturbed by the poverty and chaos they encountered in China. Japan had impressed them as modern and promising; China was drab and depressing. Nevertheless, on the morning of Sunday, January 9, Elder McKay felt impressed to dedicate the land. He and Elder Cannon desired to offer the prayer in a tranquil place, preferably under the blue sky: "Placing themselves in the hands of the Lord to lead them as He saw fit, they walked almost directly to the walls of the 'Forbidden City,' the former home of emperors and nobility. Entering the gate they walked past shrines, pagodas and temples fast falling to decay . . . and came to a grove of what they took to be cypress trees. A hallowed and reverential feeling was upon them. It was one of those occasions which at rare intervals come to mortals when they are surrounded by a Presence so sacred that human words would be disturbing. The brethren were very sure unseen holy beings were directing their footsteps." [^2]

Then, through the authority of the holy apostleship, Elder McKay dedicated, consecrated, and set apart the Chinese realm for the preaching of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. He prayed that the Chinese government might be stabilized, that the message might be given in peace. "May the Elders and Sisters whom thou shalt call to this land as missionaries," he continued, "have keen insight into the mental and spiritual state of the Chinese mind. Give them special power and ability to approach this people in such a manner as will make the proper appeal to them. We beseech thee, O God, to reveal to thy servants the best methods to adopt and the best plans to follow in establishing thy work among this ancient, tradition-steeped people." [^3] He pleaded for the suffering children and for China's young, and he prayed that the bonds of superstition, might be broken. He prayed: "Heavenly Father, . . . break the bands of superstition, and may the young men and young women come out of the darkness of the Past into the Glorious Light now shining among the children of men. Grant, our Father, that these young men and young women may through upright, virtuous lives and prayerful study, be prepared and inclined to declare this message of salvation in their own tongue to their fellowmen." [^4] It was an inspired prayer, a dedication, and a prophecy.

Several weeks later, Elder Cannon wrote to the Improvement Era and reported this event. In the article he made it clear that Elder McKay did not expect China to be opened to LDS missionaries in the near future. Concerning the prayer, he wrote: "It was such a prayer and blessing as must be recognized in heaven, and though the effects may not be suddenly apparent, they will be none the less real." [^5] But turbulent 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, in China, combined with the problems of the depression and World War II, made it impossible for the Church to open missionary work there until after the war ended.

THE CHINESE MISSION FROM 1949 TO 1953

On July 14, 1949, Elder Matthew Cowley, a member of the Council of the Twelve and president of the Asian and Pacific missions of the Church, stood atop Victoria Peak on Hong Kong Island in the company of his wife, President Hilton A. and Sister Hazel Robertson, and Elder Henry and Sister SaiLang Aki. There he offered a prayer to officially open the Chinese Mission of the Church. Mindful of Elder McKay's dedicatory prayer of 1921, Elder Cowley once again "asked God to open up the way for the gospel to be brought to that great nation." [^6]

The creation of the Chinese Mission [^7] had been discussed among the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve Apostles for some time before they authorized President David O. McKay, second counselor in the First Presidency, to call Hilton A. Robertson, the man who they believed knew "more about the Oriental people than any other man in the Church," to open the new mission. [^8] Robertson had presided over the closing of the early Japanese Mission, had opened and presided over the Japanese Mission in Hawaii from 1937 to 1940, and was currently a counselor in the East Provo Stake presidency.

After the Robertsons accepted the call to open China, President McKay telephoned Henry Wong Aki of the Oahu Stake high council and asked him and his wife, SaiLang, to accompany In late June and early July 1949, Elder Matthew Cowley and his wife, Elva (top right), sailed to Hong Kong with newly called mission president Hilton A. Robertson (seated far left) and his wife, Hazel (center of back row). Henry Wong Aki, counselor in the mission presidency, his wife SaiLang (behind him), and Carolyn Robertson completed the mission group. The others pictured were LDS members in the employ of the USS President Cleveland. the Robertsons to Hong Kong. Aki accepted the assignment and functioned as first counselor in the mission presidency.

When the missionary group (consisting of the Robertsons and their nineteen-year-old daughter, Carolyn, the Akis, and Elder and Sister Cowley) docked at Hong Kong on July 10, 1949, they found the weather hot and humid and the city overcrowded with refugees from the civil war in mainland China. Since the end of World War II, the population of the British Crown Colony had exploded from 600,000 to almost 2.5 million. The entire area under British control encompassed only four hundred square miles and consisted of Hong Kong Island, the Kowloon and Sai Kung Peninsulas, and the New Territories (a tract of land adjacent to the Chinese border that was leased by the British in 1898 for ninety-nine years). Most of the 1.7 million refugees were packed into slums where food and water were meager, sanitation was inadequate, and the danger of devastating fires was ever present. Longtime residents, both British and Chinese, lived in modern apartment buildings and worked in modern establishments. Everyone, however, was distressed about the immediate effects of the war as well as the possible long-term consequences of the Nationalist-Communist struggle.

From the day of their arrival, the missionaries had difficulty finding housing and chapel facilities. Only through the help of some of Elder Aki's relatives did the missionaries and the Cowleys find hotel rooms at the Kimberly Hotel, Kowloon. Permanent headquarters were even harder to find.

On July 12, Elders Cowley, Robertson, and Aki flew to Canton (Guangzhou) to investigate the possibility of doing missionary work there. They found Canton to be in even worse condition than Hong Kong and in greater danger because of the war. They returned to Hong Kong the same day, hoping the Church could at least gain a foothold there. [^9]

Two days later the group met at Victoria Peak on Hong Kong Island, and Elder Cowley offered the prayer that officially opened the mission to the Chinese people. "Another outstanding day in the mission," wrote President Robertson at the end of the day. "We went to Hong Kong and to the Peak South side where prayers were offered by Brother Aki and myself and then Apostle Mathew Cowley prayed officially opening the mission. It was an inspirational hour of worship and thanksgiving to God, our Father in Heaven, for our safe arrival and for the blessings of employment in his Kingdom among the people of the populous nation so overridden by so many calamities of nature and man." [^10] The following day, Elder and Sister Cowley left for Japan, and the little band of missionaries was on its own.

During the next eighteen months the missionaries accomplished much, considering the circumstances. The first two young missionaries were Elders H. Grant Heaton and William K. Paalani, who arrived on February 25, 1950. Six additional elders came to Hong Kong and made significant progress in the Cantonese language and acquired a number of friends for the Church. Eighteen Chinese joined the Church. Three young girls, Nora Koot and her sisters, were the first Chinese to be baptized in Hong Kong. They were baptized in a temporarily dammed stream at the bottom of a waterfall at Diamond Hill on December 31, 1950. The next month, fifteen others, most of whom were relatives of the Akis, joined the Church. Progress was slow, but the elders started with no knowledge of the language, with no members of the Church, with no Mormon literature except the Bible in Chinese (and not even Elder Aki could read it), with a difficult British bureaucracy with which to deal (the missionaries had problems gaining permission to build a chapel on property they had an option to buy), and worst of all, with an international situation that was very unstable.

It was an international problem—the Korean War, which broke out in July 1950—that brought an end to the mission. By that time the Chinese Communists were totally in control of mainland China, and the border along the New Territories was tense. The Korean problem exacerbated the situation in Hong Kong, and no one was sure that the war would not spread throughout East Asia. On January 9, 1951, President Harry S. Truman asked the American people to unite behind an effort to block the conquest of the world by Communism. The following day, the U.S. consul general in Hong Kong advised all American dependents to leave the colony as soon as possible. Forty-five thousand Chinese troops were amassed along the borders, and the situation was dangerous. [^11]

The First Presidency watched carefully, and then, on January 13, President McKay telephoned President Robertson to inquire concerning the safety of the missionaries. Upon hearing Robertson's assessment of conditions, President McKay asked him to take "all of the missionaries to the Hawaiian Islands for the time being." [^12] On February 6, 1951, President Robertson and his companions sailed from Hong Kong. Elders Heaton and Paalani had not been in Hong Kong for even a year, and the other elders had been there a shorter time. Robertson considered the withdrawal to be a temporary move, motivated primarily by the tense international situation but also by the fact that the Church did not think it was wise to build a chapel and missionary quarters at that time; and without larger facilities (the living room of the mission home could accommodate only twenty-five people at a time) the Church could not grow. [^13]

The mission operated in Honolulu until March 31, and then the missionaries were sent on to San Francisco. Until February 9, 1953, the missionaries of the Chinese Mission worked among the Chinese people of northern California, especially in San Francisco, Oakland, Fresno, Stockton, and Sacramento. The mission was then closed, primarily because of lack of interest among the American-Chinese people. Only a handful of persons had joined the Church.

THE OPENING OF THE SOUTHERN FAR EAST MISSION

Only two months after President Robertson and his missionaries departed from Hong Kong, David O. McKay became President of the Church. Although he was strongly oriented toward missionary expansion, the Korean conflict and the conscription of young LDS men into the armed services curtailed missionary efforts throughout the world. The total missionary force dropped from a high of 5,164 in 1950 to 2,584 in 1953. The missions of the Church were hard-pressed to maintain their programs, and the opening of new fields was out of the question. But with the conclusion of open hostilities in Korea in 1953, the LDS missionary force climbed again; and by the end of 1955, 4,651 missionaries were in the field, a sufficient number for the First Presidency to again consider opening China. [^14]

Only seven months after Robertson's release from the Chinese Mission in February 1953, he was called again into missionary service, this time as president of the Japanese Mission and the Chinese Mission. As president of the Japan Mission ( which was for a brief time called the Far East Mission), Robertson supervised all LDS activities in East Asia. Although full-time missionary work was limited to Japan, LDS servicemen's groups were organized in Korea, Taiwan, Okinawa, Guam, and the Philippines. Demands on the mission president and some of the older missionaries were heavy.

On May 23, 1955, President McKay called twenty-six-year-old H. Grant Heaton to preside over a new mission, the Southern Far East Mission, which was soon to be created. Heaton, who had served as a missionary in Hong Kong during the earlier mission, had learned Cantonese before being transferred to California. During the Korean conflict he had served in military intelligence as an interrogator of Chinese prisoners and had learned the Mandarin language as well. He could read and write Chinese. Supporting him in his new assignment was his wife, Luana, and their six-month-old baby.

As had been true in 1949, a member of the Council of the Twelve, this time Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, accompanied the new mission president to his post. En route, President Smith toured the Japan Mission and also visited Korea and dedicated that land. While in Japan, he held an important meeting with President Hilton A. Robertson (who was now serving as president of the Japan Mission), the LDS servicemen, the missionaries, and the Japanese Saints. President Smith proposed that the mission be divided into the Northern Far East Mission, which would consist of Japan, Korea, and Okinawa, and the Southern Far East Mission, which would consist of Hong Kong, Taiwan, the Philippines, Guam, and other parts of South and Southeast Asia. Although it was not accessible to missionary work, the People's Republic of China, too, was part of the mission. The proposal was unanimously accepted in Japan, as was the same proposal in Hong Kong on August 16, 1955. Hence, on that day, the Church officially commenced its third and most successful effort to take the restored gospel to China. [^15]

Soon after, President Heaton, President Robertson, and President Smith flew to the Philippines. On August 21, at Clark Air Base, President Smith presided at a meeting with about fifty LDS servicemen. At that time he dedicated the Philippine Islands to the preaching of the gospel. While the three presidents were in Manila, they attempted to find a site for a chapel and mission home. Six years passed, however, before missionary work was opened there.

On August 23 the Smiths flew to Guam. Two days later they met in conference with the Guam Branch, which consisted primarily of service personnel. The Saints there, too, approved of the new Southern Far East Mission. President Smith then dedicated the Island of Guam for missionary work. [^16]

Following the visit to the Philippines, President Heaton returned to Hong Kong. On August 23 eight charter missionaries arrived in Hong Kong on board the SS President Wilson: Garnet E. Birch, Gary L. Bradshaw, Duane W. Degn, Kenneth K. S. Fong, Malan R. Jackson, Keith A. Madsen, Ronald R. Ollis, and Jerry D. Wheat. Only Elders Degn, Ollis, and Wheat had been called to serve in Hong Kong; but on the long sea voyage to Japan, President Joseph Fielding Smith and President Heaton decided that three elders was a strange number to start a mission with, and so they assigned five Japan-bound elders to Hong Kong. [^17] Six additional elders arrived on October 8. From the beginning the First Presidency and Church leaders supported the mission with sufficient manpower to accomplish the work.

On August 27 the Heatons and the eight missionary elders moved into a rented home on Argyle Street, Kowloon. The immediate task was to prepare the elders to do active missionary work. President Heaton was qualified to direct the language training program that was needed. He hired young Chinese men to teach the elders six hours a day, one teacher for every two elders. One of these teachers, a mattress salesman until then, was Ng Kat Hing. (Ng was later baptized by Elder Wheat and became a strong leader in the Church in Hong Kong. Over the years he has done translation work, run the distribution center, held almost every priesthood calling, and is now the first president of the Hong Kong Temple.) The initial training program consisted of twelve hours of study per day—six hours with a teacher, two hours with a tape recorder, two hours of scripture study, one hour of world religions, and one hour of group discussion. [^18]

Within a few days, by early September, most of the converts from the earlier mission had been relocated. President Heaton soon organized a Sunday School, and even some of the investigators from the earlier period were studying the gospel. The elders used English classes to attract interest among nonmembers. The Book of Mormon and Bible were the basic texts. By September 18 the elders were out among the people two days a week tracting. The grueling study schedule was taking a toll among the missionaries, and they needed to get out. Because their ability to use Cantonese and Mandarin (some elders were assigned to study each language) was limited, they sought out English-speaking people—Chinese, Indians, Englishmen, and others. [^19]

In contrast to the two earlier attempts to plant the Church on Chinese soil, in 1955 the people of Hong Kong were ready for the gospel. "Present conditions in Hong Kong," wrote President Heaton, "seem conducive to missionary work. This colony is a place of refuge for those who cannot find safety in the Communist-dominated country of their birth. Most of the Christian missions which have been expelled from China are trying to maintain an organization, and to do this they operate in Hong Kong with many limitations. The presence of so many missionaries representing so many different sects, has created a great deal of religious interest among the Chinese. These factions, combined with the natural tendency of people in distress to turn to a Divine source, make the preaching of the Restored Gospel very vital and also give great opportunities to the (LDS) missionaries to fill their assignment." [^20]

President Heaton recognized the need for translated materials. One of his first acts was to advertise for professional translators. More than one hundred well-educated men applied for the job, and from them Heaton chose three who were the best qualified. Subsequently two of these men were dismissed, and Mr. Wang Kai-An became the Church translator. During the next few years Mr. Wang, who later became a member of the Church, translated many tracts and lesson materials for the mission. [^21]

Missionary activity in Hong Kong Colony was intensive from the beginning. Before the year ended, President Heaton had leased three apartments and sent the missionaries into the field, created the Hong Kong-Kowloon District, organized three branches (the North Point Branch on October 23, and the Tsim Sha Tsui and Sham Shui Po Branches on November 17), and purchased the property at #2 Cornwall Street in Kowloon-Tong, which served as the mission home and office until the 1990s, when the site was used for the construction of the Hong Kong Temple. The leased apartments doubled as meeting halls for Church services. The new mission home required remodeling before it could be occupied. Before the year ended, Heaton had visited the LDS servicemen in the Philippines again. He had also made significant progress on a new missionary lesson plan that was designed especially for the Chinese people. After only four months, wrote Heaton, the elders were "well on their way to mastery of the language." [^22]

BUYING THE CORNWALL STREET PROPERTY AND OTHERS

The acquisition of the property on Cornwall Street was the most important real estate purchase the Church ever made in Hong Kong. Buying property in Hong Kong Colony has always been difficult. Costs have been unreasonably high, especially in comparison with prices in Utah. Heaton knew the Brethren intended to have the mission succeed and that to do so buildings were necessary for meetinghouses and a mission home and office. But as he searched for appropriate properties, he found that the turnaround time to get a positive reply from the Church bureaucracy in Salt Lake City was always too slow. The properties he chose were sold before he could buy them. Finally, President Heaton wrote directly to President David O. McKay and explained the problem. President McKay made a special arrangement with Heaton to wire funds to a bank in Hong Kong when the right properties were found. Heaton was to acquire properties in his name. The properties that Heaton bought were handled in this way and later deeded over to the Church.

BUYING #2 CORNWALL STREET

H. Grant Heaton

I had found the mission home that we were going to buy—a piece of property just up on Waterloo Road, just about four houses up on Boundary Street—and had wired for the money. The only thing it had going for it was that it was available. It wasn't very good at all. It was a house that we could live in and we thought that if we owned it we could probably control the termites. But it didn't have much to offer. Except it was available. And so I had gone in and negotiated a sound earnest money deposit on that property and had agreed that when the check came in from President McKay I was to go down and close the deal. In the meantime, a very good friend . . . called me and said, "Father Lee has a piece of property that is owned by some of his parishioners and he would like to get rid of it." Now, Father Lee . . . was the Abbot General of the Trappist Monastery over in Lantau Island. He happened to have been educated at the Trappist Monastery in Huntsville, Utah. He had been of a little service earlier, when I tried to open a bank account when we first came. The bank wasn't sure they wanted to convert a check written out for $20,000 into a Hong Kong bank account. They brought up several people to the teller's desk. Pretty soon a voice from behind me spoke up. It said, "If that check is written by the Mormon Church, you can cash it. It doesn't matter how much it is." I turned around and here was this Catholic priest behind me. That was Father Lee. . . . But Father Lee had a piece of property that he insisted that I see. I said, "It is no good for me to look at it. We have already made a deposit and there is no way I can get out of this deposit." "But come look at it," he said. They dragged me kicking and screaming to #2 Cornwall Street. My opinion at that time was, in a ranking of 1 to 10, it was about a 15. It was the ideal place for us. It couldn't be better. As all of you well know.

And so I was troubled. I thought I had failed the Lord because I had chosen a piece of property and made a commitment on that piece of property and now here is one that we needed and we didn't have enough money for two. So I didn't know if President McKay would go for a blind deal like that or not. We obviously prayed a good deal about it. I decided I would go back to the old gentleman and see if there was some way I could talk him into keeping the deposit, but letting us out from the deal. I didn't want to be dishonorable with him and so, I went to his home. I had negotiated just with him prior to that time. When I went in, two of his sons were in the room. I think he was afraid that he hadn't really communicated to me well in Chinese. He and I spoke Cantonese together and I didn't have a great real estate vocabulary at the time. I thought he had his sons there to help translate, because they spoke English. And as we finished the small talk, one of his sons finally came to me and said, "Mr. Heaton, our father has sold, has made an agreement to sell you this place. He didn't consult us. We would prefer not selling it. Would you be willing to take back the deposit?" And, I was willing.

The Lord blessed us with Cornwall Street. It couldn' t have served us better under any circumstances over the years. For forty years it has served us well. I believe the Lord had a hand in directing Father Lee, although it wasn't his intent to magnify the Mormon Church in Hong Kong. He was a good, honest, sincere man. [^23]

The new mission home was a beautiful colonial-style building with sixteen rooms, five bathrooms, and an attractive front yard.

THE CHURCH IN HONG KONG FROM 1956 TO 1959

Hong Kong is an unusual political entity. [^24] Its very existence as a British colony was an anomaly. During the time when colonial powers were retreating from Asia, the British somehow held on there. Although few people find Hong Kong to be a desirable place from a social, economic, or political perspective, it continued, grew, and even prospered under difficult conditions. It is a city unique in all the world. It had and continues to have a pulse, a bustle that sets it apart.

Hong Kong was a chaotic place in the mid-1950s. As the population almost exploded with the influx of millions of refugees from mainland China, the British colonial government found itself faced with the difficult and costly task of housing these people. Efforts in this area have continued to the present. Refugees built shacks on hillsides, on rooftops, in alleys, and on city streets. Chinese with a variety of dialects competed with one another for jobs, food, and water. Social, medical, and welfare services were strained almost to the breaking point as former Chinese leaders and elites found themselves thrust to the bottom rung of Hong Kong's economic and social ladder. The high and the lowly mingled together as near equals. Sages and servants vied with each other for survival at least, and for economic and social betterment if possible.

Heaton and the missionaries may have overreacted to the "Chineseness" of the situation. Having studied Chinese history and politics at the University of California at Berkeley, Heaton knew many of the problems of East-West relations. He was caught between his feelings of love for the Chinese and an educated distrust of their ability to turn situations to their own best advantage. So-called rice Christians, those who would claim to be Christians for an allotment of rice or some other benefit, were plentiful in Hong Kong. Many Christian churches distributed U.S. agricultural products to needy refugees, and unfortunately these products were sometimes used by the churches as a means of attracting members. President Heaton was fearful of the negative consequences of such situations and made every effort to avoid attracting people into the Church whose intentions were not sincere.

He was also concerned about bringing Chinese people into the Church who did not fully understand the teachings of the Church and the implications of membership. In an effort to teach the Chinese people well, Heaton and the missionaries developed a series of seventeen lessons that handled the basic tenets of the gospel from Jesus Christ to Joseph Smith and from the premortal existence to the last judgment. The original intention of the missionaries was to give investigators one lesson each week until they completed the series. After baptism, new converts were then required to listen to twenty more lessons that were designed to ground them solidly in the faith. The implications of this procedure were significant. The missionaries had to memorize the entire lesson plan—a large demand on any elder or sister. The amount of time the lesson plan required before the missionaries could consider their job done was great. Present-day missionaries can teach five or six times as many people in the same period of time. Nevertheless, the times and circumstances must be remembered. Because the new members of the Church did not have examples to follow in Church activity and because they did not have a deep knowledge of the restored gospel, the extended plan was undoubtedly desirable during the first several years of the mission. In addition to their proselyting work, the missionaries were also involved in branch and district leadership assignments.

The new mission celebrated its first success on May 31, 1956, when eleven Chinese were baptized, five of whom were refugees from Communist China. Two weeks later, four more Chinese were baptized into the Church. By the end of 1956, eighty-one converts had come into the Church in the Hong Kong area. In November two Chinese men, Lee Wing Foon and Ng Kat Hing, were called as counselors in a Sunday School superintendency. Other Chinese members were called as Sunday School teachers. The first Chinese to receive the Aaronic Priesthood were ordained on November 11.

In January 1957 the mission instituted regular sacrament meetings. Until then only a brief sacrament service had been held following Sunday School. In February President Heaton called Lee Nai Ken, a fairly new convert, to fill a mission. Elder Lee, the first Hong Kong Chinese to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, served full-time from February until August 1957. In May 1957 Nora Koot, a convert of the 1949-51 mission, accepted a call to serve as a missionary. She was the first Chinese female to serve in that calling.

By the end of June there were forty missionaries and three hundred members in Hong Kong. The missionaries were having remarkable success in their proselyting efforts. President Heaton told the Hong Kong Standard that 30 percent of the people whom the elders and sisters contacted became members of the Church. [^25]

Before the year ended, eighteen Chinese members of the Church were enrolled in a twenty-two-week missionary preparation course. Each class was to last two hours. Heaton expected some of the graduates to serve full-time missions if they could find money to finance themselves.

When President Heaton wrote his report of December 31, 1957, he made some unusual statements. In fact, he said some things that have seldom, if ever, been written by a mission president before or since. He complained that the missionaries had too many investigators and that they did not have time to meet with all the people who wanted to study the gospel. Since October, when a man named Chu Wan Yuen contacted the Church and then introduced his close friends to the missionaries, affairs had moved at a breathtaking pace. At about the same time, another influential Chinese named Wang Chih Tsao started introducing his friends to the missionaries in the Tsuen Wan area. Investigators became so numerous that the elders could not meet with each individual or family. To meet the need, they formed study groups and taught interested people in classes of 15 to 150. Seven nights a week they met with these groups and then raced through each day trying to meet every investigator at their home. The major weakness of this system, of course, was that the missionaries did not have enough time to establish meaningful relationships with and feel the spirit of their investigators. But there seemed to be no alternative.

Before the year ended, the missionaries had waiting lists of people who wanted to be taught the gospel. The first study group in Yuen Long multiplied from one to eleven between October and December. The elders had baptized thirty people, and fifty more were awaiting approval. President Heaton could see that by March 1958 there would be more than one hundred members of the Church in Yuen Long, and there was not even a place to meet. At that time the new branch was meeting in little wooden or rice straw houses, as was also often true in other parts of the New Territories, Kowloon, and Hong Kong.

The rapid influx of members placed a strain on the auxiliaries. There were very few experienced leaders. In January 1958 Heaton assigned ten elders to work full-time with baptized members. He expected to assign ten more missionaries to member work before midsummer and all of the missionaries to work with members by the end of the year. It worked out almost in that way. Because of the rapid growth during 1958 (904 baptisms), Heaton stopped all proselyting during January and February 1959. Even before that, however, he had put the damper on the group-study method of teaching the gospel. An unfortunately high attrition rate developed in late 1958, and President Heaton wisely counseled his missionaries to again teach only individuals and families. He reasoned that the honest in heart would be waiting when the missionaries had time to work with them.

It was difficult to explain what the sudden attraction of the Church was. Some sincere and lasting converts have reported that if they had remained in mainland China, where they had wealth and servants, they would have never seen the missionaries. Now that they were in humble circumstances, they were more teachable. A number of former provincial governors, generals, and highly educated men came into the Church. Many of them, however, fell away. Why they left so soon is a matter of speculation. Some missionaries of the time have suggested that these people hoped to better their social and economic position by joining the Church. Perhaps they thought the Church could help them leave Hong Kong and go to America. Another explanation is that President Heaton and his missionaries, who worked hard to appeal to the Chinese mind, seemed like sages. Whatever the cause, a high percentage of the converts through the group-study classes did not remain faithful to the Church.

On the other hand, observers familiar with the Hong Kong situation during the Heaton era have reported that only a few converts came into the Church hoping to gain immediate material advantage. The Church developed a reputation as a non-relief church. While other churches distributed rice and other foods, the people who joined the LDS Church found themselves confronted with the problem of giving up their aid from other churches. Many sincere converts to the Church were in serious financial difficulty and needed and deserved the assistance of the Church in overcoming their problems.

THE WELFARE OF THE HONG KONG SAINTS

The LDS mission in Hong Kong was faced with the problem of caring for its own. Though President Heaton knew well the doctrines of self-sufficiency, self-support, and self-reliance, he also knew that the leaders of the Church had preached from the early days that a church that could not save a man temporally could not save him spiritually. He found the responsibility of caring for the honest, needy poor while avoiding rice Christians to be a demanding task.

Heaton spearheaded a campaign in which the missionaries wrote home for old clothes and financial contributions for the poor. By Christmas 1957 two tons of clothes and $2,517 had arrived from the United States for distribution. Though this project was successful, it was evident to the mission staff that self-help projects would be much better in the long run. By March 1958, the mission was involved in several efforts to help the Chinese Saints improve their financial situations. The most important project was an arrangement that Heaton and some of the elders made with a few businesses in Utah to sell Chinese-Mormon handicrafts. Several thousands of dollars were earned by Hong Kong Saints before this project ran its course.

President Heaton called Wang Chih Tsao to coordinate a welfare committee of members from each branch. These members and the missionaries discussed ways to help the Saints. One branch, Sham Shui Po, enlisted the aid of two medical doctors—Kom Kwok, who employed traditional Chinese medical knowledge, and Sit Paak, who was trained in Western-style medicine—to treat branch members who were unable to pay for medical help elsewhere. The welfare committee also discussed the need for educational help, either elementary or secondary-technical study, and operated a scholarship fund for several years. Another need, or so it seemed for a while, was for vocational or on-the-job training. President Heaton involved the Church in two clothing factories. His intention was to run a training program in professional sewing. Unfortunately, the members did not want to learn to sew, and the project was a financial loss for the Church. In retrospect, it is evident that Heaton overreacted to the needs of the Saints. The economy of Hong Kong was improving rapidly by 1959. Furthermore, when Heaton surveyed the members of the Church in June 1959, he found that the Latter-day Saints were considerably better off than the average resident in Hong Kong. President Heaton and the welfare committee also considered establishing a chicken and pig farm on an island near Hong Kong and a brick factory in the New Territories. It is doubtful whether either undertaking would have succeeded. As Elder Mark E. Petersen concluded, the members of the Church were too well educated—that is, the older people—to be willing to work for either enterprise.

Concerning education for the young, President Heaton presented information to Elder Petersen that convinced him of the need for two elementary schools, one on the Hong Kong side and one in Kowloon, and a high school-vocational school. But Elder Petersen's positive recommendation to the First Presidency was not carried out. There were at that time 135 qualified school-teachers in the mission who could have provided the complete staff of the elementary schools and part of the faculty for the secondary school. The issue of schools was discussed in Salt Lake and in Hong Kong for years to come, but beyond seminary and institute programs the Church did not undertake any education projects.

THE STRUGGLE TO ACQUIRE REAL ESTATE

Property for chapels was a challenging problem from the beginning. Hong Kong is densely populated, and land sells at a premium price. President Heaton and the missionaries entered the area with many preconceptions, among them the idea that chapels should spread over a large area and have parking, landscaping, and so forth. Although Heaton worked tirelessly at acquiring some government-held land, he found that without paying high black market prices, he could not acquire property. This he would not do. He finally settled for a different solution. In March 1957 he purchased for the Church four apartments at the top of a seven-story building in Tsim Sha Tsui in downtown Kowloon. Located at #2 Tak Shing Street, the completely remodeled apartments were converted to a chapel, seven classrooms, and missionary quarters. In September President Heaton bought apartment space on the eighth floor of an apartment house in Sham Shui Po and on the twelfth floor of a building in Happy Valley (Causeway Bay) on the Hong Kong Island side. Until the mid-1970s these three buildings serviced most LDS meetings in the downtown areas of Hong Kong and Kowloon.

To meet the needs of the rapidly growing Tsuen Wan Branch, which was situated ten miles north outside Kowloon, Heaton bought a complete four-story building in December 1957. It provided a chapel, classrooms, office space, and missionary quarters. Six months later he purchased a three-story building in Yuen Long. The building was not yet completed, and delays caused by government regulations put off use of the building for almost a year. In March 1959, the Church built a small chapel at Tui Geng Ling. The modest $4,500 structure was considered to be a first-phase building; nevertheless, it met the needs of the branch for a while. This was probably the first LDS-constructed chapel on the Asian mainland, at least the first built since the little chapels in Calcutta and Karachi, India, in the 1850s. When Elder Mark E. Petersen toured the mission in May and June 1959, he dedicated all five chapels in the Hong Kong area.

TRANSLATION AND PRINTING OF CHURCH MATERIALS

In addition to President Heaton's struggle to acquire property, to care for the needy, and to develop new teaching plans, he and the missionaries were also deeply concerned with the responsibility to provide tracts, pamphlets, hymns, lesson manuals, and LDS scriptures in the Chinese language. Earlier it was mentioned that Heaton hired Wang Kai-An as a translator. Brother Wang published the first Chinese tracts, part of the "Rays of Living Light" series, in July 1956. Two months later the Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story pamphlet (later published worldwide as Joseph Smith's Testimony) was ready for distribution. By November Wang was translating Elder LeGrand Richards's A Marvelous Work and a Wonder for use as a Relief Society manual. Other translation projects were also completed and printed during this period.

In September 1957 Heaton formed a Book of Mormon translation committee. Parts of the book were assigned to a number of Chinese men for translation. The target date for its publication was June 1960, but for various reasons, the most significant ones being Heaton's release in the fall of 1959 and the problem of too much variation in style among different translators, the book was not published until 1966.

In March 1959 the mission started publication of a monthly magazine for the Saints. Titled Voice of the Saints, it contained translated articles and talks by General Authorities and items that were written in the mission.

By summer 1959 the Hong Kong part of the Southern Far East Mission was solidly established. Most of the branches were well housed by Hong Kong standards, and publications in Chinese were being printed in ever-increasing numbers. The temporal condition of the Saints was improving, and the spiritual condition of the members was generally healthy. There were problems in two branches because some of the members would not support and sustain Chinese Saints—their own people—in their callings as branch presidents, counselors, and so forth. But sacrament meeting attendance was 53 percent, better than the Church average, and almost 80 percent of the members could be considered active or semi-active. [^26]

CHARACTERISTICS OF CHINESE MEMBERS

Who were these new Latter-day Saints? Although statistical information is not available, some of the missionaries and Elder Mark E. Petersen commented on this question. Elder Petersen reported to the First Presidency that the members were primarily refugees. Were the new members converts from Asian religions? Generally not. Wayne Bringhurst, missionary counselor to President Heaton, wrote: "We cannot underestimate the good the other (Christian) churches have done. . . . It is a rare occasion when a person with no previous knowledge of the Bible, Adam and Eve, or Jesus Christ comes into the Church." [^27] But the new converts were Chinese, nevertheless. They brought with them many wonderful traits of character and seemingly inborn qualities for leadership.

By mid-1959 membership in Hong Kong was approaching 1,500. Among these members were 188 college graduates, 3 former provincial governors, 7 former generals in the Kuomintang Army, 5 people with Ph.D.s, and many skilled people. The new Chinese converts were proving their worth to the Church through missionary service. Chen Hsiao Hsin (David) baptized 114 converts during his first year in the mission field. He later served as president of the Hong Kong Mission from 1977 to 1980. His close friend, Tang Ching Nan (Jonathan), baptized 78 converts during his first year as a missionary. Their converts were as solid in the gospel as any in the mission.

During 1959, however, the number of converts was low. The missionaries made a conscious decision to require significant proof of conversion and devotion to the Church. From 1959 onward, the task of later mission presidents was basically one of building carefully on the solid foundation of the early years. To later mission presidents also fell the task of opening new areas such as the Philippines, South and Southeast Asia, and strengthening the work in Taiwan.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CHURCH IN TAIWAN

When Elder Joseph Fielding Smith created the Southern Far East Mission in 1955 and toured the countries included in it, he was unable to visit Taiwan, the little Chinese island that the Portuguese named Formosa, "Beautiful Isle." Taiwan, which means "terraced bay" in Chinese, had been almost unknown to most Americans prior to the Nationalist retreat there in 1949 and 1950. Even in 1955 it was considered to be a temporary home by the more than one million soldiers and civilians of mainland China who were driven out by the Communists. Those native to the island, who spoke primarily a variation of Fukienese, were not happy to have the "aristocratic" mainlanders take over their island and control the more than seven million Taiwanese.

However, the Taiwanese were somewhat accustomed to domination from abroad. From 1895 until 1945, the Japanese controlled Taiwan as a colony. Before that, Taiwan was for two centuries part of China proper. Indeed, the mainlanders had some justification for their claimed right to direct the government in Taiwan.

When Protestant and Roman Catholic missionaries were forced to leave the mainland between 1949 and 1953, many of them moved to Taiwan. Before the 1950s, the Presbyterians were the dominant mission group. Since then the number of churches and missionary societies represented has grown greatly. At the end of World War II there were only thirty thousand Christians in Taiwan. By the mid-1970s the number had grown to more than six hundred thousand, and by the 1990s there were more than one million Christians there.

Taiwan is only a small place, but in comparison with Hong Kong's tiny area, its 13,808 square miles offer considerable space to the inhabitants. Taiwan is larger than Massachusetts and Connecticut combined and slightly smaller than the Netherlands. [^28] By the late 1970s Taiwan had the second-highest standard of living in Asia, behind Japan. American-aid dollars helped greatly in developing Taiwan's economy. Aside from military assistance, the Republic of China has not received foreign aid from the United States since 1965.

When LDS missionaries first arrived in Taiwan in 1956, however, the economic situation was weak, religions were in flux, and the climate was one of government-promoted tension. Propaganda campaigns against the Communist Chinese were endless. In fact, the crusade to return to the mainland was so encompassing that the people hardly had time to think about other matters. It was into this environment that the first LDS missionaries came.

President Heaton, who had responsibility for Hong Kong, Guam, and the Philippines, also had the assignment to establish the Church in Taiwan. He made several visits there before he was ready to assign the first missionaries. It was fortunate that a few LDS servicemen and their families were stationed in Taipei. One stalwart convert to the Church was Captain Stanley Simiskey. He was the leader of the small band of Saints in Taiwan, all Americans. Heaton arranged for him to care for the elders when they arrived from Hong Kong on June 4, 1956. [^29] Elders Duane W. Degn, Melvin C. Fish, Weldon J. Kitchen, and Keith A. Madsen expected to find a bleak, poverty-stricken land. To their delight they found the people of Taiwan to be well fed and well housed. Some luxuries were absent from their lives, but the comfort afforded by the greater space and the natural beauty of the island more than compensated for the missing elements of modernity.

By October 1956 the Taipei Branch had regular attendance of thirty-five people—missionaries, service personnel, and local Chinese investigators. The elders had studied Mandarin Chinese while in Hong Kong. But now that they were among the people, they found that a large majority did not use that language. Nevertheless, because Mandarin was the official language of Taiwan, they persisted in their effort to learn it. By March 1957 the number of elders had been doubled, and all of them were progressing well in the language.

The Taiwan elders realized their first success on April 27, 1957, when they baptized Ch'iu Hung-hsiang and Tseng I-Chang. Both men were educated, capable men. Brother Tseng, who was the first Chinese in Taiwan to be ordained an elder (April 1958), later served his nation as a consular officer in France, the Philippines, and Saudi Arabia. He and Brother Ch'iu were called as counselors in the Taipei Branch Sunday School superintendency shortly after their baptisms. In April 1958 Elder Kitchen set Brother Tseng apart as a counselor in the branch presidency. He was the first Chinese in Taiwan to serve in that capacity.

By the end of 1957 the elders had baptized more than fifty Chinese, and by mid-1958 the work was moving ahead at a satisfactory pace. By then there were 286 local members, 184 of whom were in Taipei. In the first quarter of 1958, the elders extended the work to Tainan and Taichung, and soon after to Kaohsiung and other cities in the south.

But the Church did not take hold in Taiwan quite as quickly as it did in Hong Kong. There were several reasons for this. President Heaton did not assign as many missionaries there as in Hong Kong. He could not visit Taiwan very often—about quarterly—and did not feel comfortable having many elders and sisters away from his direct supervision. This led to feelings of separateness among many of the Taiwan workers. When Heaton or his counselors visited Taiwan, at least until September 1958, the missionaries treated them coolly, and when the leaders were gone, the Taiwan elders disregarded some mission rules and directions. But during the last part of 1958, President Heaton assigned his counselor, W. Brent Hardy, to live in Taiwan and act as president. This change brought the desired effect, and from then on the work progressed at a faster pace.

A change in local political conditions at about the same time also had a good effect. During August and September 1958, Communist China and the Republic of China almost went to war. Elder Hardy related that tensions were extremely high during this time and that the missionaries were not sure whether they could stay. At approximately the same time that the threat of war was at its height, the missionaries held an islandwide meeting in which they prayed that they could remain and pledged their loyalty to the Lord, the Church, the Chinese people, and each other. Within a few days the danger of war passed, and by the end of the year new investigators were studying the restored gospel. As the two powers settled into the uncomfortable peace that has endured to the present, the level of propaganda was reduced somewhat in Taiwan, and the people had an opportunity to think about matters other than war. From that time on, the LDS missionaries had better success. [^30]

Evidently the missionaries did not encounter as much poverty in Taiwan as they had in Hong Kong. The mission records do not mention shortages of food, housing, or medical attention. Education, too, seems to have been adequate and steadily improving. President Heaton and the Taiwan elders did have a difficult time finding suitable property for chapels. By the time of Heaton's release, the Church had acquired no property. Meeting facilities were poor. Related to the property matter was official registration of the Church. The Church needed to own property before it could register. Hence, buying property took on additional importance.

Buddhism and Daoism (Taoism) were and are the dominant religions of the island. With the exception of the aboriginal tribes who were until recently animists but are now generally converted to Protestant Christianity, the people of Taiwan worship a number of folk deities. But they generally pattern their lives on Confucian ethical principles. Early LDS missionaries reported that their converts were almost never Buddhist or Roman Catholic. They found that their greatest success came "from those people who have studied in Christian schools and already have a good understanding of the Bible, but have never been baptized into any other church." [^31]

The most important event in the Church in Taiwan from its founding in 1956 until 1959 was Elder Mark E. Petersen's visit from May 25 to June 1, 1959. He was the first General Authority to visit there. During that time, he and Sister Petersen visited with all of the missionaries and branches and also with high-ranking U.S. officials in the country to assess its political stability.

On June 1, shortly before leaving for Hong Kong, Elder and Sister Petersen, President Heaton, and some missionaries and members gathered at the end of Chung Shan North Road, just below the Grand Hotel, for a special meeting. Elder Petersen then offered a prayer of rededication of the land and people of Taiwan. In his prayer he mentioned Elder McKay's dedication of the entire Chinese realm, but he asked for a special blessing on this particular part of it. He prayed "for all the freedoms that are necessary for the carrying on of the gospel." [^32]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 1960-1962; in President Hinckley's possession.
[^2] William S. Bradshaw Oral History, interviews by author, Provo, Utah, 1974, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 17.
[^3] See Spencer J. Palmer et al., "Educational Needs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Asia: Final Report," Church Educational System, October 1972, p. 90.
[^4] See Jay A. Parry, "Hong Kong: Pearl of the Orient," Ensign 5 (August 1975): 54.
[^5] See Palmer et al., "Educational Needs," pp. 87-90.
[^6] See Taiwan Taipei Mission Historical Reports, 31 March 1976, LDS Church Archives.
[^7] Southern Far East Mission Historical Reports, 30 September 1963, LDS Church Archives.
[^8] Larry K. Browning, Diary, in his possession.
[^9] Hinckley, Journal, 1965.
[^10] See Diane E. Browning, "The Translation of Mormon Scriptures into Chinese" (unpublished paper, Brigham Young University, 1977), pp. 21-22; in possession of the author.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Hinckley, Journal, by date.
[^13] Ibid., 6 May 1960.
[^14] The present writer was part of that team.
[^15] See "Church Educational System, Overview," unpublished CES report, 1978, pp. 38-39. Copy in possession of author.
[^16] See Palmer et al., "Educational Needs." See the main report and the two supplements on Taiwan and Hong Kong.
[^17] See "Church's Health Team Teaches Maternal Care," Church News, 3 March 1979, p. 13.
[^18] See "Thousands Visit Hong Kong Center," Church News, 22 January 1977, p. 3.
[^19] See ibid.; and "Hong Kong Center Improves Attitudes Toward the Church, Baptisms Increase," Church News, 10 September 1977, p. 6.
[^20] See "Elders now preach in Macau, a Portuguese colony in China," Church News, 4 December 1976, p. 5; "Church flourishes in colony of Macao," Church News, 23 September 1978, p. 6.
[^21] Hinckley, Journal, 13 August 1975.
[^22] See Victoria Varley Hawkins, "Conference in Hong Kong"; and Kevin Moss, "Conference in Taiwan," Ensign 5 (October 1975): 91-93.
[^23] H. Grant Heaton delivered this testimony in the Ho Man Tin chapel, Kowloon-Tong, Hong Kong, 26 May 1996.
[^24] Unless otherwise noted, the basic source for this and the following section is SFEM, by date. President Heaton kept a thorough record of mission developments and activities.
[^25] See Hong Kong Standard, 1 September 1957.
[^26] A survey made while Elder Mark E. Petersen was in Hong Kong in June 1959 "indicated that only about 20 percent of the membership in this area is unemployed. Many have low wages, and low standard of living, but they are self-supporting. Those not employed are cared for by relatives and friends, not by the Church. The average income for our employed Saints is about $218 per month Hong Kong dollars. One American dollar is worth 5.85 Hong Kong dollars. Therefore in terms of American dollars the income would be about $27.40 per month. The average income for the people of the city generally is $130 per month, Hong Kong. Our people therefore are well above the average. The average size of L.D.S. family is 5.4 persons." See Mark E. Petersen to First Presidency, Tour of the Southern Far East Mission, General Observations, 6 July 1959, LDS Church Archives.
[^27] SFEM, 30 September 1958.
[^28] A useful introduction to Christianity in Taiwan is David Woodward's "Taiwan," in Donald E. Hoke, The Church in Asia (Chicago: Moody Press, 1975), pp. 609-21.
[^29] See "Mormon missionaries now labor in Formosa," Church News, 23 June 1956, p. 19.
[^30] W. Brent Hardy, interview by the author, Las Vegas, Nevada, 2 June 1975, tape recording.
[^31] SFEM, 30 September 1958.
[^32] Ibid., 30 June 1959.
