R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE CHINESE REALM 1959-1978

Continuing Progress in Hong Kong and Taiwan

The development of the Church in the nations of the Southern Far East Mission from 1955 to 1978 was inspiring to those who witnessed it firsthand. Even outside observers who learn about the rise of the Church in those lands consider it an amazing phenomenon. Young President Heaton and those who served with him worked diligently to establish the Church not only in Hong Kong and Taiwan but also in Guam, the Philippines, and Singapore. Before 1970 ended, the Church was planted in the Philippines, Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand, and Indonesia, and representatives of the Church had visited with growing groups of Latter-day Saints in India and other parts of South and Southeast Asia. This chapter is devoted to the development of the Church in Hong Kong and Taiwan.

Robert Sherman Taylor, a businessman from Hawaii, assumed leadership of the Southern Far East Mission on September 15, 1959. He was not as well prepared for his new role in China as his predecessor had been, but he was a careful, well-organized man who had the ability to get things done. Though he had problems learning the Chinese languages, he was soon able to gain the loyalty of the Saints and missionaries.

To him fell a number of difficult tasks, not the least of which was the purchase of property and encouraging official recognition of the Church in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the Philippines. As can be seen in the table below, President Taylor and the missionaries produced growing numbers of converts each year of his administration.

Southern Far East Mission Statistics, 1956-1968DateTotal MembersConvert BaptismsMelchizedek PriesthoodBranches/DistrictNumber of Missionaries1956212+811 19577145102 557+319581586904718/583+8195917152581313/591+1196022113812225/7115+7196133326393925/7136+2196239468306427/8150+1196356721430*28/3170+119646981131343/5204+519657488254841/6203+11196610524118245142/10243+1219677070**58336930/9130+14196810337++55731/10118+10Hong Kong-Taiwan Mission Statistics, 1969-1970196987324962613/3134+61970944278931/5153+9+ Mostly servicemen. The inclusion of servicemen has made this data less reliable.* Melchizedek Priesthood numbers become unreliable at this point.** The Philippines becomes a separate mission.

++ Add 1,450 servicement in Vietnam and Thailand.

By April 1960 there were fewer than five hundred members of the Church in Taiwan, but through the challenge of Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and the continued encouragement of President Taylor, the Taiwan missionaries increased the total number of Chinese members in Taiwan to 831 by March 1962. [^1]

It was during April 1960 that Elder Hinckley made his first tour of the Asian missions. He found conditions in Hong Kong and Taiwan less than desirable but marveled at the love the missionaries had for the Chinese people. Even in 1962 he described missionary living conditions in Taiwan as miserable but found the elders and sisters willing to accept them.

In September 1962 Jay A. Quealy Jr., former Oahu Stake president and a successful businessman, became president of the mission. He was a warm, well-organized, charismatic figure who received the respect of all who associated with him. The number of missionaries expanded rapidly between 1962 and 1965, largely because of the growth of the work in the Philippines, and the baptismal rate per missionary remained high. He was eager to see the local Saints in leadership positions and organized the districts of the mission so that the Chinese held the important posts. President Quealy pushed expansion of the Church into new nations. He and Elder Hinckley even visited India together, a story that is reported later. Although he did not know much Cantonese or Mandarin Chinese, President Quealy encouraged progress on the Book of Mormon translation and printing project. He had been released by the time it was published in late 1965, but he had the satisfaction of knowing that he had moved it toward completion.

Keith E. Garner, from Palo Alto, California, became president of the mission in August 1965. His previous contacts with the Chinese people had been as a missionary in Hawaii. He worked well with the missionaries, and the auxiliaries also received his attention. He emphasized the use of the Book of Mormon, which was first distributed during his time. President Garner devoted much time to work with servicemen in Vietnam.

While President Garner led the mission, the membership grew to more than 9,000, plus over 5,500 servicement in Vietnam and Thailand. In 1967 the Philippines portion was divided off into a separate mission. More than 100 of the 243 missionaries and 3,000 of the members were transferred to the new mission. It was during 1966 that Elder Hinckley first recommended that Taiwan be made a separate mission, a move that was slow in coming.

W. Brent Hardy, fifth president of the mission, was also a businessman. He had served in Hong Kong and Taiwan during the early years of the mission and knew well the Mandarin and Cantonese languages and Chinese ways. His wife, too, spoke Cantonese. He worked closely with local leaders to strengthen the Chinese Saints. Virtually all programs of the Church were in use in Hong Kong and Taiwan by this time, and members were generally struggling with the same problems as the Saints elsewhere in the world. "President Hardy," said William S. Bradshaw, who followed him as mission president in Hong Kong, "had the mammoth responsibility of seeing the Church undergo organizational changes in many, many countries." [^2] He was referring to the separation of Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand, and South Vietnam into the new Southeast Asia Mission in 1969, the reassimilation of South Vietnam a short time later, and the creation of the Taiwan Mission in January 1971. Being involved in these changes was time-consuming and taxing on his energies. President Hardy also worked at acquiring new property for chapels.

President William S. Bradshaw, who led the Hong Kong Mission from 1971 to 1974, also had a wife who knew Cantonese well. Bradshaw, a Harvard educated Ph.D. in zoology, spoke beautiful Chinese and came closer to the sagely Chinese ideal of a churchman than any president since H. Grant Heaton. President Bradshaw saw the need to move the Church toward a stake organization as rapidly as possible. He believed that leaders learned by doing, not merely by observing and reading. In addition to his work on properties, proselyting, and organizations, he also encouraged temple sealings and marriages, helped found seminary and institute programs, and spent a great deal of time working with missionaries in South Vietnam.

When Jerry D. Wheat, one of the first group of elders in Hong Kong in 1955, became mission president in 1974, the mission was on the verge of a number of great advancements, most notably the first area conference in August 1975 and the creation of the Hong Kong—Kowloon Stake in April 1976. Highly conscious of the Church's image, President Wheat demanded of his missionaries strict obedience to mission rules, immaculate apartments, and well-kept apparel. He was conscious of public relations and directed considerable media attention to visits by President Kimball and other General Authorities to the area conference. He also oversaw the construction of a new mission home at #2 Cornwall Street as well as a new district chapel (now a stake center) in Ho Man Tin, Kowloon-Tong. President Bradshaw had acquired this property following the continued efforts of his predecessors. President Wheat also initiated full-time missionary work in Macau, the tiny Portuguese colony only forty miles west from Hong Kong. David Hsiao Hsin Chen, one of the first Hong Kong Chinese to serve as a missionary for the Church and the first native-born Chinese to be a mission president, led the mission in Hong Kong from 1977 to 1980. President Chen's life of service to the Church, his devotion to personal improvement through hard work, his Ph.D. degree, and his position as a professor of political science at Brigham Young University—Hawaii Campus combined to make him a popular and effective leader with the missionaries and the local Saints.

THE HONG KONG AREA

By the end of 1977 there were only 4,256 members in Hong Kong, almost a fourth of whom were less-active or lost. Hong Kong, as we have said, is an anomaly: it is not truly Chinese, nor is it Western. Most of the people who live there are not citizens of the colony. The colony itself had a limited lifetime because it was scheduled to revert to the Chinese government in 1997 (which it did). Most residents of the colony live at a near-subsistence level and have little control over their work schedules.

A high percentage of members of the Church in Hong Kong are young. A 1972 survey found that 69.4 percent of Hong Kong converts joined the Church between the ages of twelve and twenty, and another 12.5 percent came into the Church between the ages of twenty-one and thirty. Only 5 percent of the members who joined were over age thirty. [^3] At that time 72 percent of the active members had been in the Church four years or less, indicating a serious rate of member loss over the years. Where had they gone?

Between 1956 and 1962 (the last year such information was submitted on the annual mission reports to the Presiding Bishop's Office), 297 members from Hong Kong, 7 percent of the 1962 total, emigrated to other countries. During the 1970s there was no evidence that this emigration rate was higher or lower than at other times. [^4] People leave Hong Kong for many reasons. Some go abroad for education. Others go to the United States, to the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia or elsewhere for work. Before the reversion of Hong Kong to the PRC, many Hong Kong residents left because of fear for the future of the colony. Other Church members experienced change in their work schedules, making it impossible for them to attend meetings. Particularly disturbing was that many of the best leaders in the Church had left the area. This is natural because they are capable and aggressive and have a desire to provide a good life for themselves and their families. Such people find ways to escape what has been called a "dead-end world." Although some visiting Church leaders asked the Chinese Saints to remain at home and build Zion there, the people of Hong Kong answered that they feel no sense of nationalism and have no ties, they want the kinds of opportunities Americans enjoy, and they want to rear their children in better circumstances. Although the Church suffers from this kind of thinking and action, no one should blame them for trying to improve their lives.

PROGRESS IN TAIWAN

Although the Church had a slower beginning in Taiwan than in Hong Kong, by the late 1970s, membership had passed that of Hong Kong (7,933 members in 1977). This can be explained partially on the basis of population (17 million in Taiwan versus 4 million in Hong Kong), but other variables have had an influence on the situation. By the 1970s, Taiwan was much more stable than Hong Kong. Its economy was strong, and the people were generally satisfied with their lot in life. In December 1978 U.S. recognition of the People's Republic of China slowed LDS missionary work in Taiwan for a number of months, but by late 1979 feelings of animosity toward Americans were less evident.

The Church in Taiwan has attracted older members, 26 percent of them being over thirty in 1972. Whereas in 1972 only 2.1 percent of the Hong Kong members had a husband or wife in the Church, almost one-fourth of the Taiwan members had either a husband or a wife who was a member. The Church had a different image in Taiwan than in Hong Kong. In the former it was considered a family church; in the latter, it was considered a youth movement. In 1972, 45 percent of the Latter-day Saints in Taiwan were children of members, but only 15 percent of the Hong Kong members had their parents in the faith. [^5]

In 1971 Taiwan became a separate mission. Under the direct leadership of President Malan R. Jackson (one of the first eight missionaries into Hong Kong), the Church developed greatly. The stepchild feeling of the Southern Far East Mission days was soon forgotten, and the Saints moved ahead with energy and enthusiasm.

The Taiwan Mission (its name was changed to the Taiwan Taipei Mission in 1974) did not long remain responsible for the entire island. In July 1976 it was divided, and the Taiwan Kaohsiung Mission was organized with P. Boyd Hales as its first president. In the spring of 1979 the First Presidency announced a further division, and the new Taiwan Taichung Mission was created with Frederick W. Crook as president.

During the late 1960s and 1970s the Chinese missions entered a new era. With the exception of Grant Heaton, before this time the Church did not have men available who had in-depth knowledge of the history and culture of the area. In 1949 Hilton A. Robertson, who had little education regarding Asian history, religions, or politics, was thought to be the most knowledgeable man in the Church on Asian matters. But now a new crop of scholars who had served in Hong Kong and Taiwan as missionaries came of age and provided a more sophisticated corps of leaders for this part of the world. First among these new leaders was Malan R. Jackson, an administrator at Arizona State University who was extremely energetic. He was followed in 1974 by Thomas P. Neilson, who was a professor of Chinese literature at Arizona State University when he received his call. In 1977 he was replaced by Frederick W. Crook, who holds a Ph.D. in economics and has special training in Asian affairs. Taiwan was led by these men who met the demand for academic or scholarly excellence that is admired—almost expected—by the Chinese. These leaders were nevertheless very American in their encouragement of their missionaries to teach the restored gospel with enthusiasm and courage. A number of men with similar qualifications have served since that time.

The methods used by the missionaries to teach the gospel in China have basically been the same as those that are used elsewhere in the world. In June 1961 the Church Missionary Committee announced a uniform plan of six lessons that were to be employed everywhere. These lessons replaced the seventeen-lesson plan that had been used in Hong Kong and Taiwan since 1955. As new improvements have been developed elsewhere in the Church since the early 1960s, particularly in Salt Lake City, the Chinese missions have put them to use. For example, President Thomas P. Neilson helped his missionaries develop some filmstrips that were intended to help Chinese Buddhists understand the Mormon concepts of families and temple work. The first filmstrip was titled We Are Waiting, referring to ancestors who are waiting for their temple work to be done. [^6]

Of real significance in Hong Kong and Taiwan was the constant involvement of local Chinese missionaries. From the beginning in Hong Kong, young converts accepted calls to serve fulltime missions. Although their numbers were not great during most years, in the early 1970s the number of Chinese missionaries grew. In 1971 twenty-eight Taiwan Chinese (ten elders and eighteen sisters) were serving. By the end of 1978, thirty-nine local missionaries were serving in Hong Kong and twenty-two in Taiwan.

THE TRANSLATION AND PUBLICATION OF THE STANDARD WORKS IN CHINESE

After President Heaton returned home, President Taylor encouraged the translation of the Book of Mormon. But it was not until President Quealy, at Elder Hinckley's instigation, became enthusiastic about the project that the work of translation got under way. In July 1963 Elder Hinckley called Larry K. Browning, then a student at National Taiwan University, to "supervise the translation of the Book of Mormon into Chinese." [^7] He was asked to recommend a suitable Chinese translator to work with him on the project. Browning selected Hu Wei-I, who was serving as a counselor in the mission presidency. The two men worked together for almost two years. Unfortunately, they did not understand each other's assignments, and they disagreed on many points. Nevertheless, they knew that Elder Hinckley believed it was "the most important thing taking place in the Far East," [^8] and they finally put together what Brother Hu believed was a good translation. Browning did not agree. Hu thought the book should be translated literally, in a mid-level style that avoided elite and simple language. Browning thought some literary liberties should be taken in order to get the meaning of the book across. Hu's position eventually prevailed, and on December 20, 1965, one thousand copies of the book were published. A few months later, a second edition of 2,500 copies came off the press. Only typographical errors were corrected in the second printing. The book has been of great value to Chinese-speaking Saints. Elder Hinckley was particularly pleased when he received the first copy. He took it to President McKay and explained that he had two major goals when he was assigned to supervise Church affairs in Asia. One was to see a Chinese translation of the Book of Mormon in print, and the other was to see the same in Korean, and at that time the Korean Book of Mormon was at press. [^9]

The translation of the Doctrine and Covenants into Chinese was an unhappy experience for all concerned. In August 1966 President Garner called his counselor in Taiwan, President Ch'e Tsai Tien, to translate the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price into Chinese. He was to be assisted by Thomas P. Neilson, then a student of Chinese literature. A year or two later Ch'e sent his translation of the Doctrine and Covenants to Hong Kong for review by Brothers Ng Kat Hing (head of translation projects in Hong Kong for almost a decade by that time) and Liu Nga Sang. In Hong Kong a number of other people became involved in the review and revision process, and a suitable product was not ready for printing until 1973. After the project was begun in 1966, the Translation and Distribution Department of the Church became involved.

The basic difficulty involved in completing a suitable translation grew out of two problems: too much nit-picking and too many personal preferences on the part of mission presidents and other reviewers and basic differences in structural preference between Cantonese and Mandarin speakers. The official version of the Doctrine and Covenants was published by Brother Ng in Hong Kong. However, the Taiwan mission, under Malan R. Jackson, published its own version. Unfortunately, there are significant differences in text. [^10] Diane E. Browning succinctly analyzes the problem in this way: "The great genius of the Chinese writing system, which has served to unify that nation for three thousand years, seems on the verge of being frustrated by competing versions of the same material by the Hong Kong and Taiwan translation offices. Since the publication of the Doctrine and Covenants, other translations, e.g. missionary discussions, the temple ceremony, and most recently, the names of Church General Authorities, have been translated differently, and these differences are not mere dialectical variants." [^11]

Hu Wei-I was the principal translator of the Book of Mormon into the Mandarin Chinese language. He also translated many other Latter-day Saint books and materials.

The translation of the Pearl of Great Price did not go smoothly either. First, it is evident that Translation Services personnel in Asia did not expect careful, meticulous analysis of the style of Brother Ch'e's translation when they sent it to Salt Lake City for approval. They thought they had a satisfactory translation and wanted more or less unquestioning approval by the review committee. Second, even though the review committee suggested content and stylistic changes in almost every verse, when the Chinese version was printed, almost none of the reviewers' suggestions were incorporated into the printed text. Nevertheless, the Chinese version of the Pearl of Great Price was published in Taiwan in April 1976.

In less-developed parts of the world where the written word has not been cherished as it is in China, missionaries and members have been able to produce translations of the scriptures with greater ease. For example, it is evident that in Hawaii, Tonga, and other parts of Polynesia amateur but inspired translators have been able to provide excellent translations, translations that have stood the test of use and years. Chinese, however, is an immensely complex language, one that requires more than years of devoted Church service to master. To write well requires years of laborious training.

As this picture of the chapel illustrates, Kam Tong Hall has provided an elegant and useful setting for Church administration and activity in Hong Kong. It was purchased by Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and President Robert S. Taylor in May 1960.

In addition to the scriptures, the Church in Hong Kong and Taiwan published a wide variety of tracts, magazines, manuals, and books. Since 1966 these items have been produced through the general leadership of the Translation Department of the Church. Hu Wei-I personally translated James E. Talmage's Jesus the Christ and Articles of Faith, LeGrand Richards's A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, Joseph F. Smith's Gospel Doctrine, Joseph Smith's Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith's Doctrines of Salvation, and many other books.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHURCH PROPERTY

By the late 1970s a small number of chapels and other Church buildings were operating in Hong Kong and Taiwan. The mission acquired several apartment-style chapels in Hong Kong during Heaton's era, and other chapels were added slowly. The only freestanding building owned by the Church on Hong Kong Island by the late 1970s was Kam Tong Hall, a beautifully remodeled mansion at #7 Castle Road, high on the hill overlooking Hong Kong Harbor. This hall was built by Sir Ho Kam (Robert) Tong, one of the few Chinese to be knighted. When Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and President Robert S. Taylor found the building on May 7, 1960, it was occupied by five or six families and was poorly kept. After the Church bought it, thirty thousand dollars (a large amount in those days) was required to make it a suitable Latter-day Saint meetinghouse. The four-story structure provided a chapel, cultural hall, classrooms, meetinghouse library, missionary quarters, and offices. In more recent years it has served as the Asia Area offices and the Hong Kong Mission office.

The Ho Man Tin chapel serves as a stake center. Located in Kowloon-Tong, this chapel was built on property that had been purchased after continuous efforts by several mission presidents. (Photo by author)

In April 1967 President Hugh B. Brown, First Counselor in the First Presidency, dedicated the new Yuen Long chapel in the New Territories. It had been constructed by professional church builders, aided by member labor missionaries. It was the first chapel in the Southern Far East Mission area to have the appearance and facilities of a regular LDS chapel.

More recently, through the efforts of Presidents Hardy, Bradshaw, and Wheat, the Church constructed a four-story stake center in the Ho Man Tin area of mid-Kowloon. Located at the corner of Shek Ku and Sheung Shing Streets, the beautiful white Taichung Stake Center in Taichung, Taiwan, is situated on a pie-shaped lot surrounded by busy streets next to the Taiwan Taichung Mission office and mission home. (Photo by author) structure has a striking appearance. The first floor is used partially for parking but also provides classrooms, a baptismal font, and storage. On the second floor are found the Relief Society room, the Junior Sunday School room, a multipurpose room, and classrooms. The chapel and ward and stake offices are on the third floor, and the fourth floor is a fine cultural hall. By 1978 the Church had two other chapels on the Kowloon side: one at Kwun Tong and the other at #2 Cornwall Street, adjacent to the mission home.

The history of chapel building in Taiwan to 1978 is much briefer than in Hong Kong. As late as 1975 there were only three Church-owned chapels on the island. Every time Elder Hinckley visited Taiwan from 1960 onward, he looked for property. He regularly worked with government officials, real estate people, and others to try to help the cause along. President Taylor tried to buy land but was not too successful. Not until November 2, 1963, did the Church hold a ground-breaking ceremony for a chapel in Taipei. Almost three years passed before the structure, which was to serve the needs of two branches with nine hundred members and which had all the normal facilities of a modern LDS chapel, was dedicated by Elder Hinckley on October 16, 1966. [^12] The second and third chapels were constructed at Kaohsiung and Taichung in the southern part of the island. By the late 1970s most branches and wards were still meeting in rented halls, apartments, and homes. The most important improvement was the addition of mission homes and mission offices in Taipei and Kaohsiung.

CHURCH EDUCATION EFFORTS

When Elder Mark E. Petersen returned from Hong Kong in 1959, he recommended to the First Presidency that the Church found two elementary schools (one in Hong Kong and one in Kowloon) and a secondary-vocational school. A year later, when Elder Hinckley visited the mission, the idea was evidently still alive. He wrote in his journal that the Church talked about establishing schools, but no commitment was made. [^13] When he and President Taylor bought the Kam Tong Hall, they did so with the intention of using it for a school. Even though the school plan was being considered in 1961, it was evidently rejected in the upper councils of the Church at some later date.

In 1972 Neal A. Maxwell, commissioner of Church education, appointed a committee of Asian and international relations specialists from BYU to survey the educational needs of Latter-day Saints in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Philippines. [^14] While in Hong Kong and Taiwan, the members of the Asia Educational Resources Project (AERP) visited with knowledgeable educational leaders, interviewed local Church leaders, and conducted a formal survey through the use of a questionnaire. The survey revealed that the Hong Kong Saints still perceived a need for educational help, most notably at the post-secondary level. They also strongly desired more religious education. Soon the home-study seminary program was implemented, and by 1978 some 208 students were participating in it. In addition, an individual-study institute program was serving 339 post-secondary young people by that time. Ed Andrus, a former Hong Kong missionary, returned there to help start these programs.

In Taiwan an even more active program of Church education was organized. Joseph Wan did much to create the seminary and institute program there. By 1975 as many as 420 young people were involved in the program in all three districts. The programs continued to blossom, and in 1978 there were 532 students participating, including 153 who were enrolled in a regular institute program in Taipei. [^15] Although the AERP members suggested other programs, only religious education, the most requested and desired need, was addressed. [^16]

WELFARE SERVICES MISSIONARIES

In keeping with their concern for the temporal welfare of members, Church leaders organized the health missionary program in 1971. In 1972 Sister Ira Gyllenbogel from Finland was sent to Taiwan as the first health services missionary. She, and others who followed, taught principles of health care and preventative medicine. In June 1972 Sister Mary Ellen Edmunds, who had been working as a health missionary in the Philippines, was joined by Molly Nutman from England and Rosalie Hacking from Idaho, when they arrived in Hong Kong as the first health missionaries in that mission. Sister Edmunds oriented the new missionaries by teaching them what had and had not worked in the Philippines. Health missionaries have been extremely successful in Hong Kong and Taiwan.

In about 1975 the program underwent a change of emphasis. Whereas the early health missionaries operated somewhat along the lines of the Peace Corps, after that time the name and purpose of their calling was modified. They were to be known as welfare services missionaries. Their purpose was to teach personal and family preparedness. Health was only one important part of a larger program. The new program was holistic, taking into consideration all areas of personal and family welfare. [^17]

THE HONG KONG VISITORS' CENTER

On September 24, 1976, Elder Jacob de Jager of the First Quorum of the Seventy, then serving as supervisor of the Southeast Asia-Philippines Area of the Church, dedicated a new visitors' center in the city of Tsuen Wan, a suburb of Kowloon. The idea for the center was the result of a conversation between Elder A. Theodore Tuttle and President Jerry D. Wheat in October 1974. While visiting the Tsuen Wan chapel building, a four-story structure the Church purchased during the Heaton years, Elder Tuttle noted the large number of people who passed by. He suggested that this might be an appropriate place to establish a visitors' center. After the remodeling of the ground floor and the constructing of displays concerning the restored gospel, the idea became a reality. [^18]

During the early months of its operation, the center attracted considerable attention. More than two thousand people toured the center during its first month. Between March and August 1977, forty-six people were baptized after a member or missionary took them to the center while they were having the missionary lessons. The center's approach emphasized traditional Chinese values, most notably the importance of the family and genealogy. The theme used during the initial months of operation was "God has given you many gifts. What is your gift to God?" The plan of salvation and the story of the restoration of the gospel are clearly depicted for visitors. Full-time missionaries and seventies (a stake calling at that time) operated the facility. [^19]

The center served another important purpose: the Hong Kong Eighth Ward, which met in the same building, grew considerably because of the influence of the center. But there were also some problems. Tsuen Wan is an industrial city—neither a shopping center nor a tourist attraction—and most of the people who walked past the visitors' center were simply those who were on their way to and from work. The initial attraction of the center died down after the local people became acquainted with the building and its purposes.

THE OPENING OF MACAU TO LDS MISSIONARY WORK

Over the years since the Southern Far East Mission was created, various mission presidents visited the Portuguese colony of Macau to investigate the possibility of teaching the gospel there. Macau is situated on a small peninsula on the south coast of China's Guangdong Province. It is only a two-hour boat trip away from Hong Kong. Until April 1976, when Elder Gordon B. Hinckley encouraged President Wheat to consider establishing the Church there, various problems had stood in the way of opening the work. On September 6, 1976, however, President Wheat sent four elders to Macau. They started proselyting that same day. With a population of fewer than one-half million in the 1990s, the city-colony was much smaller when the work commenced there. Membership growth has been slow, but by 1978 a branch of forty members had been established. Since that time growth has continued, and an average of ten elders and sisters have served there continuously. Though the English-speaking residents and the Portuguese people there have not been interested in the missionaries' message, the Chinese have displayed an interest in the gospel similar to that in Hong Kong. [^20]

GENERAL AUTHORITY SUPERVISION AND THE FIRST AREA CONFERENCE

Two Apostles have had extremely close relationships with the missions of Asia: Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and Elder Ezra Taft Benson. Elder Hinckley, as has been explained earlier, supervised the Asian areas from 1961 to 1968 and again from 1975 to 1976. His warm yet decisive influence had a great impact on the leaders, Saints, and missionaries who served there. Elder Benson also taught the people well and did much to strengthen the organizations of the Church. Other General Authorities have had important roles to play in Asia. Elder Adney Y. Komatsu was the first General Authority to reside in Asia while supervising the area. He was followed by Elder Yoshihiko Kikuchi, who directed Church affairs in Japan and Korea, and Elder de Jager, who took over the southern part of the area. Before them, Elders Marion D. Hanks, Bruce R. McConkie, and James A. Cullimore worked with Elders Benson and Hinckley in the area.

The first area conferences of the Church in Hong Kong and Taiwan were held on August 13 and 14, 1975. President Spencer W. Kimball presided at both places, in Hong Kong on the thirteenth and in Taiwan the next day. He was accompanied by eleven other General Authorities; notable among them were Elders Benson, Hinckley, and Ashton, all of the Council of the Twelve.

The Hong Kong conference was more a city conference than an area conference. The small geographical size of Hong Kong has always encouraged conferences of all the Saints there. Two thousand members and friends filled the Lee Theatre as well as the ballroom of the nearby Lee Gardens Hotel (where they watched the proceedings on closed-circuit television) to participate in the event.

President Jerry D. Wheat went to great pains to have the best media coverage possible. As Elder Hinckley wrote in his journal, "We have had more favorable publicity in the last few days than I think we have had in all the years of the mission put together." [^21] Approximately 44 percent of the Hong Kong membership attended the meetings.

The Taiwan meeting was a little larger and had more the feeling of an area conference. The Chinese Saints made all of the preparations for hotels, the meeting hall, bus transportation, choirs, public relations, and so forth. More than twenty- five hundred members and friends of the Church met in the Dr. Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall in Taipei. During his brief stay in Taipei, President Kimball met for forty-five minutes with Yen Chia-Kan, president of the Republic of China. President Kimball explained the Church's teachings regarding genealogy, temple work, and welfare services. President Yen expressed interest in and support for the Church's programs. In the general session, President Kimball talked about temples and announced the Tokyo Temple, discussed missionary work, and set forth his vision of carrying the gospel to all the world. He also stressed the importance of service.

The Taiwan Saints joyously received President Kimball and the other General Authorities and visitors. One elder called the Saints' greeting of President Kimball a "gracious and respectful mobbing." Probably the most important result of the area conferences was the feeling that the Church is led by a living prophet of God and that the Lord loves all of his children. [^22]

THE TAIPEI TAIWAN AND HONG KONG-KOWLOON STAKES

Having prayerfully contemplated the matter for some time, on November 9, 1975, President Thomas P. Neilson submitted a proposal to the First Presidency asking that a stake be created in the Taiwan North District. On the following January 13, he received word back from Salt Lake City that the proposal had been approved. (January 1976 was an exciting month for Neilson and other leaders because only two weeks later he received word that the mission was to be divided.) On April 19 Elder Hinckley and Elder Komatsu arrived in Taipei, and the following day they selected Chang I-Ch'ing as the first Chinese to preside over a Chinese stake. The Taipei Taiwan Stake was created on April 22, 1976. The new stake had six wards and five branches comprising 4,497 members.

Three days later, on April 25, Elder Hinckley presented Poon Shui-tat (Sheldon) as president of the new Hong Kong- Kowloon Stake. President Poon, age thirty, had previously served in many responsible positions. The stake consisted of six wards and two branches, totaling 3,410 members. In 1979 there were fourteen wards and branches in Hong Kong and fifty-one wards and branches in Taiwan.

There has been a tendency to view LDS growth in Hong Kong and Taiwan as insignificant in comparison with the total population of these areas or of the People's Republic of China. The 11,815 Saints (7,494 in Taiwan and 4,315 in Hong Kong in December 1978) were but a small percentage (.0000124) of China's estimated 950 million people. Nevertheless, considering the brief duration of LDS missionary work in these areas, the relatively small missionary force in the field during most years since the area was opened, the high standard of personal conduct and the high level of commitment demanded of new converts before and after baptism, the LDS missions in Hong Kong and Taiwan were quite successful. After the area was opened, only two decades passed before stakes were formed. The three missions, with 403 missionaries, brought 1,070 people into the Church (2.6 converts per missionary) in 1978. The baptismal rate compared well with that of Japan (2.7 converts per missionary) but fell well below that of the Philippines (8.3). The non-Christian nations of Asia remained difficult proselyting areas. They were, however, more productive than what some observers have labeled the "post-Christian" nations of Great Britain and Europe.

Relatively speaking, much had been accomplished in Hong Kong and Taiwan. But realistically the great task still remained. Hong Kong and Taiwan were only small training areas, places of preparation for the demanding challenges ahead.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "Asia Area: Fifth stake organized," Church News, 23 April 1994, p. 12.
[^2] Monte Carlson, interview by Feng Xi, Provo, Utah, 18 February 1994, in Feng Xi, "A History of Mormon-Chinese Relations: 1849-1993" (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1994), pp. 192-94.
[^3] Ibid., p. 202.
[^4] Bai Tien was an English language student in a class taught by George Bennion, teacher at Xian Foreign Languages University. This essay was written as an English class assignment.
[^5] The "Three Bonds" are the relationship of ruler and subject, father and son, and husband and wife. The "Five Virtues" are benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and fidelity.
[^6] Ezra Taft Benson to All Stake and Mission Presidents in the Orient, 8 April 1975; copy in possession of the author.
[^7] See Mike Cannon, "'Lord's timetable' guides new leader," Church News, 19 September 1992, pp. 6-7; and "Tai Kwok Yuen of the Seventy," Ensign 22 (September 1992): 79.
[^8] Paul V. Hyer to Richard B. Stamps, 29 February 1996; copy in possession of the author.
[^9] As quoted in David C. H. Liu and Richard L. Jensen, "Taiwan Saints Eager for Temple Blessings," Ensign 14 (November 1984): 108.
[^10] See "LDS, others take pride in Taiwan temple at open house," Church News, 11 November 1984, p. 12.
[^11] Gerry Avant, "First temple in Chinese realm," Church News, 25 November 1984, p. 3.
[^12] David C. H. Liu, "Taipei Taiwan Temple Dedicated," Ensign 15 (February 1985): 75-76.
[^13] John L. Hart, "Temple Moments: Great is their joy," Church News, 10 December 1988, p. 16.
[^14] From notes taken by the author at the temple dedication, 27 May 1996, Hong Kong.
[^15] John K. Carmack, remarks at ground breaking of Hong Kong Temple, 22 January 1994; copy in possession of the author.
[^16] John K. Carmack, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 30 November 1995.
[^17] See my "The Current Legal Status of Christianity in China," Brigham Young University Law Review 1995, no. 2: 347-99.
[^18] See "Hong Kong Temple visited by 13,000 during open house," Church News, 25 May 1996, pp. 4-5.
[^19] For more information regarding the life of President Ng, see Kellene Ricks, "Ng Kat Hing: Hong Kong Pioneer," Ensign 22 (August 1992): 50-52.
[^20] "Dedicatory Prayer of the Hong Kong Temple," Church News, 1 June 1996, p. 4.
[^21] Gerry Avant, "LDS leader pays visit to China's mainland," Deseret News, 28 May 1996, A1-A2.
[^22] As quoted in Dell Van Orden, "Door to China may be opening," Church News, 7 April 1979, p. 3; and "President Kimball Sees Missions in Communist China in Future," Herald (Provo, Utah), 1 April 1979, p. 24.
