R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE CHINESE REALM 1978-1996

Taiwan and Hong Kong, the People's Republic of China, and Mongolia

TAIWAN AND HONG KONG

By mid-1996 there were more than 22,000 members of the Church in Taiwan and almost 21,000 in Hong Kong. Although annual baptism rates varied somewhat in the two areas, an average of about 1,000 people joined the Church in each nation or colony from 1979 onward. Taiwan—largely because it had greater numbers of mature priesthood leaders, more territory, a larger populace (21 million versus 6.5 million in Hong Kong in 1996), more missionaries, and available land—received a temple in 1984. The two Taiwan missions, Kaohsiung and Taipei, were divided into three with the creation of the Taichung Mission in 1979, although the number was reduced to two in 1982. Additional stakes were created, bringing the number to five in 1994. There were also three districts. In the years since 1979, the Church acquired a number of properties and built almost thirty chapels. The seminary and institute programs grew steadily. In general, the Church reached a stage of maturity and solidity in Taiwan.

The same is true for the Church in Hong Kong. The small geographical size of the colony does not justify more than one mission even though the populace of around six million would do so in other parts of the world. In 1996 there were five stakes in Hong Kong and many wards. Some problems, such as the difficulty of acquiring land and the constant problem of leaders and members who move elsewhere, hindered Church growth there. But in May 1996 the Church dedicated the Hong Kong Temple and appeared to be as secure as any other denomination while the colony awaited reversion to the People's Republic of China in 1997.

In 1979 the People's Republic of China, under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, opened its doors wider to foreigners. In the summer of that year Brigham Young University's Young Ambassadors performance group visited the PRC and initiated a multitude of relationships between China and the university, the Church, and many Church leaders. Although the Church is not legally recognized in China and proselyting is not allowed according to Chinese law and policy, branches of the Church are allowed for expatriates. As a result, many productive relationships and friendships abound between Church entities and Church members and Chinese officials and citizens.

Recently, in 1992, humanitarian services missionaries and regular proselyting elders entered Mongolia, now a free and independent nation. Long under the control of the Soviet Union, it is steadily leaving the realm of Communism and becoming part of the democratic world. More than six hundred Mongols are now (in 1996) baptized members of the Church.

Organization and Administration

In 1979 there was one stake in Taiwan and one in Hong Kong. On May 29, 1980, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley created the Hong Kong Kowloon Stake with twenty-nine-year-old Wong Chung-hei (Patrick) as the first president. President Wong, who had served as bishop and as a high councilor, was continuing a series of important Liang Shih-An (Kent) (left), seated beside his father, Liang Yun-Sheng, is the first Area Authority Seventy from Taiwan. The young Liang is among the few second-generation Latter-day Saints among the leaders of the Church in Asia. (Photo by author) callings in the Church. Subsequently he served twice as a Regional Representative of the Twelve, and on August 15, 1995, he was called as an Area Authority of the Church. A year later, in 1996, he was called as second counselor in the Asia Area Presidency. Liang Shih-an (Kent) from Taipei was also called as an Area Authority at the same time. Liang, a professor and formerly a Regional Representative, stake president, high councilor, and bishop, is the son of Brother and Sister Liang Yun-sheng, who were converted to the Church in Taiwan in May 1958. Over the years, the older Liang served in many positions in the Church, including being in the first stake presidency. He was a patriarch, a counselor in the Southern Far East Mission presidency, and so on. His son, Elder Liang, grew up in a strong Mormon home and represents the strength of second-generation Mormon families in Asia.

On November 6, 1981, Taiwan gained its second stake, the Kaohsiung Stake, with Ho Tung-hai as president. Only four months later the Taipei Stake was divided into the Taipei East Stake (presided over by President Yen Yuan-hu) and the Taipei West Stake (with Liu Chu-hwa as president), bringing Taiwan's number of stakes to four. The Taichung Stake, the fifth and latest, was organized on December 18, 1994, with Chou Wen-tsung as president.

The Hong Kong Kowloon North Stake (later changed to the Hong Kong Talo Harbour Stake) and the New Territories Stake were organized on November 11, 1984, with Yau Fu-man and Johnson Ma as presidents, respectively. Ten years later, on March 20, 1994, the Hong Kong Kowloon West Stake was created with Poon Yin Sang (Peter) as president, thus bringing Hong Kong even with Taiwan in number of stakes. At the organizing stake conference meeting, Elder John K. Carmack, Area President, told the congregation: "These days of uncertainties and concerns in Hong Kong are also the most exciting days in the history of the Church in Hong Kong. We should all thank the Lord that we are permitted to be here to witness the history unfold." [^1] Elder Carmack was referring to both the unrest that Hong Kong residents were facing as the uncertainties of 1997 drew nearer and to the joy that Hong Kong members were experiencing as they anticipated the completion of the Hong Kong Temple in 1996.

Unusual Mission Changes

The Hong Kong Mission has continued uninterrupted since Taiwan was divided off in 1971. But Taiwan provides a more varied history. After the initial creation of the Taiwan Mission in 1971, the mission was first divided in July 1976 with the creation of the Kaohsiung Mission in the south. Three years later the Brethren created the Taichung Mission, but three missions proved unnecessary, and the decision was made to close it, transferring parts of the mission to Taipei and Kaohsiung in July 1982. A year later the new mission president, finding that adequate educational facilities were not available for his children in Kaohsiung, sent his family to live in the mission facilities in Taichung. Upon learning of this situation, on September 28, 1983, Church authorities officially moved the mission headquarters to Taichung and changed the name of the mission to reflect the move. [^2]

Church Growth and the Chinese Way

For the past two decades the dominant problem facing missionaries in Hong Kong and Taiwan has been materialism. This has not always been so, but with the rising pressure in Hong Kong to succeed temporally because of the crowded and intense conditions, and with the ever-rising standard of living in Taiwan, missionaries have had a growing problem finding individuals who have not made money and possessions their religion. During the decade from 1974 to 1984, Taiwan had the second-highest economic growth in the world. In earlier years, missionaries often wrote concerning the humble conditions in which most people lived. Such memories are largely missing from missionaries who have served in Taiwan since the mid-1970s.

Living conditions for most Chinese in Hong Kong remain extremely close. Privacy is difficult to find, and personal space for projects, study, hobbies, and the like is almost nonexistent. As mentioned several times before, most Hong Kong residents have been living with considerable uncertainty regarding how their lives will be affected by the change of government in 1997. Some Hong Kong residents, including Latter-day Saints, have chosen to immigrate to other countries if they have the means and the legal ability to do so. Most, however, have had to remain and wait for the unknown. The Church in Taiwan has also been affected by emigration. One student of the matter suggested that "it is relatively easier to find more qualified Chinese members available for a Church position in California or Salt Lake City than in Taiwan or Hong Kong." [^3]

Typically, Chinese are not very religious in the Western sense of being conscious of membership in a particular church or a specific congregation. Nor are they accustomed to attending weekly worship services. Chinese religion is family-oriented and often home-centered. Local gods and spirits play major roles in most lives, as do fortune-telling, tea leaf reading, and reverence for the spirits of dead ancestors. Respect for dead ancestors and the rituals involved in paying honor to them is important to almost all Chinese, whether they call themselves Buddhists, Daoists, Confucianists, or some combination of the three. Most Chinese follow worship patterns that include parts of all three religions, but they seldom distinguish or know from which tradition these practices have come.

Respect for one's elders—filial piety, or hsiao (xiao)—living and dead, is important to most Chinese. Parents teach affection, obligation, and responsibility to other people, specifically to a child's parents and elders. Chinese children grow up with feelings of being connected, close, and interdependent. Decisions regarding religion are seldom made alone. They are family decisions, and most families would not consider leaving the customs of the past or fail to offer ritual respect for the dead on appointed days. Mormon missionaries, generally being young, have had a difficult time understanding why mature men and women insist on asking permission from their parents when desiring to join the Church. The missionaries do not understand that one is expected to respect and defer to the wishes of his elders until there is no family member older than himself.

Age and maleness have priority in the Chinese realm, but frequently Mormon missionaries have directed their proselyting attention to young women. The results have often been disruptive to the lives of these young people. Parents, particularly fathers, resent the influence of outsiders upon their children, even at ages that most Americans consider mature enough for people to make their own decisions. Traditionally, Chinese parents have strict control of their children's lives. When young people leave home to go away to college, the bonds of parental control are loosened, but not broken. It is during this stage that most converts to the Church are found.

TRACING MY ANCESTORS

Bai Tien

A couple of summers ago I was marching in the strong summer sunshine along the edge of the Mao Wushu Desert in Northwest China to visit my ancestral grave. I had never been there before and had been longing to go there ever since Father told me about it. And then I got the chance. I was on summer vacation and I was on a University-sponsored educational trip to Yanan, which was comparatively nearer to my hometown. [In China one's hometown is the town where one's father was born.] So I decided to take another all-day, bumpy bus ride from Yanan to my hometown county in the very northeast of Shanxi. As I was walking deeper into the desert, the sunshine was becoming stronger and stronger. And to step forward on the sands demanded a certain amount of efforts. Finally, after a two-hour walk in the hot summer sun, I reached my destination.

And now I was there, standing in front of my ancestors' graves, where they lay beneath the sands and the soil. There were four graves, two for my grandparents and another two for [no words here]. They were located in a square manner which looked like four piles of sand rather than formal and decent graves. And each one was very close to another so that they overlapped a little. It was a quiet place which was one side of a hill facing south. (The nearest village was almost a mile away.) Beyond this hill there was the mighty desert extending northwards, which was dotted with patches of green colour here and there, showing signs of afforestation. Everything was in silence. Time seemed to stop flowing. Only the warm desert wind was whistling away. The sun was shining brightly. I stood there motionless. Numerous senses of respect, love, gratefulness, loyalty, and the like were swarming inside me. A voice in my heart, perhaps it was my father's, was telling me again and again that this was my very origin, this is where I came from. I didn't and I couldn't labour my lips, but instead I was communicating with my ancestors. I said to them that I was one of their descendants, and that I came to see them for the first time in my life, and I came to be accepted by the "Bai" family; I said to them that I loved them, I worshiped them, I admired them and I thanked them for making "me" possible. I did not shed tears. I knew they didn't like it. They liked their boy to be strong-minded. I knelt down. It was a must. It was human. I knew they were pleased to see me and they agreed to accept me. They gave me their "blessings."

I did not stay long. Having sprinkled a bottle of wine over the graves in memory of my ancestors, I was prepared to leave. I stood there with my head bowing down for a few minutes. I said to my ancestors that I was ready to go and promised to do my best in the future. I looked my good-by at them and turned back and began to walk down the hill. When about a hundred yards apart, I turned back and looked up to that hill where my ancestors were buried. I said to myself: "This is a quiet place, and they rest in peace." [^4]

Many Chinese believe Christianity is incompatible with Chinese traditions and values. Belief in the "Three Bonds" and "Five Virtues" of Confucianism continues to influence most Chinese. [^5] Unfortunately, most people in Hong Kong and Taiwan have never heard of the Church, and those who have generally understand little of its history or doctrines. When Chinese understand the Church's teachings regarding the eternal nature of the family, temple sealings, and so forth, they find great compatibility between Chinese beliefs and the teachings of the restored gospel. But most never listen long enough to make the connection.

Among Church members in Hong Kong and Taiwan there have been differences of opinion regarding the proper place of ancestor worship among members. Some have argued that the practice is pagan and totally inappropriate. Others have suggested that some elements of the practice are wholesome and not harmful if not carried to the extreme. Others have averred that ancestor worship is simply an early, perhaps apostate form of paying recognition and should be allowed if other parts of a believer's life are in order. And others have focused their attention on family history and genealogical research (which is amply supported in Hong Kong and Taiwan). Members in Taiwan continue to debate the matter. The most helpful guidance on the subject came from President Ezra Taft Benson, while he served as President of the Quorum of the Twelve. To the stake and mission presidents of Asia he wrote: "The important thing is that the person be taught, as part of his conversion to the gospel, that he no longer worships shrines and altars and ancestors, but he pays his devotions and offers his prayers to God, our Eternal Father, in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ. Converts so taught have not had serious difficulty in handling the problem." [^6] A great difficulty for faithful Chinese members has been to manifest to loved family members who are non-Mormons that they honor their elders and dead ancestors while at the same time following the teachings of the Church.

General Authority Supervision and Administrative Offices

Since the mid-1970s various members of the Seventy have presided over Hong Kong and Taiwan. On July 1, 1984, the world was divided into thirteen administrative areas, of which three were outside the United States. The Asia Area was created with Elder William R. Bradford, who was already in charge in Tokyo, as the first Area President, with Elder Jack H Goaslind Jr. and Robert B. Harbertson as counselors. A year later President Bradford and his new counselors, Jacob de Jager and Keith W. Wilcox, moved the headquarters for all of Asia to Hong Kong. Hong Kong remained the center of all Asian operations until 1987, when the Philippines/Micronesia Area was created with Elder George I. Cannon as president. The Asia Area was divided again on September 1, 1992, when the Asia North Area Presidency, presided over by Elder W. Eugene Hansen, was created to administer affairs in Japan and Korea.

Elder Tai Kwok Yuen, the first Chinese to serve as a General Authority, was called into the Second Quorum of the Seventy in June 1992. Prior to that calling, he had served as branch president, stake president's counselor, Regional Representative, and president of the Hong Kong Mission. As a Seventy he served in the Asia Area Presidency in Hong Kong. (Courtesy LDS Church)

The Asia Area Presidency in Hong Kong has had the enormous task of administering Church affairs not only in Hong Kong and Taiwan but also in all of South and Southeast Asia (except the Philippines). In addition, they have been responsible for Church affairs in the People's Republic of China and the establishment of new mission fields in Mongolia and countries of South and Southeast Asia.

Elder Tai Kwok Yuen, who served in the Asia Area Presidency from 1992 to the present, is the first Chinese to be called as a General Authority. He joined the Church in Hong Kong on June 9, 1959, at age seventeen. Through the encouragement of his illiterate aunt, who reared him, he gained an education, eventually graduating from the University of Sydney in Australia with a degree in chemical engineering. He also did graduate studies in management at the University of Hong Kong. In 1966 he married Lai Hui-hua, whom he had met in church after returning to Hong Kong from Australia. They are the parents of two sons and a daughter. Over the years, the Tais have lived in Hong Kong, England, and America. Elder Tai has served in a variety of Church leadership capacities, including branch president, high councilor, stake president's counselor, and Regional Representative. In 1989 they were called while living in California to lead the Hong Kong Mission. At the end of that period of service, President Gordon B. Hinckley in June 1992 called President Tai to be a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy and to serve as second counselor in the Asia Area Presidency in Hong Kong. In 1995 he became president of that area. [^7]

The Taipei Church administration building houses a number of functions, including a distribution center, temporal affairs office, and Taipei Taiwan Mission offices and mission president's apartment, and the temple president's apartment. It has been a Church facility since early 1983. (Photo by author)

Administrative offices for the Area Presidency in Hong Kong have been located in Kam Tong Hall on Hong Kong Island. The lovely old building provides a warm and classy environment for visitors, members, and those of other faiths alike. As the Church grew in Taiwan, a similar headquarters building became more and more necessary. Fortunately, the first property purchased by the Church in Taipei, a small city block, was large enough to hold the original Taipei chapel (which later became the stake center) and new facilities (a home and a separate office) for the Taiwan Mission when it was created in 1971. But on March 31, 1982, the First Presidency announced the forthcoming construction of a new temple for Taiwan. The decision was made to build the temple on the land occupied by the mission home and office. This meant that a new mission home or apartment for the mission president and a new mission office were needed. But that was not all. The temple president also would need a residence. In addition, various other operations—the Presiding Bishopric area office, Translation Services, the distribution center, the islandwide construction offices—also needed office space. Fortunately, while these decisions were being pondered, a seven-story office building was under construction directly across the lane from the entrances to the stake center and proposed temple. Paul V. Hyer, the mission president, helped negotiate the purchase of the building, moved his family and mission office staff into the building in early 1983, and watched the temple go up from his new office. [^8] The administration building, the stake center, and temple make up an efficient Church complex in a fine Taipei neighborhood. The Church Educational System offices are located in the stake center, as is a genealogy service center. Property costs in Taipei have inflated so much that the original price of the Church block would now purchase only one parking space. The Church is greatly blessed to have such a property.

The Taipei Taiwan Temple

From the early history of the Restoration, Latter-day Saints have viewed temples as the highest symbol of their spiritual aspirations. Missionaries often consider their work done only after people they have taught and baptized also attend the temple and receive the blessings of the Lord's holy house. Since the 1960s, mission records refer to plans for temple excursions to Hawaii or Salt Lake City. But because transportation costs were high, with only one exception, such plans never materialized. Nevertheless, Church leaders from the missions and the stakes, as well as visiting authorities, regularly encouraged members to save money and go to the temple. When President Spencer W. Kimball spoke at the first area conference in 1975, he announced plans for the Tokyo Temple and explained its purposes. Encouraging those present, he promised, "You, too, can have one." [^9] At that time Taiwan was yet to have its first stake.

But the Church in Taiwan and Hong Kong grew in leadership strength and numbers, and only seven years passed before the Brethren decided to build the first temple in the Chinese realm in Taipei. On March 31, 1982, the First Presidency announced new temples for four cities, including Taipei. The Taipei Taiwan Temple was projected to be a small temple of ten thousand square feet. The completed structure was to have a capacity of ninety thousand endowments per year, featuring four ordinance rooms, three sealing rooms, a celestial room, a baptistry, and various offices.

The ground-breaking ceremonies were conducted on August 26, 1982, by President Gordon B. Hinckley, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, accompanied by Area Executive Administrator Marion D. Hanks. But construction did not begin until early 1983, and then it proceeded slowly. Completion was projected for early 1984, but not until October 30 did the twelve-day open house begin. Although slow, construction of the temple was "tremendously exhilarating for members," reported Paul Hyer. In addition to the beauty of the white tiles on the walls and the bluetiled roof of the temple, the stake center next door was painted white and retiled with matching blue tile. The entire effect was one of considerable beauty. [^10]

The new temple was dedicated in five sessions held on November 17 and 18, 1984. President Hinckley presided at three sessions, and Elder Howard W. Hunter conducted two sessions. Four sessions were held in Mandarin and one in Cantonese for the 150 members who attended from Hong Kong. A number of other General Authorities were present.

In one of his addresses, President Hinckley mentioned his participation in the purchase of the property on which they met. The land had formerly been a prison and a farm worked by the prisoners. "This house, built on what was once prison property, will open the prison doors of the veil of death," spoke President The Taipei Taiwan Temple was announced in March 1982 and dedicated on 17-18 November 1984 by President Gordon B. Hinckley, who was at that time second counselor to President Spencer W. Kimball. (Photo by author) Hinckley. He also expressed concern for the small number of members in Taiwan and Hong Kong who held temple recommends. "There are only 500 to do the work of millions. . . . There is so much to be done. The laborers are relatively few. There is no other place where a temple has been built where so few are eligible to use it." [^11] By 1995 the number of recommend holders had grown to 1,331 in Taiwan, still a small number.

In the dedicatory prayer, reference was made to Elder David O. McKay's prayer dedicating the Chinese realm for the preaching of the gospel. The prayer read in part: "We thank thee for the firm foundation on which thy Church is now established in this part of the earth. We thank thee for this day when those who will use this temple may turn their hearts to their fathers, participating in thy holy house in those ordinances which will make it possible for their deceased forebears to move forward on the way that leads to eternal life." The prayer continued: "We pray for the government of this nation which has been hospitable to thy servants and thy work. . . . May thy work spread from here to the vast numbers of thy Chinese sons and daughters wherever they may be found. Touch the hearts of those who govern that they may open the doors of their nations to thy messengers of eternal truth. May thy work grow in beauty and strength in the great Chinese realm." [^12]

Although the number of persons holding temple recommends was initially small, the first two temple presidents, John W. Clifford and Paul V. Hyer, complimented those who could attend, saying they were among the most devoted temple participants in the Church. [^13] When the temple opened there were thirteen thousand members in Taiwan and ten thousand in Hong Kong. Now this number has almost doubled, and a new temple has been constructed in Hong Kong, a fact that attests to the continued growth in numbers of temple-worthy members in both places.

The first Chinese member to preside at the Taipei Taiwan Temple was Wang Wei, with his wife, Wang Hsiao-feng, as matron. They were called in 1993.

The Church Educational System in Hong Kong and Taiwan

Having been founded in the early 1970s in both areas, CES programs have continued to make steady growth and improvement through the years. Seminary, almost always taught through home study in Hong Kong and Taiwan, has grown more slowly than the institute program because more college-age persons join the Church than high school students. Few families in the Church have children of high school age, although more are coming along now. By the late 1980s Hong Kong had about 150 seminary students (under 20 percent of potential) and more than 250 institute students (about 60 percent of potential). Taiwan's statistics were higher, with 32 percent of potential seminary students participating and 91 percent of potential institute students taking part. These figures have improved in the 1990s. In 1996 Kwok Kam-Tim was country director in Hong Kong, and Wang Lu-pao was country director in Taiwan.

The Hong Kong Temple

As momentous as the opening of the Taipei Taiwan Temple was, the building and dedication of the Hong Kong Temple was a more dramatic event. Two very different factors set the Hong Kong Temple apart: finding an appropriate site and the question of what might transpire in Hong Kong when the People's Republic of China took over on July 1, 1997. Finding any kind of property in Hong Kong is almost impossible. Finding land that is suitable for a temple is much more difficult. Prices are extremely high everywhere, and many areas are inappropriate.

After gaining the support and blessing of President Ezra Taft Benson for the proposal to build a temple in Hong Kong, President Gordon B. Hinckley, First Counselor in the First Presidency, visited Hong Kong twice for the purpose of finding a temple site. On July 25 through 27, 1992, following a long day of visits to ten potential sites, President Hinckley retired to bed feeling quite discouraged. He awoke between two and three o'clock in the morning with the clear impression that the temple should be built on the site of the mission home and office at #2 Cornwall Street in Kowloon Tong. In the night he sketched a possible plan for a building that would serve more than one purpose, something the Latter-day Saints never had done with a temple before. "It was clear to me we should have two separate buildings in one," said President Hinckley. In the morning he shared his ideas with Ted D. Simmons, managing director for physical facilities for the Church. After going over this plan with the Area Presidency and local leaders, Church leaders decided to build a multipurpose temple at #2 Cornwall Street. Speaking at the temple dedication regarding his thoughts to build the temple with such an unusual plan, President Hinckley said, "If ever in my life I felt the inspiration of the Lord, it was with this building." [^14]

Plans to build the Hong Kong Temple were announced on October 3, 1992, at general conference in Salt Lake City. President Hinckley's original plan was to construct an eight-story building. In addition to the temple proper, which would take up the top three floors (the baptismal font would be below the plaza level), the building would also house offices for the Hong Kong Mission, apartments for the mission and temple presidents and their families, a small chapel and classroom facility for a branch, an outlet for the sale of temple clothing, the building engineer's office, and limited parking. Civil regulations and zoning restrictions required that the building not stand more than seven stories above ground, so the original plan had to be tightened. The building has eighteen thousand square feet, eight thousand more than the Taipei Taiwan Temple. The finished structure, faced with light-green granite, has a dome covered in gold leaf and a spire with a statue of the angel Moroni at the top.

From the ground-breaking ceremony to the dedication, the question of what might happen after July 1, 1997, was constantly on the minds of all with an interest in the temple. In his address at the ground breaking (January 22, 1994), Elder John K. Carmack, Area President, said: "The question everyone asks me, and I assume you get asked it too, is, 'What is going to happen after 1997?' I am not a prophet and don't know all that will happen in 1997, but part of the answer is that we are building a temple that will serve China for a long time and that is a statement of our faith and confidence in the future. We have all been promised the continuation of religious freedom under the Basic Law and we fully expect to enjoy the freedom to worship, learn, and receive ordinances under that freedom. We break ground today as an act of faith and confidence in the future." [^15]

Through negotiations of the British, Hong Kong representatives, and the government of the People's Republic of China, Hong Kong was established as a Special Administrative Region. The Basic Law, a sort of constitution for Hong Kong, was adopted on April 4, 1990. Of special interest to the Church was Article 141, which provided that China would not restrict freedom of religious belief, interfere in the internal affairs of religious organizations, or restrict religious activities that do not contravene the laws of the Special Administrative Region. "Religious organizations," according to Elder John K. Carmack, "were to be given the right to acquire property, receive outside financial support, have ownership rights, operate seminaries, schools, hospitals, and welfare institutions, and provide other social services." Of special significance is the right of religious organizations and individuals to have relationships with religious organizations and believers elsewhere. The result should be the freedom of religious organizations and individuals to continue their present rights and practices. [^16]

Religious law and policy within the PRC highly restrict the religious activities of all Chinese citizens and foreigners. Missionaries are not allowed. Roman Catholics within the PRC have been criticized harshly and sometimes persecuted because they have allegiance to the Pope, a leader outside China. Considering the similar organizational nature of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with its Prophet-President, First Presidency, Quorum of Twelve Apostles, and other central officers, if the government of the People's Republic of China were to decide to implement similar rules in Hong Kong, the Church would be in great difficulty. [^17]

Questions regarding the continuation of the status quo notwithstanding, the Church moved ahead with confidence in the Probably the most unusual LDS temple in the world, the Hong Kong Temple was announced in October 1992 and dedicated by President Gordon B. Hinckley on 26-27 May 1996. In addition to standard temple facilities, the building houses a small chapel and branch meeting rooms, as well as apartments for the mission president and temple president. (Photo by author) honor of the PRC government to stand by the Basic Law and provide for the continuation of present religious rights and practice.

Five hundred VIP guests, twenty-five ministers of religion, and thirteen thousand others visited the completed temple during the open house, which was held from May 7 to May 21, 1996. [^18] Following several days of intense cleaning, seven dedicatory sessions were held on May 26 and 27. Approximately five thousand Church members from many nations attended the sessions, which were presided over by President Hinckley and conducted by either himself or President Thomas S. Monson, First Counselor in the First Presidency. Other General Authorities included Elder Neal A. Maxwell and Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Council of the Twelve and the Area Presidency, Elders Tai Kwok Yuen, John H. Groberg, and Rulon G. Craven. Members came from Singapore and Thailand, also part of the temple district, as well as from Taiwan. Temple president Ng Kat Hing and his wife, Pang Lai Har, temple matron, were also present. [^19] President and Sister Ng were among the earliest converts to the Church in Hong Kong. The dedication gave cause for the greatest reunion of missionaries to Hong Kong and Taiwan and their families that has ever taken place. A past mission president commented, "This has got to be the biggest reunion we'll ever have until we meet for the dedication of the Beijing Temple."

Beijing and China seemed to be ever on the minds of those who spoke and those who listened. Before reading the dedicatory prayer in one of the sessions, President Hinckley spoke for a moment about the nature of such prayers. He pointed out that dedicatory prayers are very specific, that they are read, word for word, in each session. Then he in a sense revealed his concern for the future of the temple. He invited all who were present to listen carefully to the specific words of the prayer as they related to the future of the Church in Hong Kong. In part the prayer reads: "We thank Thee for the freedom granted by this government in permitting Thy servants to labor here. . . . We pray that this harvest of souls may continue, that in the future as in the present, Thy people may be free and secure in their worship and that none shall hinder the service of missionaries called to this area. Bless all who befriend Thy Church, all who defend Thy people, and all who assist those called to teach the everlasting gospel. We pray that Thy work may grow and prosper in the great Chinese realm, and may those who govern be ever receptive to those called and sent as messengers of revealed truth." [^20]

The Hong Kong Temple opened for regular endowment sessions on May 28, 1996, one day following the last dedication session.

THE CHURCH AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

The day following the dedication of the Hong Kong Temple, President Gordon B. Hinckley, his wife, Marjorie, and others who were traveling with him crossed into China proper to visit the Chinese Folk Villages (patterned after the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawaii) at Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, the newly created commercial and industrial city a short distance across the border. This was the first visit by a President of the Church to the PRC. President Hinckley had first visited China in 1980 while an Apostle. The red carpet was literally rolled out to greet President Hinckley and his party. According to a Deseret News report, "It seemed that a warmer welcome could not have been extended." [^21] His May 1996 visit was acknowledged as important in the Church press, but it could be considered simply the latest visit to the PRC by a series of members of the Twelve and other General Authorities, beginning in the summer of 1979.

Not long after Deng Xiaoping assumed the reigns of government following the ouster of the "Gang of Four," he made clear China's intention to open its doors to foreign trade and greater diplomatic and cultural ties abroad. President Spencer W. Kimball, knowing that one-fourth of humanity lived within China's borders, asked in 1978 that China experts at Brigham Young University investigate the possibility of opening missionary work there. Although the report he received was not encouraging, President Kimball believed it was time to start preparing in earnest for closer relations with China. On September 29, 1978, at a meeting with the Regional Representatives of the Church, he emphasized the importance of China and asked, rhetorically, how many members of the Church could speak Mandarin Chinese. He encouraged more members to learn the language. BYU President Dallin H. Oaks, who was present at the meeting, soon thought of sending a BYU performing group to the PRC, but he learned that making arrangements for such a tour was impossible because the United States and China did not recognize each other diplomatically. But U.S.—Chinese relations changed quickly, and on January 1, 1979, diplomatic relations were normalized. BYU administrators and artistic directors decided to try to send the Young Ambassadors, a performance troupe, to China. Through various diplomatic channels and the efforts of Senator Frank Church of Idaho, who was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, arrangements were made for two BYU representatives, Ed Blaser and Val Lindsey, to fly to Beijing through Romania. While in Beijing they enlisted the help of the China Youth Travel Service, which made arrangements for this tour and many others to follow.

In an address to the Regional Representatives at April general conference in 1979, President Kimball again pressed the China matter. He said, "It appears that the time is not too distant when the gospel might be preached" to the people of China. "The door to China is starting to open," the prophet said. "Rather than waiting to be asked, we should take affirmative action to obtain approval to enter." [^22] The China tour was now more important than ever.

When the BYU group left for Asia, many questions remained unanswered. The tour and performance schedule for the Young Ambassadors was not firm even as they traveled from Hong Kong to Guangzhou by railroad in early July 1979. Chinese officials required the group to perform for a jury of cultural specialists before going on with the tour. The critics were impressed, and the tour proceeded to Beijing and then on to Shanghai and Hangzhou. Before the tour was over, the Young Ambassadors had performed before seventeen thousand people in the major halls of four cities and had given at least forty-five impromptu performances at historic sites, such as the Great Wall and the Forbidden City, and at factories, nurseries, and other places. Randy Boothe, artistic director, reported, "We believe that was the first time a tour of this kind had ever been to China." Other individual performers such as comedian Bob Hope and violinist Isaac Stern had previously visited China, as had the Boston Symphony Orchestra, but this was likely the first "total show experience" to come from the United States. [^23]

The young performers were excellent, but their ability to make friends was most impressive. They had studied the Mandarin language briefly and used it to introduce the various parts of the show. They also had learned some Chinese songs that the crowds appreciated. Everywhere they went they were on stage. They mingled freely with the Chinese people on trains, in hotels, and on the city streets.

Elder James E. Faust of the Quorum of the Twelve accompanied the Young Ambassadors during the part of their Asia tour that took them to China. While visiting the Forbidden City (the Palace Museum) in Beijing, the group gathered at a lovely pavilion in a beautiful garden and sang "I Am a Child of God." In the quiet of that spot, near the place where Elder David O. McKay dedicated the Chinese realm for the preaching of the gospel in 1921, Elder Faust voiced another prayer that the gospel might soon be taught in the People's Republic of China.

Over the years since that first tour, other BYU groups—the Folk Dance Ensemble, the Lamanite Generation, the Ballroom Dance Company, the Chamber Orchestra, and the Wind Symphony—have taken at least sixteen performance tours to China. General Authorities of the Church and BYU administrators have traveled with most of the groups. There is little question that BYU is among the two or three best-known and most highly respected foreign universities in China.

Through cultural exchanges, as the tours have been labeled, the Church has had a legitimate avenue for establishing contacts among China's highest officials. These relationships have developed in other areas, such as medicine, science, business, English teaching, and diplomacy. Chinese political leaders also visited Salt Lake City and the Polynesian Cultural Center in Laie, Hawaii, during the 1980s and 1990s. Vice Premier Geng Biao was the first such leader to visit the Polynesian Cultural Center in 1980, followed by Premier Zhao Ziyang in 1984 and President Li Xiannan in October 1985. In January 1981 Ambassador Chai Zemin was the first of several Chinese ambassadors to the United States to accept invitations to visit Church headquarters in Salt Lake City and Brigham Young University. The most recent visit was by Ambassador Li Daoyu in the spring of 1996. [^24]

The Church has also provided humanitarian aid to the PRC on at least two occasions, and Church members have volunteered their medical knowledge and service many times. Most notable, Elder Russell M. Nelson, before and since his call as an Apostle in April 1984, has taught heart surgery at the Shandong Medical College in Jinan, Shandong Province. For his service in 1980 and 1984, he was named honorary professor in September 1984. His service and dedication to doing his teaching well were exceptional. He studied Mandarin Chinese and became proficient enough to communicate effectively, "particularly during surgery." [^25] His ability to speak and understand Chinese has helped as he has visited China on several occasions since that time.

In February 1989 and again in August 1991, representatives of the Church, Elder Russell M. Nelson and Elder Merlin R. Lybbert, respectively, delivered checks for $25,000 and $25,600 to representatives of the Chinese government for earthquake damage reconstruction and to buy medical supplies for victims of a major flood. [^26]

The distance between China and the Church has been closed through contacts of a number of kinds. BYU students have studied the Chinese language at Nanjing University every spring since the late 1980s. Faculty members have participated in a formal exchange program between Xian Foreign Languages University and the College of Humanities at BYU. [^27] Hundreds of LDS business people, professors, and government employees have lived and served in various Chinese cities, most frequently Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Xian. Three expatriate branches and several groups of the Church have operated in China since the late 1980s.

One of the most effective in-country initiatives has been the China Teachers Program of the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies at Brigham Young University. In 1988 Ray C. Hillam, director of the Kennedy Center, and his colleagues implemented a system of teacher placement at various universities and institutes in China. The program started small but has expanded most years until during the 1995-96 school year eighty people were employed as English teachers in China. The purpose was at least twofold: to perform humanitarian service in the spirit suggested by President Kimball and to have a Latter-day Saint presence in China. By 1996 hundreds of teachers had participated in the placement program, and thousands of Chinese students had become acquainted with believing members of the Church. The teachers are not allowed to preach or teach about their religious beliefs, but their way of life has provided a good example for many who associate with them. [^28]

In addition to the foreign Mormon involvement in China, thousands of Chinese students have left China to study at universities throughout the world. Since the mid-1980s hundreds of these students have studied at BYU and BYU—Hawaii. From 1985 until 1994 approximately $120,000 per year was allocated from PCC profits to support Chinese students at the two institutions. [^29] Some of these students, as well as hundreds at other universities in the United States and the Western world, have learned about the restored gospel, become converted, and been baptized into the Church.

The status of these Chinese converts upon returning to China has been a problem. Chinese Mormons, of course, wish to associate with other members of the Church, but since the events at Tiananmen Square in May and June 1989, the government has strictly forbidden affiliation of Chinese citizens with expatriate religious groups and individuals. In short, American and other foreign Latter-day Saints are allowed to meet as religious organizations, but Chinese are not allowed to meet with them.

The missionary position of the Church has never varied; the Church will not enter a country under devious or illegal means. Leaders of the Church have been absolutely forthright with Chinese government officials regarding the Church's hopes and intentions in China. The hope of the Church is to take the restored gospel to every land and people, including China. Until June 4, 1989, various members of the Quorum of the Twelve, sometimes in company with BYU performance groups, sometimes alone, and sometimes in twos, have met with officers at the highest levels to convey the interests and commitments of the Church. Those who have been charged with primary responsibility for Asia, and thus China, for the past decade have been Elder Dallin H. Oaks, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, and Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin. During their periods as first contact for Asia, Elders Oaks and Maxwell made several trips to China to speak at such institutions as the Academy of Science, to negotiate with Chinese officials, and to survey the situation. Elder Oaks (along with Elder Nelson) shared the commitment of the Church to strictly adhere to Chinese religious law and policy, offered aid and gave promises of educational assistance, received encouragement, and were led to believe that Chinese members of the Church (those who joined outside China) would be free to practice their religious beliefs. But since the Tiananmen Incident, Chinese members have not been allowed to meet with other Chinese members or with expatriates. In spite of attempts by LDS representatives to gain modification of this position, the government has created an ever firmer legal and policy position against outside religions and teachers of religion. [^30]

LDS China watchers have sometimes become frustrated with the slow pace of progress there. To those who have impatient thoughts, Elder Oaks gave some wise and sensitive counsel. On March 12, 1991, he delivered an important devotional address at BYU titled "Getting to Know China," in which he reviewed the relationships the Church and members of the Church have had with the People's Republic of China. Elder Oaks said:

People sometimes ask me about what can be done to "open China." In response, I state my belief that China is already "open"—it is we who are closed. We are closed because we expect the Orient to be the same as the West, China to be the same as Canada or Chile. We must understand their way of thinking, their aspirations and their impressive accomplishments. We must observe their laws, and follow their example of patience. We must deserve to be their friends.

As we become friends of China, and as we learn from them, our Father in Heaven, who has made "all nations of men . . . and [has] determined . . . the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26), will bring His purposes to pass in that great nation "in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:68). [^31]

When President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke to the missionaries of the Hong Kong Mission on May 25, 1996, he talked about China and the future growth of the Church there. He suggested, "Don't push it." It will come in the Lord's time. Considering present religious law and policy, Latter-day Saint missionary work will have to be in the Lord's time.

CHURCH BEGINNINGS IN MONGOLIA

The Mongols

During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries no people in the world were more feared than the Mongols. Under the leadership of Chinggis (Genghis) Khan, the Mongols established an empire that stretched from Korea to Hungary. The Mongol Yüan dynasty (1280-1367) ruled China for almost a hundred years, and its influence lasted much longer. With the rise of the Manchu Qing (Ch'ing) dynasty in China in 1644, Mongolia fell under Chinese rule and was administered as a Chinese province called Inner and Outer Mongolia and remained under Chinese control until the revolution of 1911. By 1921 Russian Communists became predominant, and in 1924 Mongolia became the second Communist nation in the world—the first in Asia. For centuries Mongolia had been part of the Chinese sphere; from 1924 until the breakup of the Soviet Union beginning in 1989, Mongolia was under Russian dominance. A series of public protests in the capital, Ulaanbaatar (population 600,000), from December 1989 to March 1990, brought the resignation of Mongolia's third Communist leader, Dzhambiyn Batmunkh. Calls for political and economic reform have brought significant changes in government since that time. Until summer 1996, Communists of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party controlled the Great Hura, (parliament), at which time a coalition of democratic parties gained fifty of the seventy-six seats in the unicameral law-making body. The Democratic Union party supports religious freedom, making the situation for the LDS Church more comfortable than under the previous government. Religious freedom is a tenuous matter in many newly independent nations, including Mongolia. Formerly called Outer Mongolia and the People's Republic of Mongolia, it was renamed the Republic of Mongolia in 1992.

Mongolia is approximately the size of Alaska, with a population of 2.3 million. Its population density is the lowest of any nation in the world. Twenty-five percent of the people live in Ulaanbaatar, and another 35 percent live in Mongolia's other urban centers, such as Darkhan and Erdenet. Forty percent of the populous is rural, many of the people remaining seminomadic. According to Culturgrams '96, a publication of the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies at BYU, "about 90 percent of the highly homogeneous population are Mongols," of whom the chief group is the Khalkhas. The Khalkha dialect is the standard language of the Mongols. During the years of Russian dominance the language was written in the Cyrillic alphabet, but in 1991 the parliament voted to restore the traditional script. Although an attempt was made to move back to the old cursive script, which is written vertically, the experiment proved unworkable, and in 1995 the decision was made to return to the Cyrillic alphabet because it was better understood throughout the world.

Before the Communist takeover, most Mongols believed in Tibetan Lamaist Buddhism and Shamanism, [^32] but after 1929 all but one of the hundreds of monasteries were closed, most of the Buddhist priests and nuns having been brutally murdered. Since 1990 there has been a resurgence of Buddhism, with more than one hundred of the monasteries reopened. Many Mongols consider Buddhism the national religion, but a constitutional provision to make it official, proposed in 1991, failed. Since 1990, Mongolia has guaranteed freedom of religion, but assaults on religious liberty continue.

The Church in Mongolia

The spread of democracy and freedom of religion and the growth of free enterprise were preparatory steps in the establishment of the restored gospel in Mongolia. Before the fall of Communism, establishing missionary work was an impossibility. But on September 19, 1992, Elder Monte J. Brough, president of the Asia Area, announced that six missionary couples, "at the invitation of the Mongolian government, will be sent to the country to help improve Mongolia's higher education system." They would go as missionaries with permission to proselyte and hold Church meetings during hours when they were not engaged in teaching, consulting, advising, or otherwise helping with the reconstruction of Mongolia's higher education system. [^33]

In a visit to the Mongolian Embassy in Washington, D.C., groundwork was laid by emeritus professors Paul V. Hyer and Sechin Jagchid (a Mongol by birth) of Brigham Young University for a visit to BYU by the Mongolian Ambassador to the United States. Later, Elder Brough and Elder Merlin R. Lybbert traveled to Mongolia several times to meet with government officials and survey the areas where the Church might be of assistance. Because of the switch from a command economy and a Russian-language-centered education system, the new government faced many challenges. Education officials desired to move higher education toward a Western model; the Church offered to help.

The first six missionary couples were carefully selected. Every individual had talents and training to make a significant contribution. The team leaders were Kenneth H. Beesley and his wife, Donna. Formerly an associate commissioner of education for the Church and president of LDS Business College, Elder Beesley held seminars for the Ministry of Science and Education (MOSE) with universities, a technical university, and several business colleges. He also taught a class in English. Donna taught English classes at the Russian-Mongolian Secondary School No. 3 and tutored students outside class. Richard Harper taught psychology and English and consulted with the vice president of the Academy of Sciences. His wife, Anna, taught English and gave TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language) review sessions. Stanley B. Smith taught English and business classes, and his wife, Marjorie, taught English at Russian-Mongolian Secondary School No. 3. Royce P. Flandro consulted regarding curriculum, faculty evaluation, and distance-learning. His wife, Jane, taught classes on how to start and manage small businesses. C. DuWayne Schmidt, M.D., lectured at the Medical University, rewrote a Mongolian textbook on pulmonary diseases, and donated medical books and journals and some medicines to the Medical University. His wife, Alice, taught English. Gary Carlson taught computer systems and donated a large library of computer books and journals, software, and hardware to the Technical University. His wife, Barbara, taught English classes, contributed a large library of books and teaching materials to the Otgon-Tenger Foreign In the few years since the first Mongolian convert came into the Church in 1993, the Church in Mongolia has grown to around a thousand members. This picture, taken Christmas day 1993, shows a Church meeting in the State Central Library, which had been rented because investigators (there were only 23 members at this time) could not be accommodated in missionary apartments that had previously hosted meetings. (At this writing, September 1997, 42 Mongolians have served or are serving full-time missions for the Church.) (Courtesy Kenneth and Donna Beesley) Language Institute, and established an ESL (English as a second language) library for LDS missionaries. All of these men had formerly been university professors. [^34]

The couples arrived in Ulaanbaatar between September 16, 1992, and February 1993. In August 1993 they were joined by six young elders, fresh from the Missionary Training Center. They were assigned to teach English as a foreign language at various schools and universities. But their greatest contribution was their ability to teach the fundamentals of the restored gospel to the growing number of people, mostly students, who had become acquainted with the couple missionaries and who wanted to learn more about their religious beliefs. [^35]

The first converts asked to be taught. Charlotte Lofgreen, a BYU English professor who was doing research and teaching English in Mongolia, reported their conversions: "Since the missionaries had no scriptures or tracts in Mongolian, and therefore had to learn the language in the country, the teaching of English became an important key to opening the gospel door. Although Elder Stanley Smith taught business, he so impressed his students that they asked him to teach them English. After class one day, Purusuren and Batoolzi [^36] inquired, 'Are you a Christian?' Receiving an affirmative reply, they asked to be taught about Jesus Christ. This was the beginning of the Church in Mongolia. Purusuren [^37] and Batoolzi were baptized in February of 1993." [^38] Three months later, on May 8, Gendenjamts Darrjargal became the first Mongolian woman and the third Mongolian person to be baptized.

The Dedication of Mongolia

On April 15, 1993, Elder Neal A. Maxwell visited Ulaanbaatar and dedicated Mongolia to the preaching of the gospel. He was accompanied by Elder Tai Kwok Yuen, a member of the Asia Area Presidency. Thirty-four people assembled on Zaysan, Monument Hill, overlooking Ulaanbaatar. The day was cold and windy, but the sky and air were clear. After humbly acknowledging God as the "Father of the whole human family," Elder Maxwell sought Heavenly Father's blessings on the "pioneering couples and all those missionaries who will follow." He asked for a blessing on "the new converts" and prayed that they would "be strong as they shape the future of the Church in Mongolia." Elder Maxwell prayed that the Mongolian people could be "happier and more prosperous." "Father," he prayed, "this is a wind-swept land. May it also be the case that the winds of freedom will never cease to blow in Mongolia. Preserve and protect the independence of Mongolia regardless of the moves made on the great checkerboard of the nations." He prayed that Mongolian members would be good citizens of the Church and of the nation. "I dedicate the land of Mongolia and bless its leaders and people, its soil, and its sky—all to the end that the nation may be blessed and that it will so respond to the gospel message so that Thy work may be firmly established here. May Mongolia even be as a beacon light to other nations." [^39]

Continued Growth to 1996

Church meetings were initially held in the apartments of the missionary couples. But when the number grew to thirty-five, they had to move to a larger place. For six months the young branch met in the State Central Library with the assistance of the director, Mr. Otgon; but because of complaints regarding separation of church and state, the missionaries moved the meetings to another facility, the Peace and Friendship House. This government-owned building was very expensive. The rental contract there was not renewed in February 1996, making it necessary for the branch to move to another location. Finding and renting halls for Church services was particularly difficult in Mongolia because 95 percent of the buildings were still owned by the government and thus generally not available because of religious restrictions. The few private facilities that were available, like the government-owned facilities, were extremely expensive to rent. [^40]

By December 1993, 110 members and investigators met together for sacrament meeting. By then two local members were serving as counselors in the branch presidency and a Mongolian sister led the Relief Society. Forty-four Mongolians entered the waters of baptism in 1993. By August 1994 there were 120 Mongolian members of the Church and growth continued steadily.

One of the most important matters for the Church when moving into new nations is to gain legal recognition. This is required so the Church can act as a legal corporation to rent, lease, or buy property and act legally in other transactions. The Church was registered with the Mongolian government in 1994. As has been expedient or required in other countries, legal status was also granted to one of the Church's legal entities, in this case Deseret International Charities. This charitable organization was officially registered in Mongolia in May 1996.

Expansion has not been easy. The Church and individual members have been persecuted, rebuffed by unfavorable newspaper articles, forced out of employment, treated unkindly by other Christian groups, and so on. When young Mongolians join Christian churches, they are often accused of being disloyal to national values. Some Mongolians have a strong concern for the continuation of Mongolian culture and emphasize Buddhism in this context, and others fear dissonance and social chaos through the introduction of other religions, particularly Christianity. This has led to problems for the Church. Mission president Richard Cook and his wife, Mary, described these challenges:

We faced a major roadblock when we opened the city of Darkhan in April [1996]. The city council refused to register the Church with the city and in fact ordered that the work be stopped. In a city council meeting the reason cited was "We have one Christian church in Darkhan. We only have one Buddhist church in Mongolia. We don't need another Christian church in this city." The missionaries stopped their work with investigators for one month in Darkhan. We met with our lawyer in Ulaanbaatar, and he challenged the city council's decision. He said that the fact that the Church was registered in the country gave us the right to practice in Darkhan. We continued our work in Darkhan as a dependent branch of the Selbe Branch in Ulaanbaatar and argued that we are not a "new" church. We have not been challenged. [^41]

Interestingly, even though nationalistic Buddhists created problems for the Church, monks of the Dashchoiliin Monastery were "cooperative and respectful of our purposes and efforts." [^42] Having been persecuted by the Communists, they were aware of the fragile nature of religious freedom. Their belief was that all religions should cooperate to protect religious liberty. In an effort to create and continue good relations, our missionaries taught English to the monks twice a week.

By July 1996 the branch in Ulaanbaatar had been divided into three branches (the Ulaanbaatar, Enkhtaivan, and Selbe Branches), and, as mentioned earlier, small branches had been established in Erdenet and Darkhan. Mongolia had more than six hundred Latter-day Saints. Branch members met separately in rented halls, and two of the branches had local branch presidents. Most of the branch organizations were staffed by Mongols, and nearly all teachers in branches were local. By that time, twenty Mongolian members had been called as missionaries to the United States, Canada, Russia, and Korea, with five more called to serve. Three of that number had been called to serve in their native Mongolia.

Without much fanfare, on July 1, 1995, Richard E. Cook, who was already serving with his wife, Mary, in Ulaanbaatar, began to serve as president of the new Mongolia Ulaanbaatar Mission. They were replaced on July 1, 1996, by Gary E. Cox and his wife, Joyce, who had served there previously. When the Coxes arrived in Mongolia, there were eight missionary couples, six sister missionaries, and eighteen elders serving, a total missionary force of forty. [^43]

Over time the original assignments for couples to assist with the higher education system were expanded. By September 1995 missionaries with other talents had been sent to Mongolia. Among the specialists were accountants (of which President Cook was one) to help upgrade the country's accounting system and librarians to improve the library system. (The Church also donated appropriate books for faculty and student use.) In July 1996 a housing consultant was sent to assist officials of the Ministry of Infrastructure Development in evaluating low-cost methods of providing housing. In June 1995 Welfare Services shipped 289 boxes of math and science books to be distributed to schools throughout Ulaanbaatar. The missionaries helped distribute the books. In addition, young elders (five of the first six elders were Eagle Scouts) conducted workshops for the Boy Scouts organization in Mongolia.

As in many Asian nations, maintaining long-term visas for missionaries was a problem, in spite of the contributions made by the missionaries. Not everyone appreciated what the Church was doing, and some people in high government offices were influenced by groups who were opposed under any conditions to the Church's presence. Mongolian laws also demanded that long-term visa holders have formal letters of invitation from an appropriate individual or a recognized organization. To qualify for long-term visas, applicants had to have a contract to work or perform volunteer service in the country. To fulfill this requirement, LDS missionaries have willingly provided at least sixteen hours of English teaching per week. The Mongolian Higher Education Development Foundation acted as sponsor from the beginning. To extend the relationship between the Church and the Foundation, Elder John H. Groberg of the Asia Area Presidency negotiated a five-year contract in March 1996. The foundation was to "continue to issue letters of invitation to our missionaries. The Church, in turn, has agreed to conduct an annual seminar in Mongolia on an agreed-upon subject and to provide training abroad for selected professionals at BYU—Hawaii or BYU—Provo." [^44] It is expected that the Church will continue to grow steadily in Mongolia for the foreseeable future.

NOTES

"When we did find a suitable building to rent, costs were unreasonably high because our church was considered a 'foreign church.' The management often proved to be uncooperative. Rooms would be locked and unavailable for use, although we had paid for them. Finally, they refused to renew our lease in spite of the sizable income the rent brought their organization each year.

"The Enkhtaivan Branch was renting a movie theater in March 1996. One Sunday the manager of the theater approached our branch president and requested that during the months of May and June the Branch meet elsewhere. With the upcoming election to be held on June 30th, he did not want politicians who would be speaking at the theater to know that he was renting to a Christian group. We complied with his request and moved until after the election.

"The Church is attempting to buy a facility for permanent use by the members. This has been very difficult due to the inexperience of Mongolians with such transactions. All land is owned by the government and leased on a long-term basis by an interested buyer or builder. The major difficulty comes in trying to identify titles to property. There is no [institutionalized] system yet established in the country to identify liabilities against a property or who, in fact, owns the property. At one point we had found a privately owned, partially finished building in an ideal location. We felt that it was at a perfect stage to be finished to the Church's specifications. After weeks of negotiation with the owner, we made an offer. We were advised by our attorneys that before signing a contract we should advertise in the major newspapers, on television and radio to identify any liabilities that may be on the property. This process revealed many problems to a point where proceeding with the purchase would have been disastrous. The safest way to obtain a building is to build, but this is expensive and time-consuming."

---
Notas:
[^1] Willard Call, Diary, in possession of Adelaide W. Call, Spanish Fork, Utah. See Lowell E. Call, "Latter-day Saint Servicemen in the Philippine Islands: A Historical Study of Their Religious Activities and Influences Resulting in the Official Organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the Philippines" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955).
[^2] See Joseph V. Cook et al., comps., A History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the Philippines (n.p., 1965), pp. 2-3.
[^3] See Joseph Fielding Smith, "Report from the Far East Missions," Improvement Era 58 (December 1955): 917.
[^4] Mark E. Petersen to the First Presidency, 6 July 1959, LDS Church Archives.
[^5] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 14-15 May 1960.
[^6] Ibid., 25-28 April 1961.
[^7] Southern Far East Mission Historical Reports, 30 June 1961, LDS Church Archives; cited hereafter as SFEM.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ralph Tolliver, "The Philippines," in Donald E. Hoke, The Church in Asia (Chicago: Moody Press, 1975), pp. 525-26.
[^11] See Spencer J. Palmer et al., "Educational Needs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Asia: Final Report," Church Educational System, October 1972, pp. 83, 87, 90.
[^12] Cook et al., History of the Church, pp. 4-5; see also SFEM by date, particularly the December 31 report each year.
[^13] Joseph V. Cook to Keith E. Garner, 1 September 1965, LDS Church Archives.
[^14] See "3 Stakes formed from 1 in Philippines," Church News, 9 July 1977, p. 13.
[^15] See Missionary Department Annual Report, 1978, LDS Church Archives, p. 9.
[^16] Augusto A. Lim, "The Church in the Philippines," in Mormonism: A Faith for All Cultures, ed. F. LaMond Tullis (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 160.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Cook to Garner, 1 September 1965.
[^19] See "Church Educational System, Overview," unpublished CES report, 1978, p. 39; copy in possession of author.
[^20] See "Conference in the Philippines," Ensign 5 (October 1975): 90-91.
[^21] Hinckley, Journals, 13 August 1975.
[^22] As quoted in Dell Van Orden, "Door to China may be opening," Church News, 7 April 1979, p. 3; and "President Kimball Sees Missions in Communist China in Future," Herald (Provo, Utah), 1 April 1979, p. 24.
[^23] Lynne Hollstein Hansen, "Y students a success in China," Church News, 11 August 1979, p. 10.
[^24] See "Chinese leader visits center," Church News, 12 July 1980, p. 9; "Chinese ambassador visits Utah," Church News, 17 January 1981, p. 5; "Chinese Premier Visits BYU—Hawaii Campus, Polynesian Cultural Center," Ensign 14 (March 1984): 77-78; "Polynesian Cultural Center Hosts Chinese President," Ensign 15 (October 1985): 78. The author participated in hosting Ambassador Li Daoyu in 1996.
[^25] "Elder Nelson is named honorary professor by Chinese medical college," Church News, 29 September 1985, p. 6.
[^26] "Gift to help China rebuild after quake," Church News, 25 February 1989, p. 4; "Church donates Aid for Victims of Quake in China," Ensign 19 (May 1989): 109; and "Donation to help flood victims in China," Church News, 17 August 1991, p. 11.
[^27] See Carri P. Jenkins, "Bridging Barriers," BYU Today 40 (August 1986): 18-22, 25, 34-35.
[^28] The author, who served as director of the Kennedy Center, has firsthand knowledge of this program.
[^29] The same comment in n. 28 applies.
[^30] See note 16; and "China: Two apostles visit, assured that religious freedom exists and people are free to worship as they choose," Church News, 28 January 1989, pp. 3-4.
[^31] As quoted in "Open minds, hearts to people of China," Church News, 16 March 1991, p. 5.
[^32] Shamanism is a religion of northeastern Asia that emphasizes the spiritual and mystical powers of a priest (or priestess) called a Shaman (or Shamaness), who uses magic and trances to communicate with gods, ancestors, deceased family members, and so on.
[^33] See "Six missionary couples to help with Mongolia's higher education," Church News, 19 September 1992, pp. 3-4.
[^34] See Kenneth H. Beesley, "The LDS Church and Higher Education in Mongolia," Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Conference of the International Society, Brigham Young University, 15 August 1994, pp. 33-34.
[^35] See ibid., p. 32.
[^36] Spellings vary depending on the person writing the report. Purusuren is also given as Lamjav Purevsuren, and Batoolzi is also spelled Tsendkhuu Bat-Ulzii.
[^37] Mongolians have a patronymic and a given name. All people are called by their given names.
[^38] Charlotte D. Lofgreen, "Mongolia: The Morning Breaks," Cameo: Latter-day Women in Profile 2 (February 1994): 23-24.
[^39] Neal A. Maxwell, Official Dedicatory Prayer, 15 April 1993, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia; copy in possession of the author. See also "Mongolia dedicated for preaching of the gospel," Church News, 19 June 1993, p. 3.
[^40] Richard E. and Mary N. Cook, "The Challenges of Sharing the Gospel in Countries with a Strong Secular Tradition: Mongolia," p. 7; copy in possession of the author. The Cooks described some of the problems they encountered acquiring property in these words:
[^41] Ibid., p. 6.
[^42] Ibid., pp. 7-8.
[^43] See ibid., p. 2.
[^44] Ibid., p. 5.
