R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE PHILIPPINES 1961-1980

Laying the Foundations

The area conference of the Church held in Manila, Republic of the Philippines, in August 1975 was a miracle to the early converts as well as to the visiting General Authorities of the Church. But one man, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, was perhaps more moved and inspired than anyone else by the crowd of eighteen thousand members and friends. He remembered well his efforts and those of others to legally establish the Church in these islands. Only he and President Robert S. Taylor of the Southern Far East Mission knew the sorrow and sadness of the moment when they returned from a sacred meeting of rededication on the morning of April 28, 1961, and learned that their application for missionary visas had been denied. But they had overcome the obstacles of that time, and five weeks later four missionaries arrived in Manila from Hong Kong. On June 6, 1961, the elders tracted in the area of their newly rented home in Pasay City, a Manila suburb. They succeeded in entering every home they visited. Although there were discouraging times ahead, they had opened LDS missionary work in the Philippines.

Those four elders were not the first Latter-day Saints to teach the restored gospel in the Philippines. They were preceded by a faithful line of LDS servicemen and women, U.S. government employees, and businessmen and their families. The first LDS Maxine Tate, American Red Cross worker, with LDS servicemen on Leyte, Philippines, toward the end of World War II. Sister Tate met and married E. M. "Pete" Grimm following the war. Manila became her principal residence for many years. (Courtesy Maxine Tate Grimm) missionaries preached the gospel in Cortel de Mesic about August 30, 1898. They were Willard Call and George Seaman, members of the Utah artillery batteries that were sent to the Philippines during the Spanish-American War. Apostle John Henry Smith had set them apart as missionaries. [^1]

Between that time and 1944, when numerous LDS servicemen and women were among General Douglas MacArthur's advancing forces, no known members were in the Philippines. Between 1944 and 1946 a number of LDS servicemen's groups functioned in various cities and bases, but as the islands returned to normal and gained their independence from the United States on July 4, 1946, the groups dwindled as quickly as they had come. A few Latter-day Saints, all Americans except Aniceta Fajardo, the first Filipino convert, remained. Most notable among the permanent residents was Maxine Tate Grimm.

From 1947 until 1951 few meetings were held. But because of the military buildup caused by the Korean War, LDS servicemen's groups again formed in 1951, and by February 13, 1953, Vinal G. Mauss, who as president of the Japanese Mission had responsibility for servicemen in all of Asia, found it advisable to organize the Luzon Servicemen's District. He called Major L. B. Davis as its first president. The new district consisted of groups at Manila—Sangley Point, Subic Bay, and Clark Air Force Base. The Clark Group was the largest and had the most auxiliaries, including the first Relief Society in the Philippines. [^2]

The servicemen's groups remained under the Japanese (Far East) Mission until August 1955, when President Joseph Fielding Smith organized the Southern Far East Mission and dedicated the Philippines for the preaching of the gospel. This event took place between sessions of a servicemen's conference on Sunday, August 21, 1955, at a beautiful grove in Clark Air Force Base. [^3] From then until 1961, when missionary work officially began, President H. Grant Heaton and then President Robert S. Taylor made regular visits to Luzon to hold conferences, make changes in district leadership, and register the Church with the government so that missionary work could begin. In June 1959 Elder Mark E. Petersen visited the Philippines for four days and concluded that missionary work could be done there. He recommended that the legal department in Salt Lake City "be requested to expedite papers for seeking registration of our Church in the Philippines." [^4] Elder Gordon B. Hinckley entered the picture in May 1960, when he made his first visit to the Philippines. During this visit he became convinced that the Philippines could be as fruitful as many other fields. He recognized the advantage of having many LDS servicemen and their families there to support the elders when they arrived. [^5]

Between May 1960 and April 1961, President Taylor arranged for legal recognition of the Church by the government and applied for visas for missionaries. On April 25, 1961, Elder Hinckley and President Taylor visited government offices and endured the discomforts of sultry air and sultry treatment from indifferent bureaucrats. It was necessary for Elder Hinckley and President Taylor to convince the officials that the elders and sisters would not be a burden on the economy or a problem for the government. On the twenty-seventh, President Taylor visited the Immigration Office and learned that the commissioners had recommended to their superiors that the missionaries be granted visas. Thus encouraged, President Taylor and Elder Hinckley arranged to hold a sunrise service the next morning at the Fort McKinley War Memorial Cemetery (now called the American War Memorial Cemetery).

Servicemen and their families, local American residents such as E. M. "Pete" and Maxine Grimm and one Filipino Saint gathered on the steps of the cemetery chapel. When Elder Hinckley told the approximately one hundred people that the Philippines had been dedicated six years before by President Smith, they were greatly surprised. [^6] In that calm and beautiful setting, surrounded by the graves of thousands of American war dead, the group heard talks by Maxine Grimm, who outlined the history of Latter-day Saints in the Philippines since 1944, and by David Lagman, the first male Filipino to join the Church and the first Filipino to hold the office of an elder. Elder Hinckley then spoke: "This is an occasion you will never forget. What we begin here will affect the lives of thousands and thousands of people in this island republic, and its effects will go on from generation to generation for great and everlasting good." [^7] Perhaps even Elder Hinckley did not realize the magnitude of the prophecy he was giving.

In his prayer of rededication, Elder Hinckley touched on many important things. One paragraph stands out as particularly prophetic and meaningful. He prayed:

We invoke Thy blessings upon the people of this land, that they shall be friendly and hospitable, and kind and gracious to those who shall come here, and that many, yea, Lord, we pray that there shall be many thousands The American War Memorial Cemetery is by its nature solemn and sacred ground. Thousands of American soldiers lie at eternal rest here. To Latter-day Saints it is additionally sacred because missionary work in the Philippines commenced here with a prayer of rededication offered by Elder Gordon B. Hinckley on 28 April 1961. Elder Hinckley and President Robert S. Taylor of the Southern Far East Mission are in the middle of the first standing row. Others include Maxine Tate Grimm (at organ, right); Ping Bachelor (standing at far left), the first person baptized after missionary work commenced; and David Lagman, the only Filipino member at the meeting. (Photo by author) who shall receive this message and be blessed thereby. Wilt Thou bless them with receptive minds and understanding hearts, and with faith to receive, and with courage to live the principles of the Gospel, and with a desire to share with others the blessings which they shall receive. We pray that there shall be many men, faithful, good, virtuous, true men who shall join the Church and who shall accept and grow in leadership, that Thy work here shall be handled largely by local brethren, under the direction of those who hold the keys in this day and time, according to the law and order of Thy Church. [^8]

Every blessing Elder Hinckley prayed for had been fulfilled in less than twenty years and has continued to expand since that time.

As mentioned before, later that day Elder Hinckley and President Taylor received word from the Office of Foreign Affairs that the missionary visas that they had been led to believe would be approved had been turned down. Fortunately, they appealed the decision and convinced the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who had ultimate jurisdiction in the matter, that the missionaries should be allowed in the country. By June the way was clear for missionaries to begin proselyting.

On June 5, 1961, President Taylor accompanied four elders—Raymond L. Goodson, Nester O. Ledesma, Kent C. Lowe, and Harry J. Murray—to Manila. The following day Taylor rented a large house, one that was big enough for small Church services, and the elders began preaching the gospel. [^9]

THE PHILIPPINES, A UNIQUE ASIAN MISSION FIELD

Considering the amazing success of the Church in the Philippines (approximately 20,000 members by 1975 and 370,000 by 1996), one wonders why the Church is doing so well there in comparison with Thailand, Japan, or areas in China. The explanation lies almost entirely in the historical development of the Philippines. Ralph Tolliver, a Protestant missionary to the Philippines, presents the fundamental historical ingredients by means of an effective analogy:

The Philippines are like an onion. The thin outside skin of the onion is American: the first things that impress the visitor to Manila are the Stars and Stripes that flew over the Philippines for forty-eight years, from 1898 to 1946 (interrupted by four years of Japanese occupation, from 1942-1945).

Peel off the outside skin of the onion and the next layer is Spanish. He who delves into life in the Philippines soon discovers that its religion, music, social customs, and commercial systems of telling time, counting money, and weighing vegetables all come from . . . Spain's rule in the Philippines [1565-1898], the most important is the nominal Catholicism, which claims almost 85 percent of the people still today.

Then peel off the Spanish layer and you come to the hard and durable core of Filipino life, which is Malayo-Indonesian. Proverbs and values, the family system, and personal relationships—the real game of life—is played by ancient tribal rules.

But this make-believe onion is still an organic unit, for "Juan de la Cruz" (the Filipino "Joe Doe") functions during office hours as an American, goes to mass on Sunday morning like a Spaniard, and rules his home like a traditional Filipino. He is a mixture of East and West, old and new. Sometimes the conflict disturbs him, but most of the time he does not stop to think about the disparate influences which mold his life. [^10]

Elements of all parts of this complex—American, Spanish, and Filipino—have combined to help the LDS Church succeed in the Philippines. Americans are generally respected and welcome there. They not only provided fair and equitable government from 1898 until 1946, but they also liberated the islands at the end of World War II. To the present, America is the Philippines' number-one trading partner, even though inequities there have recently caused problems. But more important than the legacy of efficient colonial government and U.S. trade are two other remnants of the colonial era: a feeling for democracy and the adoption of the English language.

When the Republic of the Philippines was created, its founders modeled its constitution on that of the United States. Along with other rights, freedom of religion was granted to the people. Although some observers have seen what they consider an overwhelming Roman Catholic influence in government—all of the presidents of the Philippines except the present leader have been Catholic—the existence of more than 350 different denominations is evidence that religious freedom exists. It is true that American democracy has not been duplicated there, but local inhabitants and foreigners are extended most liberties that Americans enjoy.

Estimates vary regarding the number of languages that are spoken in the Philippines. There are at least eighty-seven. The great majority of the people use one of four native languages: Tagalog, which is the basis for Filipino (the national language), Ilocano, Hiligaynon (Ilonggo), and Cebuano. But English is the real lingua franca of the nation. It is used in government, business, education, and communications. Half of Manila's newspapers are in English. More than half the population understands English, making the Philippines the third-largest English-speaking country in the world. The implications for missionary work are obvious.

The most important carryover from the Spanish era for LDS missionary work is Christianity. Before the Spanish conquest the Filipino people were generally animists. In 1565, when the Spanish conquest began, only the southwestern tip of Mindanao had been converted to Islam. The rule of the Roman Catholic Church had many negative features, but the people in general did become nominally Christian. It is much easier to convert an English-speaking Christian to the restored gospel than, for example, a Chinese-speaking Buddhist or Daoist.

The religious makeup of the nation is 83 percent Roman Catholic, 9 percent Protestant (Protestant missionary work began in 1898 when the United States took control of the islands), 5 percent Muslim, and 3 percent other (Chinese faiths, animism, and so forth). Converts come into the Church in almost these same proportions, particularly from Catholicism and Protestantism.

The elements that are carried over from the pre-Spanish era, the native Filipino cultural traits, are many. Among those that have contributed to LDS success is the spirit of bayanihan, of working together. It is a willingness to extend one's heart to strangers as well as friends. This trait has helped the missionaries in their tracting. Another quality not to be overlooked is the importance of the family. All Asian peoples place high value on the family unit and its role in society. But in contrast to the Confucian areas (China, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam), where importance is placed on rigid familial propriety, in the Philippines the emphasis is on family life and solidarity. Hence the Church's position on families has met with considerable approval. The membership of the Church in the Philippines is closer to the "whole family" ideal than in any other part of Asia. At the end of the first decade of missionary work, more than 35 percent of all married members had mates who belonged to the Church, and almost 50 percent had brothers and sisters who were members. [^11] This trend appears to have continued.

Another important contributor to the success of the Church, especially during the early years of the mission, was the influence and leadership of the LDS servicemen. Whereas in Taiwan the Chinese language caused problems and necessitated the organization of a separate English-speaking branch, in the Philippines the servicemen and their families were able to communicate with the local people, and they developed strong bonds of fellowship and love. In Manila near Clark Air Force Base and Subic Bay Naval Station there was no period of struggle while the Filipinos learned from the missionaries how to conduct meetings and organize the Church. Filipino leaders had the advantage of older role models to emulate, rather than youthful, inexperienced missionaries.

THE EARLY YEARS OF THE MISSION

When the first four elders began work in June 1961, President Taylor made a significant administrative change. The Luzon Servicemen's District became the Luzon District, and the servicemen's groups were made regular branches. Thus, President Taylor created a normal ecclesiastical organization from the beginning. Theon Laney served as the first district president. He was followed by several other servicemen from Clark Air Force Base. In February 1964 President Jay A. Quealy Jr. reorganized the district presidency and called Harvey D. Brown as president. Brown, a U.S. government employee, was the first district president to reside in Manila. The Church was growing rapidly in the Manila area and needed closer supervision.

Though the missionaries did not meet with immediate success when they began teaching in earnest, they did make steady progress. By the end of 1961 they had baptized eight people. The first two converts were Jose Gutierrez Sr. and Lino Brocka. After that the work moved more rapidly ahead. "At the end of 1962," wrote district president Joseph V. Cook, "there were 8 missionaries, and 47 baptisms were recorded for the year [6 converts per missionary]. In [October] 1962, President Jay A. Quealy, Jr., became president of the Southern Far East Mission, and under his capable leadership the work continued to spread, with 232 baptisms in 1963 by 22 missionaries [10.5 converts per missionary]. In 1964 there were 263 baptisms with a total of 32 missionaries by the end of the year [8.2 converts per missionary]. As of May this year (1965) there were 42 missionaries and 115 baptisms were performed in the first four months of the year, making a total of 663 since the work began." [^12] Most of these baptisms were performed in the small swimming pool at the home of E. M. and Maxine Grimm. Sister Grimm was a mainstay of the Church and a support to the missionaries from the beginning. In September 1965 President Cook shared his excitement about the work in the Philippines with the new mission president, Keith E. Garner. Cook wrote: "I feel there is great room for growth and expansion. The Church has just begun to grow here, and we are going to have to make some very rapid adjustments to keep up with the rapid growth that is going to take place here in the Philippine Islands." [^13]

Rapid adjustments were necessary. In 1966 Elder Hinckley recommended to the Council of the First Presidency and the Twelve that the Philippines become a separate mission. A year later, on June 28, 1967, Paul S. Rose became the first president of the newly created Philippines Mission. By the end of that year there were 3,193 members in the mission, 631 of whom had been converted that year. During the next three years, President Rose organized twenty-five new branches and groups, supervised the expansion of the missionary force from 100 to more than 150, and saw nearly 3,000 new converts come into the Church.

During President DeWitt C. Smith's era of mission leadership (1970 to 1973), the Church in the Philippines expanded from 6,400 to almost 13,000 members. Before his release as mission president, he helped Elder Ezra Taft Benson organize the Manila Philippines Stake on May 20, 1973, with Augusto A. Lim installed as president. What had taken many decades elsewhere to accomplish in growth and development of local leadership, the Filipino Saints had done in twelve busy years. The progress of the Church continued, and by 1979 membership was over 30,000, divided among three stakes in Metro Manila and three missions. With its nearly four million people (as of 1979) living in a sprawling area, Church leaders soon found it necessary to divide the original stake into three. (At that time a high percentage of members, probably more than 50 percent, lived in metro Manila.) This was done on May 29, 1977. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley called President Lim to become president of the new Quezon City Philippines Stake. Angel S. Pedroche, Lim's first counselor, became president of the Manila Philippines Stake, and Ruben M. Lacanienta, second counselor to President Lim, became president of the Makati Philippines Stake. The three stake presidents were among the most experienced leaders of the Church in the Philippines. All three men had joined the Church by 1964. [^14] By 1979 there were about twenty wards and branches in the three stakes.

Expansion outside Manila and the Island of Luzon began when President Garner sent Elders Paul Wright and Thomas Pierce to Cebu City, in the Visayas Islands in the central Philippines. By 1972 there were thirteen groups and branches in that region. By the same time there were also ten thriving branches and groups in Mindanao. Two years later the First Presidency called Carl D. Jones, who had been serving for a year as president of the entire mission, to open the new Philippines Cebu City Mission. Progress was so rapid, however, that only three years later the First Presidency called Layton B. Jones to preside over the Philippines Davao Mission, which was created on July 1, 1977. The three Philippines missions were extremely productive, laying the foundation for the greater growth of the 1980s and 1990s. In 1978 the 456 missionaries baptized 3,805 converts, 8.34 per missionary. [^15]

Mission presidents had difficulty directing the affairs of the large number of missionaries before the Cebu and Davao missions were organized; they also had an almost unmanageable amounts of territory to cover. The distance from northern Luzon to southern Mindanao is approximately 1,150 miles. Roads were poor by European or American standards, and travel by air was generally not so convenient as in more developed nations. Another reason to create new missions was the large population (44 or 45 million in 1979).

CHURCH PROPERTIES AND OTHER PROBLEMS

Rapid Church growth fostered an ongoing feeling of excitement. But growth also had a costly side, and in the Philippines annual incomes were and are generally low. In 1975 President Augusto A. Lim and his associates estimated "the average monthly income of a Latter-day Saint family in the Philippines to be about $60.00 (U.S.)." [^16] In President Lim's words, "Probably less than 5 percent of the members come from either the upper or middle classes. The majority are from the working class, from the ordinary people of the country, and, in general, they are rather poor." [^17] This shortage of funds created problems with building projects, maintenance, ward and branch budgets, individual subscriptions to Church magazines, and purchases of books, manuals, and teaching materials. Relatively speaking, Church expenses (aside from tithing) take a much greater percentage of the average Filipino's salary than the cost of similar requirements (family home evening manual, priesthood manual, lesson manuals, and so on) in the United States.

One wonders how the Church operated in a country where 65 percent of the average family income went for food, 25 percent went for housing, and only 10 percent was left for everything else—transportation, clothing, tithing, recreation, Church budget, building fund, temple fund, fast offerings, books, manuals, and other things. The new financial system based only on tithing, fast offerings, and missionary support (as decided upon by the members) that was introduced in the 1980s greatly benefited the average Filipino family.

The great disparity between the wealth of the Saints in America and the poverty of those in the Philippines has been most evident in the area of physical facilities. The story of the Makati chapel illustrates this point. The first LDS chapel constructed in the Philippines was built in the wealthy Makati subcity of Manila. The property was acquired by President Quealy after much searching by President Taylor, Elder Hinckley, and other local leaders. Mr. E. M. Grimm, then a nonmember but a solid friend of the Church, used his considerable influence to obtain the Makati land. Through the efforts of six local labor missionaries, combined with the efforts of local members and servicemen and their families who donated thousands of hours, the building was constructed between September 1964 and October 1966. Elder Hinckley dedicated the chapel in October 1966. The The Buendia chapel in Makati, Metro Manila, was the first LDS meetinghouse constructed in the Philippines. It was dedicated 21 October 1966. Through the years it has played a major role in the development of the Church: it was the first Philippine stake center and had the first family history center in the Philippines. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) Makati chapel (usually referred to as the Buendia meetinghouse) stands today as a beautiful monument to the Church and is an outstanding example of LDS architecture. But the chapel's beauty and functional utility notwithstanding, it has taught local leaders and administrators in Salt Lake City many lessons. One was that even though Church leaders wanted to show the Filipino Saints they were equals with members elsewhere in the world and demonstrated this fact by building a large air-conditioned chapel, the local Saints could not afford to pay the electricity bill to run the air-conditioning system (approximately U.S. $500 to $1,000 per month). Moreover, they were not accustomed to air conditioning and found it too cold. In the 1980s the Church Building Committee approved the construction of much less expensive chapels that have louvered windows to allow the breezes to blow through.

While the Makati chapel was under construction, all of the branches were encouraged to donate hours of work on the building. This chapel interior is typical of many in the Philippines. Over the years the Church has turned more and more frequently to the use of native materials in the construction of more numerous but smaller chapels. This is especially true in the more rural parts of the country. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) One branch, Quezon City, which was supposed to share in the use of the chapel, failed to support the effort enthusiastically. When district president Cook asked the branch leaders what the problem was, he learned that the Quezon City members did not want to attend meetings in Makati. It had been necessary, in order to justify the building to the Salt Lake City office, to state that the new building would be used by both the Manila and Quezon City Branches. President Cook explained the reasons for the Quezon City members' lack of support: "If Quezon City Branch were to meet in the new chapel, this would mean almost all of them would have to travel by public transportation, since there is little private transportation in the branch. The fare from Quezon City to Buendia is 20 centavos per person. This means that for one person to go to church, both in the morning and evening, would cost 80 centavos. Some families, where there are six and seven members in the family [the average number of children per family in the Philippines was 7.7], find this to be as much money as the father makes in one day and almost two days. So it is easy to see why they are concerned about this." [^18]

The problem was worked out so that the Quezon City Saints would not have to spend so much money on travel, but the lesson was there all the same. Even before the consolidated meeting schedule was introduced Churchwide in the early 1980s, in most branches and wards in the Philippines, leaders held as many meetings as possible on Sundays to reduce spending for transportation.

During the early years of the Church in the Philippines, many members were new in the Church and lacked leadership training and experience. According to the Asian Educational Resources Project in 1972, 81 percent of the members had been in the Church four years or fewer. This situation has improved statistically since then, but great challenges in the areas of teaching and training remain.

Although the high percentage of English speakers has been a great advantage, many members had only marginal facility in English. President Lim estimated in 1975 that only 25 percent of the Saints used English effectively. This meant that 75 percent of the members were really not available for important leadership positions in the Church. It also pointed to the need to begin teaching the gospel in the languages of the Filipino people.

The status of women is much higher in the Philippines than in other parts of Asia. Women are held in high esteem. In contrast to those in other Asian nations, Filipino women are often quite independent. The mother frequently dominates the family, creating what sociologists call a quasi-matriarchal society. In 1972 there were more females than males in the Church in the Philippines: 59 percent female, 41 percent male. Though not entirely bad, this shortage of male members occasionally led to a lack of priesthood leadership. Since 1970, however, the missionaries have concentrated on bringing whole families into the Church. As a result, the numbers of male and female members are now nearly equal.

MISSIONARY WORK

In the early 1960s, when the missionaries in Hong Kong and Taiwan were struggling to learn the new six-lesson uniform proselyting plan, the elders in the Philippines were adapting easily to the new system. From the beginning the Philippines missionaries adopted proselyting methods that were similar to those used in the English language areas of the world. They tracted regularly and encouraged local members to provide them with names of friends and relatives who might be interested in the gospel message. It was not necessary to create new written materials, nor to spend years waiting for the scriptures to be put into a language the investigators and members could easily understand.

While the Church was still young in the Philippines, President Cook arranged for Elders Catalino Brocka and Emiliano Antonio Jr. to receive calls from the prophet to serve as full-time missionaries in Hawaii. They departed from Manila on February 28, 1965. During the same month President Quealy organized the first elders quorum in the Southern Far East Mission in the Manila area. This quorum provided partial monetary support for the two missionaries.

In January 1966 four additional Filipinos received calls to serve missions. Elder Moises Mabunga Jr. and Rodolfo Santos of the Quezon City Branch, Sister Rufina Salangad of the San Fernando Branch, and Sister Virginia Calica of the Manila Branch were called to serve in the Philippines Zone of the Southern Far East Mission. The two sister missionaries were the first Filipino women to serve full-time missions. These local missionaries were the first of thousands of Filipinos to serve missions in their home country. During the 1970s the number grew steadily.

As new techniques of attracting interest in the gospel were created elsewhere in the world, the missionaries adopted most of these methods to the Philippines. For example, during the 1970s the missionaries used media presentations such as movies, film-strips, flip-charts, and flannel boards. During the mid-1970s President Raymond L. Goodson spearheaded the use of displays at fairs and other public occasions. Over the years such approaches have become common throughout the Philippines.

CHURCH EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM EFFORTS

When the members of the Asian Educational Resources Project team visited the Philippines in 1972, they learned that the Filipino Saints, like their fellow countrymen, had a great desire for education. Literacy was high in the Philippines, between 65 and 75 percent at that time (and estimated to be 90 percent in 1990)—higher than literacy rates in any other nation of Southeast Asia. But unemployment was also high (about 20 percent), and many Filipino Saints desired to improve themselves through technical and vocational training.

The Philippines had and continues to have an overabundance of college-educated people in proportion to the number of available jobs. Within the Church, however, the members lacked access to educational opportunities. They also lacked reading materials for Church use. The AERP team recommended that funds be allocated for chapel libraries and other kinds of educational assistance. However, because money was not then available for new schools and scholarship programs, CES administrators chose instead to emphasize religious education.

In July 1972 Stephen K. Iba, a former missionary to the Philippines, and his family arrived in Manila to initiate the seminary and institute programs of the Church Educational System. He introduced the home-study Book of Mormon program to 240 students. By 1978 the program had expanded to an enrollment of 1,210 home-study seminary students and 1,404 individual institute students. In 1974 Brother Iba returned to Brigham Young University for graduate studies and was replaced by Senen J. Pineda, whom Iba had hired shortly after arriving in the Philippines. Incidentally, Brother Iba returned to Manila as mission president in July 1977. [^19]

THE FIRST PHILIPPINES AREA CONFERENCE

On August 11 and 12, 1975, President Spencer W. Kimball and a dozen other General Authorities met with the Philippine Saints in one of the most successful of all area conferences. At that time there were slightly fewer than twenty thousand Latter-day Saints in the country, but more than eighteen thousand people filled the large Araneta Coliseum in Manila—the equivalent of 90 percent of the membership in the islands. Many of those in attendance were friends and investigators of the Church. Saints from all over the country had traveled long and far to be at the special gathering.

The cultural program given by the local Saints was colorful and representative of the traditions of the people from various parts of the country. In a mixture of Spanish and local dance traditions mingled with elements of modern music, the Saints performed beautifully in song and dance.

Of greater importance to the members was what the Church leaders brought to them. The talks, prayers, and musical numbers helped strengthen many testimonies. The Philippine members also warmly received the announcement of the forthcoming Tokyo Temple, not knowing that shortly after its dedication in October 1980 they would hear a similar announcement regarding their own temple in Manila. Although the cost of traveling to Japan from the Philippines to do temple work was expensive, it would be much less costly than going to Hawaii or the U.S. mainland. [^20]

On Wednesday, August 13, 1975, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, accompanied by President Kimball and the entire party of visiting leaders and their spouses, visited the American War Memorial Cemetery in Fort Bonifacio, Manila. There, in the sacred place In 1975 and again in 1980, President Spencer W. Kimball met with Philippines President Ferdinand Marcos. They are accompanied by David M. Kennedy, special representative of the First Presidency. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) where he had opened the work only fourteen years before, Elder Hinckley spoke of what he later called the "miracle of Manila." He marveled at how much things had changed and at the contrast between his poor treatment from the lazy bureaucrats in April 1961 and the hospitable welcome President Kimball received from President Ferdinand E. Marcos at the presidential palace. They had breakfast together. All the visitors received warm treatment from the press, government agencies, and from high-ranking dignitaries. In his journal Elder Hinckley wrote: "I offered a prayer of thanksgiving to the Lord, expressing gratitude for the marvelous manner in which he had blessed us and brought a fulfillment of the prayer offered 14 years earlier. I expressed appreciation for the missionaries, for government officials who let them come, for the response of the people, for the marvelous harvest of thousands of souls, for the establishment of the firm basis of the Church in the Philippines. I spoke with gratitude of the sacrifice of the Savior of the World that we might have eternal life." [^21]

337NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] "Four new areas will be created Aug. 15, bringing total to 17," Church News, 25 April 1987, p. 3.
[^2] "Jubilance at Asian temple ceremonies," Church News, 4 September 1982, pp. 3, 14.
[^3] See "Thousands attend temple open houses," Church News, 30 September 1984, p. 4.
[^4] Other General Authorities present were Elder William Grant Bangerter of the First Quorum of the Seventy, who was Executive Director of the Church Temple Department; the presidency of the Asia Area, Elders William R. Bradford, Jack H Goaslind Jr., and Robert B. Harbertson, all of the First Quorum of the Seventy; and Bishop H. Burke Peterson of the Presiding Bishopric. See Dell Van Orden, "Emotional rites note 'miracle of Philippines,'" Church News, 7 October 1984, p. 3.
[^5] "Temple brings Philippines all blessings," Church News, 30 September 1984, pp. 5, 10. This article contains a complete text of the dedicatory prayer.
[^6] Rabai B. Osumo, "The Church in the Philippines," Tambuli 15 (April 1991): Dateline Philippines, 12. This article is the most complete published to date regarding the history of the Church in the Philippines.
[^7] Roland P. Arcansalin, interview by the author, Manila, Philippines, 16 September 1995, tape recording.
[^8] Ben B. Banks, interview by the author, Manila, Philippines, 16 September 1995, tape recording; and Arcansalin interview.
[^9] Dell Van Orden, "Emotional rites note 'miracle of the Philippines,'" Church News, 7 October 1984, p. 10.
[^10] Arcansalin interview.
[^11] See Miles T. Tuason, "From 17 La Salle to Temple Drive: 10 Years of the MTC," Tambuli 17 (October 1993): Dateline Philippines, 1-2.
[^12] See "New Missionary Training Center Dedicated," Tambuli 15 (November 1992): Dateline Philippines, 3-4.
[^13] See Miles T. Tuason, "MTC Couples District Created," Tambuli 17 (March 1994): Dateline Philippines, 3.
[^14] Marion D. Hanks Oral History, interviews by Gordon Irving, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1983, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 32-33.
[^15] See S. Calvert, "Our Trip to the Temple," Tambuli 18 (February 1994): Dateline Philippines, 3.
[^16] See "Gospel Flourishes in the Refugee Camp," Tambuli 11 (March 1988): Dateline Philippines, 6.
[^17] Augusto A. Lim, interview by the author, Manila, Philippines, 16 September 1995, tape recording.
[^18] Warner Woodworth, "Third World Strategies Toward Zion," Sunstone 14 (October 1990): 18. In The Mormons' War on Poverty (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1993), Garth Mangum and Bruce Blumell suggest that according to their personal observations "the poverty rate among LDS Filipinos is about 10 percent above the national average" (p. 216). They go on as follows: "Nearly 60 percent of Filipinos are rural and, on average, experience more poverty than their urban counterparts. Because of LDS proselyting practices, 60 percent of LDS Filipinos are urban, heightening the contrast between LDS members and urban Filipinos. Approximately 100,000 adult Mormons are in the labor market, most already employed or self-employed; but the LDS unemployment rate, 15 percent in the late 1980s, was also above the national average. Compared to 16 percent of all urban Filipinos, close to half of the Mormons there are self-employed, which primarily means home manufacture, street huckstering, and operating independent 'jeepneys,' combination bus/taxis. Housing quality reflects those income and employment handicaps."
[^19] Arcansalin interview.
[^20] See James O. Mason, "The History of the Welfare Service Missionary Program," 12 August 1979 address at the Missionary Training Center, Provo, Utah, typescript, pp. 9, 11-12.
[^21] Mary Ellen Edmunds et al., "International Health and the Church," The Journal of Collegium Aesculapium 1 (December 1983): 10.
