R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE PHILIPPINES 1981-1996

A Practical Church

By 1996 Church membership in the Philippines had grown to nearly 370,000. There were forty-six stakes, ninety districts, and thirteen missions with just over one thousand wards and branches. Almost all leadership positions were held by Filipinos. One General Authority and three Area Authorities were Filipinos. A beautiful temple stood as a loved and heavily used symbol of the maturity of the Filipino Saints. Across the street and nearby, in what had become a complex of Church buildings, was the large Manila Philippines Area Church Administration Office, the Philippines Missionary Training Center, and housing (a two-story building with 150 beds) for temple patrons. Throughout the country chapels dotted the landscape. Many of those built most recently were simple and small, following the architectural preferences and needs of the Philippines and located in close proximity to the members. Some chapels were large, similar in appearance to LDS chapels in North America. Seminary classes were usually held in chapels, but the Church Educational System had also constructed a number of institute buildings near institutions of higher learning in different parts of the country. In short, the human and physical presence of the Church in the Philippines was substantial.

Now part of a Church complex consisting of the temple, a missionary training center, apartments for the temple presidency and temple missionaries, and patron housing, the Area Administration Building houses the Philippines/Micronesia Area Presidency, the director of temporal affairs for this area and the Asia Area, a welfare services office, translation services, and so on. (Photo by author)

The Church's greatest challenges in this land are not with outside forces and influences or intolerant governments and religions. Rather, poverty among members and all that relates to it is the greatest problem. Natural disasters are another serious difficulty, for the Philippines has the highest rate of natural disasters of any country in the world. But these challenges notwithstanding, the Church has moved forward. If one part of the restored gospel stands out in the Philippines it is the practicality of the faith. The Church has done much to help its members rise above their poverty and temporal difficulties.

A NEW ADMINISTRATIVE AREA

Until 1987 supervision of the Church in the Philippines was provided from Hong Kong and Tokyo. But in April 1987 the First Presidency announced the creation of the Philippines/Micronesia Area. [^1] It consisted of thirty-two stakes, twenty-two districts, and six missions, five of which were in the Philippines. A short time later the first Area Presidency was announced, consisting of Elders George I. Cannon, George R. Hill III, and Douglas J. Martin. Since then a number of the Seventy have been assigned to serve in this presidency. At this writing (summer 1996) the presidency is changing from Elders Ben B. Banks as president, with Elders Augusto A. Lim and Kenneth Johnson as counselors, to Elder Kenneth Johnson as president and Sheldon F. Child and Quentin L. Cook as counselors. Elder Lim, who was called as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy in June 1992 (a month before being released as mission president), was the first Filipino to be called as a General Authority. His call was unusual, an experiment, because he was asked to return to his regular profession as an attorney but to serve as a General Authority on weekends and as necessary. This pilot program led to the creation of Area Authorities. Their service is limited to the areas of the Church in which they reside, much like Elder Lim's call and authority. A week or two before Elder Lim's release from the Area Presidency, the First Presidency announced his call as president of the Philippines Manila Temple. He and his wife, Myrna, who was Elder Augusto A. Lim, the first General Authority from the Philippines, was called to the Second Quorum of the Seventy in June 1992, a few weeks before his release as president of the Philippines Naga Mission. After his baptism in 1964, Elder Lim was almost immediately placed in leadership positions. He was the first stake president in the Philippines, then served as a Regional Representative, a mission president's counselor, and in other callings. In 1996 he and his wife, Myrna, were called to preside over the Manila Temple. (Courtesy LDS Church) called as temple matron, were the first Filipinos to preside in that temple.

The creation of the Area Presidency has brought Church administration in the Philippines closer to the people, the challenges, and the opportunities of the country. The men serving in this presidency have been very busy. Since 1987 they have organized fifteen stakes (and then reorganized one stake as a district) and sixty-eight districts, reorganized numerous stakes and districts, supervised the creation of seven missions, and recommended the creation or reorganization of many wards and branches. They have also supervised public affairs, welfare, physical facilities (almost seven hundred meeting places are owned or rented for the wards and branches), seminary and institute, and so on. Chapel construction is constant. Leading the affairs of the Church in the Philippines during the great growth years has been a major task.

By the early 1990s the Philippines were divided into more than a dozen regions supervised by eight Regional Representatives until the creation of Area Authorities on August 15, 1995. Ambrosio C. Collado (attorney), Ruben G. Gapiz (director of the Church Welfare Services area office), and Remus G. Villarete (supervisor of the Church's area office in Cebu) were called to serve in this new position. All three were former Regional Representatives, stake presidents, and bishops; and Gapiz and Villarete have also served as mission presidents.

THE MANILA PHILIPPINES TEMPLE

At general conference in Salt Lake City on April 1, 1981, the First Presidency announced the Manila temple. A year earlier President Spencer W. Kimball had expressed his hope and the desire of Church leaders to provide temples in reasonable proximity to Church members worldwide. On August 25, 1982, President Gordon B. Hinckley, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, presided over the ground-breaking ceremony on a hilltop in the Greenmeadows subdivision in Quezon City, metro Manila. A typhoon threatened, but through the prayers of members and missionaries the elements were tempered and the meeting went forward. More than two thousand members and friends from all over the islands, having traveled by boat, airplane, train and bus, crowded the temple site. "President Hinckley said the completion of the temple will bring the full Church program to this country. Members no longer have to think about going to Salt Lake City, Hawaii, Tokyo, or California. 'Now, right here in Manila, on this beautiful site, we will shortly have a sacred House of the Lord.'" Continuing, President Hinckley said: "We do something that has never been done in the history of this nation. That which we do today is deep and wonderful, remarkable, and a significant and historic thing." And Elder Marion D. Hanks, added, "We now have the opportunity of preparing a home where we may through our faith grow up unto the Lord." [^2]

Construction of the Manila Temple took longer than planned because it was necessary to enlarge some areas even before the building was completed. Here, construction supervisor Wayne Tuttle reviews blueprints with his wife, Ruth. (Photo by author)

Because of changes in design (the Church was growing so rapidly that enlargements were needed even before the temple was completed), late arrival of imported materials, and other delays, construction of the temple did not move forward as rapidly as was planned. Nevertheless, by July 1984, the Church announced the call of W. Garth Andrus as temple president and his wife, Eloise, as matron. At the same time, the First Presidency announced the open house and dedication to take place on September 3 through 15 and September 25 through 27, respectively.

Temple open houses offer the opportunity to bring nonmember friends and dignitaries closer to the most meaningful parts of the restored gospel. In Manila 26,522 individuals toured the beautiful new facility. In the Philippines, where getting acquainted with influential people is hard for missionaries to do, the temple helped break down the barriers. More than seventeen thousand tracts and four thousand copies of the Book of Mormon were placed with visitors during the open house. [^3]

"The miracle of the Philippines," as President Hinckley referred to the wonderful growth of the Church there, became the theme of the dedicatory services. This expression was not an exaggeration. Between the announcement of the temple in 1981 and its dedication in 1984, membership had grown from almost 60,000 to nearly 100,000 members. (By the end of 1985, there were 115,656 members in the Philippines.) President Hinckley had been involved from the beginning in the Philippines and was thrilled with what had happened there.

President Hinckley was accompanied by Elders Marvin J. Ashton and L. Tom Perry of the Council of the Twelve and other General Authorities. [^4] After the cornerstone was placed, nearly sixty-five hundred members attended the nine dedicatory sessions. Several paragraphs of the dedicatory prayer are particularly significant:

This nation of the Philippines is a nation of many islands whose people love freedom and truth, whose hearts are sensitive to the testimony of thy servants, and who are responsive to the message of the eternal gospel. We thank thee for their faith. We thank thee for their spirit of sacrifice. We thank thee for the miracle of the progress of the work in this land. In a few short years it The Manila Philippines Temple was announced in 1981 and dedicated on 25-27 September 1984 by President Gordon B. Hinckley. It is the busiest of the small temples of the Church. This temple serves not only the Philippines but also Micronesia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, and India. has grown from small beginnings to its present stature with many established stakes of Zion.

We thank thee for the hospitality afforded thy servants by the government of the Republic of the Philippines. Bless the gracious officers of this nation, and preserve by thy mighty power peace and freedom in the land. Lift the blight of poverty from which so many suffer. Particularly bless thy faithful saints who live honestly with thee in the payment of their tithes and offerings. As was promised of old by thy prophet Malachi, open the windows of heaven and pour out blessings that there shall not be room enough to receive them. . . . Bless them that neither they nor their generations after them will go hungry, nor naked, nor without shelter from the storms that beat about them. Open their minds that they shall grow in wisdom in matters both spiritual and temporal.

May thy Church in this island nation grow and increase in numbers. . . .

May no unclean thing desecrate its sacred precincts. May it be preserved from the storms of nature, from vandalism, from trespass by those who are unworthy to enter it. [^5]

President Hinckley's prayer that the temple would be "preserved from the storms of nature, from vandalism, from trespass by those who are unworthy to enter it" has been heard many times as typhoons, earthquakes, and other natural disturbances have ravaged the islands. Perhaps the most pointed manifestation of the Lord's protection came during a coup attempt. "In 1989," remembered Rabai B. Osumo, "the temple became the talk of the town. At the height of the failed coup, government soldiers using jets and helicopters bombarded rebel positions near the temple. Rebel soldiers sought cover in the temple grounds and tried to enter it. Their attempt was foiled. The aftermath of the conflict found the temple unscathed except a few bullet marks in its western wall." [^6]

Two hours following completion of the last dedicatory session, the first endowment session began. It was for employees in the temple and temple workers. Since that time the temple has seen much use by the Philippine Saints.

Although the Manila temple has placed temple ordinances and blessings closer to the people, the cost of traveling there from the outer areas is still expensive by Filipino standards. To fly from Mindanao to Manila costs more than $150 (4,000 pesos), a sum equal to one month's wages for most members. So members usually travel by boat, which costs the equivalent of $15. The best time for boat travel is March, April, May, and part of June, when the seas are calm and less dangerous for small vessels. School is out during these months too.

Because many worthy members who hold leadership positions are too poor to afford the expense of traveling to the temple, the First Presidency has established a fund to supplement transportation, housing, and food costs for a single trip to the temple. In addition, each leader can use this fund to purchase three pairs of temple garments. Support levels vary depending on the amount of need, but many Filipinos have been helped to the temple through this program. [^7]

FAMILY HISTORY AND GENEALOGY WORK

As is true throughout the Church, Saints in the Philippines are working to complete their four-generation family group sheets. During the year before the temple dedication, Church leaders throughout the Philippines encouraged members to complete this program. In 1984 the Manila Genealogical Service Center was established at the Church administrative offices in Makati. In addition to providing research facilities, this center was also established to support meetinghouse libraries throughout the country. Since that time every stake and many of the districts have founded and now operate family history centers. The temple and the family history centers have encouraged members to search for ancestors and to do temple work. Couple missionaries who are knowledgeable regarding family history research have been assigned to the Philippines to teach and encourage this work. Now located in the temporal affairs office, the center (now named the Family Service Center) collects family group sheets, inputs the information, and supplies the names to the temple.

Charles Brooks, manager of records acquisition for the Genealogical Society of Utah, and several technicians have been microfilming Filipino family records for a number of years. The available records will be completed in several more years. These records, mostly Roman Catholic parish and Spanish civil records, contain millions of baptismal, matrimonial, and burial records that date back to the sixteenth century. In 1995 the First Presidency approved implementation of the name extraction program. In this program members are called to type the names of the dead from the microfilmed records into a computer base that is used as the basis for temple work. Until recently all of the names used in the Manila temple, with the exception of family file names, have come from Salt Lake City. The extraction program will supply the Manila temple with local names. [^8]

Because Filipino people have such close family ties, family history and temple work are of great interest to them. According to Elder Ben B. Banks, "Families are very important to Filipinos. That's one of the reasons why family history is progressing as fast as it is in the Philippines." Roland P. Arcansalin, temple recorder (manager of the temple), reports that the Manila temple is the "busiest of the smaller temples."

MISSIONARY WORK

In 1984 President Gordon B. Hinckley said: "I do not know of anyplace in the world where the harvest has been so great in such a short period. The Lord has touched this land in a miraculous and wonderful way. He has remembered His people on the isles of the sea." [^9] Although President Hinckley was speaking at the dedication of the Manila temple, he was referring to the missionary miracle he had seen unfold since his visits of the early 1960s. That the people of the Philippines are primarily Christian goes far in explaining the wonderful success of the Church there, but other factors have also been important. For example, the remarkable role of local Filipino elders and sisters.

"On August 12, 1975, President Spencer W. Kimball came over to the Philippines and we had an Area Conference." So begins Roland Arcansalin's description of why he went on a mission. "I had just turned nineteen at that time, but when President Kimball said every young man should fill a mission, that woke me up and immediately, that night, I wrote a letter to my parents and I said, I won't be attending second semester of college this year because I am filling a mission." [^10] Roland was among many young Filipinos who heard President Kimball's call to missionary service. Until then only a few locals were serving, but more than 20 Filipino elders entered the Philippines Manila Mission when he did. Since that time the number of local missionaries has continued to increase. In 1977 63 local missionaries were in the field, and in 1978 the number expanded to 134 local full-time missionaries, well over one-fourth of the missionaries in the country.

As noted earlier, the first division of the Philippines mission came on July 6, 1974, and the second division in 1977. Over the years these missions were divided many more times until there were thirteen missions when the Cabanatuan mission was created in 1992. As the missionary numbers grew, so did the convert baptisms. And, of course, the units of the Church increased. On November 15, 1981, the tenth stake, the Davao Stake, was created. By that time membership throughout the islands had risen to 56,985. More than 12,000 new converts joined in 1980 and nearly that number in 1981. But these almost incredible numbers soon paled in comparison with the growth that was yet to come. Membership crossed the 100,000 mark in 1985 and continued climbing. By 1990, there were 248,334 members in the Philippines. The year of greatest growth was 1988, with 38,907 people coming into the fold.

Again, many ingredients have contributed to the recipe that produced such favorable results. Among the most important has been the Philippines Missionary Training Center. The Manila MTC, as it is often called, began operations in a house in Green Hills, San Juan, a quiet Manila suburb. That house and one next door that was rented for expansion served for almost ten years. The first group consisted of twenty-five elders and sisters. Capacity, a "batch," was forty missionaries. Two hundred batches of elders and sisters from the Philippines and seventeen other countries and territories in Asia and the Pacific were given training there. [^11]

In December 1990 ground was broken for a new MTC to be situated across the street from the Manila temple. When the fourstory structure was dedicated by Area President Vaughn J. Featherstone on September 20, 1992, it contained housing for eighty missionaries, nine classrooms, a multipurpose assembly hall, dining facilities, and a reception area. [^12] The new facility and growing numbers of couple missionaries made it possible to organize a MTC couples district in 1994. (The first couples to receive MTC training in the Philippines were Elder and Sister Carmalino Cawit and Elder and Sister Ramon Mariano, who entered the old MTC on September 25, 1989.) Because couples have different teaching responsibilities than young missionaries—leadership, retention, reactivation, and special callings other than proselyting—the creation of the new district was desirable. [^13] As of the second quarter of 1993, the old and new MTCs had trained 6,244 missionaries, most of whom were Filipinos.

The proportion of Filipino missionaries grew yearly, and by 1988 most of the mission force (82 percent) throughout the country was from the Philippines. Although there were advantages of having so many local missionaries, there were also some problems. Most of the missionaries and their families could not provide financial support while they served their missions. Therefore, it was necessary to obtain support from the general missionary fund of the Church. Most of the Filipino missionaries were living much better as missionaries than their families were. Some were sleeping on mattresses for the first time in their lives. Adjustments after their missions were often difficult. A second problem was that most of the local elders were from humble origins and shied away from interactions with middle- and upper-class Filipinos. (American missionaries, on the other hand, hardly worried about the social and economic status of those whom they taught.) The result has been the enlargement through conversions of the number of Filipino members below the poverty level. This has been magnified because most upper-class and professional Filipinos live in gated communities that make access almost impossible. This has been a concern to Church authorities because leaders rise most frequently from members with education and financial security.

Although the number of Filipino elders and sisters continued to grow during the 1990s, the number of foreign missionaries fell off. Visa difficulties arose that took several years to resolve. By 1996, the number of foreign missionaries was beginning to increase, and the ratio was improving.

Missionaries in the Philippines have probably used all of the methods and approaches for contacting and teaching the gospel that have been used elsewhere in the world. But they have also been part of at least two unusual programs, one that provided service in refugee camps and another that experimented with holding basic Church services in the home.

Mormon Christian Services

The beginnings and philosophy behind the welfare services missionaries in refugee camps is discussed more fully in chapter 15. Suffice it to say that in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, more than a million Indochinese (Vietnamese, Hmongs, Laos, and Cambodians) left their homelands and fled to friendly (or not-so-friendly) nations for refuge. Large camps were established in a number of countries, including the Philippines, where the Philippines Refugee Processing Center (PRPC) was established in 1980 at Morong, Bataan, site of the terrible concentration camp where thirty-nine thousand Allied servicemen were reportedly killed during World War II. Latter-day Saints became involved when Elder Marion D. Hanks, Executive Administrator of the Asia and Southeast Asia area, saw the opportunity for LDS missionaries to provide service at this camp and at one on Palauan Island.

After successfully serving in a camp in Thailand, in 1981 Sisters Lucinda bateman and Mary Ann Meyers were asked by Elder Hanks to transfer to the PRPC at Bataan. [^14] The agency title of the LDS humanitarian program was Mormon Christian Services (MCS). Sisters Bateman and Meyers were not warmly welcomed by the members of another church who were dominant at the camp, but they were allowed to teach English and American culture to groups of the handicapped and elderly. As they persisted and happily served, they came to be appreciated by the camp administrators. Over the months the administrators requested additional pairs of LDS sisters. They also improved the missionaries' teaching assignments, their housing, and other conditions. What began as an experiment in the eyes of the camp administrators eventually developed into a long-term arrangement lasting until 1994, when the camp at Bataan was closed. The number of missionaries assigned to the PRPC varied between four and ten. [^15]

As was true in Thailand and Hong Kong, where sister missionaries performed similar service, the MCS program was based on an agreement that the Mormons would not preach their religion. But unlike the other two places, the agreement was modified in the Philippines and the sister missionaries were allowed to teach the restored gospel to refugees who asked to be taught. In late 1986 President Joel E. Leetham, president of the Philippines Quezon City Mission, met with Colonel Banzon, the deputy administrator of the PRPC, and together they worked out the agreement and also a plan to build a small LDS meetinghouse at the camp. They chose the site together. Construction began in August 1987, and the building was dedicated on January 3, 1988. By that time there were five members in the camp, and forty others were being taught the missionary discussions. [^16]

The PRPC was created to facilitate movement of Indochinese refugees to third countries for permanent residence. During the early 1980s large numbers of refugees filled the camp. But as conditions improved in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, the number of refugees dwindled. By the 1990s only Vietnamese remained in the camp. They were of two classifications, those who were legal refugees and able to be resettled in a new country and those who would eventually have to return to Vietnam.

Six sisters were serving in the camp in 1994. By then there were twenty Vietnamese members and another twenty investigators. One of the most exciting experiences for all of these people was a trip from Bataan to the temple in Manila. The members were able to do baptisms for the dead, and the nonmembers visited the grounds, the administration building, and the MTC. The PRPC was closed in 1994, having outlived its original purpose.

The Family-Centered Church Experiment

Not long after Augusto A. Lim and his wife, Myrna, began their service as leaders of the new Philippines Naga Mission in 1989, they were informed by the Area Presidency that their mission was to conduct a carefully controlled missionary experiment. Members of the Quorum of the Twelve wanted to know if the Church could be operated well on a basic level among new members in Third World countries. Specifically, they wished to know if families could hold the basic meetings of the Church at home and grow in testimony and spirituality. The Area Presidency selected the Island of Marinduque for the experiment. Until that time the Island of Marinduque had been visited only briefly by LDS missionaries, and there were no members there. The initial twelve elders who were assigned to the island were carefully selected by the Area Presidency from among all of the missions in the Philippines. Their instructions were specific: teach only community leaders; teach couples; make no mention of branches, wards, or temples; baptize only couples; don't tell anyone at home or in other missions about the experiment. After converts had been made, meetings were to be held at home with the father presiding. Lesson materials for Church services were to be limited to the Gospel Principles manual—a series of forty-seven lessons on fundamental gospel knowledge—and the scriptures of the Church.

After a year of efforts to contact and teach community leaders, no success had been realized. It was difficult to teach husbands and wives together, and when one was interested the other usually was not. So the requirements were changed to include average families who were secure financially, that is, who had steady work. Being leaders, wealthy, or prominent was no longer required. With the target families expanded, the elders succeeded in bringing more converts into the Church. But the experiment was not successful. While it had been hoped that new members of the Church could operate on a very basic body of printed material, it was found that they, more than Church members in the established parts of the world, needed more commentaries, lesson materials, and books such as Talmage's Jesus the Christ or Richards's A Marvelous Work and a Wonder. Sunday meetings were repetitious and uninteresting. The smallness of the groups did not provide people with sufficient experience to enrich those who were present. The experiment was quietly ended. Regular missionary work was pursued, and the normal programs of the Church were established on Marinduque Island. [^17] (Similar experiments with similar results were conducted in India and Latin America.)

A Missionary Problem Area

There have been some difficulties with radical Muslims on the Island of Mindanao that have required special attention. Since late 1993, no non-Filipinos have been allowed to serve as missionaries on Mindanao. The danger of kidnapping is too great because foreigners are sometimes thought to be wealthy. Even Filipino elders are restricted to proselyting during daylight hours. The Muslim separatist movement has been a problem for the central government for some time. Five percent of population in the Philippines is Muslim, and the greater part of that number lives on Mindanao. Most Muslims are not part of radical groups, but the few who are causing trouble are a serious threat to personal security in that part of the nation.

CHURCH WELFARE IN THE PHILIPPINES

In the Philippines the economic, health, and educational needs of the Saints have been a major concern for Church leaders since the early 1970s. Surveys reveal that Filipino Saints are "poorer than the general population. Twenty percent are squatters and 60 percent have no running water in their houses." [^18] Unemployment and underemployment are serious problems among Filipino members. Very few members own automobiles, and only 5 to 15 percent own their own homes in the Manila area. Others rent their apartments or homes. Home ownership is somewhat higher outside metro Manila. Transportation costs are so high in proportion to income that many members go inactive because they cannot afford to travel to Church meetings. [^19] Although literacy is relatively high and many members of the Church have post-high school education, too often training and degrees are in nontechnical areas that lead to educated unemployment.

Church members not only struggle with economic and educational challenges, but they also suffer with many health problems. Infant morbidity is relatively high in the Philippines, and Church members have not escaped this sorrow. Numerous other health problems exist that cause untold suffering among people of all ages. Missionaries too, Filipino and foreign, have been infected with hepatitis, tuberculosis, worms, and other parasites.

In 1971 President Harold B. Lee recognized the growing health needs of the worldwide Church membership. He asked Dr. James O. Mason, Church health commissioner, to create a plan to address these needs. From his thinking, discussions with Church leaders, and consideration with other health professionals, Mason devised a plan that became the health missionary program. Missionaries with specialized training in medicine, nursing, nutrition, and related health fields were called by the Missionary Department to serve missions of eighteen months or two years. They were to teach disease prevention, guide members to use local health services, work through the existing programs of the Church, and assist mission presidents and their wives in the furtherance of missionary health. [^20]

One of the earliest health missionaries called was Mary Ellen Edmunds, who had served a proselyting mission in the Philippines in 1963 and 1964. In 1972 she returned to the Philippines with the call to establish this new program. Her assignment was to help Filipino Saints take better care of their physical bodies. Years later she recalled her experience: "I felt the Holy Ghost bearing witness of the truths I taught about good nutrition, budgeting, and immunizing children. This witness was as clear and strong as the witness I had felt when I was teaching the First Vision, faith, and the importance of baptism." [^21]

It soon became apparent that teaching about good health was related to teaching good nutrition, and nutrition to finances, and finances to education, and so on. Farmers, vocational specialists, skilled tradesmen, social workers, career counselors, and others were required to teach skills for temporal and spiritual success. Before long the health missionaries were made part of a wider group called welfare services missionaries, which included missionaries with a broader range of knowledge, skills, and experiences. By 1979 more than seven hundred welfare services missionaries were serving worldwide in sixty missions. [^22] A variety of welfare services missionaries were assigned to the Philippines.

I DIDN'T KNOW I WASN'T CARING FOR HER PROPERLY

Mary Ellen Edmunds

When I was in the Philippines in about 1972, one of the members of the Church approached us and said, "I want to ask for your help. We had our first baby after we were married. It was a little girl, and we loved her and were so excited. She grew to be eight months old and one day she died suddenly, unexpectedly. And when we asked the doctor why, he told us we hadn't cared for her properly." Even as she told me this, she wept again, saying, "I didn't know. I didn't know I wasn't caring for her properly." Then she dried her eyes and said, "I want to tell you sisters that another is coming. What can I do to have a healthy baby and to care for it properly?"

Well, it turned into a whole district project to have some classes on maternal and child health. This woman participated and did everything she possibly could. It meant changing a lot of traditions and going against some deeply ingrained customs, but she trusted us and was motivated by concern for her unborn child. She realized then that she was preparing an earthly body for one of Heavenly Father's spirit children.

Pretty soon her neighbors, most of whom weren't members of the Church, began to talk about "the Mormon baby." There was a great deal of anticipation about the birth; and when the baby was born, she was larger and healthier than any baby that neighborhood had ever seen. Those parents were so proud! You couldn't have persuaded them that the Word of Wisdom and proper sanitation weren't principles of the gospel when they saw the difference it made to their child. Last year I received photographs of her baptism. It was also a great experience to be in the Salt Lake Temple when her parents were sealed. Her father, the bishop, was able to come to Salt Lake City and they took advantage of the proximity to the temple. Their first little daughter, who had died, was also sealed to them, and she was there as well. We could all feel it. Now they've had two or three additional babies—babies who are strong, healthy, and born in the covenant. When I returned to the Philippines for a visit last year, this mother said, "You know, sister, I'm so happy because my children are very naughty in Church." Malnourished children, you know, are very listless and have no energy. It was a little signal that they were healthy. This mother also wrote to me: "I want to express my gratitude for the things I have learned which are making such a difference in my family. I realize now that some of the things my mother taught me—things her mother taught her—were not correct, but the truths I am learning will now be taught to my children, and their children, and the generations to come. We will not be damned any longer by ignorance. As they say, it is never too late to learn and change. God must love us dearly to allow us to have so much truth." [^23]

Anecdotal evidence of success, such as the foregoing, indicated that the health missionaries and welfare services missionaries were remarkably successful as teachers of proper health practices. Fortunately, Professor John M. Hill and his colleagues statistically verified the results in a study of comparisons among twenty-two groups of Filipino Saints. Garth Mangum and Bruce Blumell summarized the study this way: "With three-quarters following the water purification instructions and two-thirds the kitchen sanitation and gardening techniques, the average incidence of diarrhea and fever among children was reduced 70.0 percent and eye, ear, lung, skin, and scalp infections by 53.2 percent. A subgroup with higher participation rates showed 92.9 percent and 85 percent reductions, respectively." [^24]

Health matters continue to be a concern in the Philippines. Health fairs and clinics, often in conjunction with the Philippines Health Department or with local health organizations, have been held frequently in chapels, malls, parks, and community centers throughout the country. Health fairs usually have consisted of health awareness training (personal hygiene, obesity, smoking, stress, alcoholism, parasites, and prevention of AIDS, emphysema, and diabetes), displays, dental screenings, blood-pressure checkups, immunization clinics, and similar undertakings. Often these events have been held with the help of proselyting missionaries.

In addition to Church-sponsored health programs, a private, not-for-profit organization called Mabuhay-Deseret Foundation (MDF) was founded in October 1988 with the encouragement and guidance of Dr. E. William Jackson, who was serving as president of the Philippines Manila Mission, and a group of humanitarian doctors. MDF specializes in providing surgeries to correct such conditions as cataracts, cross-eye, cleft lip, cleft palate, loss of limb, and burn contractures. Numerous non-Mormon Filipino physicians, nurses, and other specialists are part of the volunteer program. Services are provided to all people on the basis of need. In addition to medical services, MDF also provides postoperative and rehabilitative training. The philosophy of MDF is selfreliance. Those who receive help and their families are encouraged to raise as much money to pay for medical expenses as they are able. Making a financial contribution ensures self-esteem and involves a larger community. Since its inception, MDF has developed a broad group of affiliated medical practitioners and hospitals throughout the islands. By 1994 MDF had helped with 4,615 surgeries. [^25]

The full teaching program of Church welfare has been carried out in the Philippines. Home food processing, gardening (even biointensive gardening), sewing, caring for the sick and the elderly, providing for one's family, and similar teachings have been important to the Philippine Saints. But more than in any other country, disaster relief has required major efforts locally and on a countrywide scale. The pages of "Dateline Philippines," a section of Tambuli Magazine (now Liahona), the Church magazine of the Philippines, frequently report the Church's involvement in preparedness and emergency-relief projects such as reconstructing a damaged house; providing typhoon, flood, volcano, or earthquake relief; training members in the principles of self-reliance, first aid, and emergency preparedness; sponsoring concerts to raise funds for disaster victims; and so on.

Typhoons and their massive destruction are so frequent that they hardly make the news in the Philippines. But two natural disasters took such heavy tolls that they demanded attention. On July 16, 1990, an earthquake that measured 7.7 on the Richter scale rocked northern Luzon Island, destroying nearly two thousand buildings, blocking roads, and damaging water, electric, and other utilities. When a full assessment of the damage had been made by civil and Church leaders, the results were severe. "Members in seven stakes and two districts were directly affected," wrote Marvin K. Gardner in the Ensign. "One hundred twenty homes of Church members were destroyed; another 340 were damaged. Several meetinghouses were also damaged—one severely. The Manila Temple was not affected. Of 1,666 casualties, 5 were members of the Church; all missionaries were safe." [^26] Meetinghouses were used as places of refuge by hundreds of members and nonmembers. Church members rendered assistance to hundreds. The Baguio stake was selected by two national organizations to receive and distribute large amounts of donated commodities. Rice and vegetables were cooked into stew by Relief Society members and distributed to thirty-five tent cities. Over a two-week period Church members prepared and served more than thirty-four thousand meals.

But even though the members pulled together and relieved one another's suffering, many jobs were lost, homes were destroyed, and opportunities for education were hindered. Church members in other parts of the world contributed funds for humanitarian purposes. On September 21, 1990, Elder Richard G. Scott of the Council of the Twelve presented Emmanuel Pelaez, Philippines ambassador to the United States, a check for $25,000 for earthquake relief in the Philippines. [^27] Through it all, the Filipino Saints put forth a positive, courageous face and moved forward the best they could. [^28]

As if the 1990 earthquake was not enough, on June 9, 1991, Mount Pinatubo, which had been dormant for six hundred years, erupted and spewed ash over a vast area. About five thousand Church members were affected by the initial series of eruptions. About 80 percent of the homes of members in the Olongapo area were damaged or destroyed, and 40 percent of the homes in the Angeles stake. In total the damage and suffering caused by Mount Pinatubo was much greater than the earthquake of 1990. Millions of people had been displaced by 1992. Millions and millions of dollars in property values were destroyed. Vast areas of countryside and cities were covered by Pinatubo's ash.

Over time this great volcano has been a curse that keeps on cursing. When wet from heavy monsoon rains, the ash on Mount Pinatubo's sides turned into a continuous mud flow, called lahar, that goes on for miles. Everything in its path gets covered as it pushes through and around houses, gardens, offices, homes, and farm buildings. In 1993—two years after the initial eruptions—225,000 people were forced from their homes. In 1994 some 125,000 more people were left homeless. Among them were many members of the Church. In 1995, as in the previous years, Church welfare director Ruben Gapiz and his colleagues in Welfare Services spent much time supervising the evacuation and care of members as they were forced from their homes. Pinatubo is like a chronic disease that will not go away.

Twice the Church has made substantial contributions to the relief of those who were devastated by the volcano. On September 6, 1991, Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Council of the Twelve presented $25,000 to Deputy Ambassador Franklin Ebdalin in behalf of the Church. [^29] And again, on June 25, 1992, the Area Presidency, Vaughn J. Featherstone, Ben B. Banks, and Augusto A. Lim, met with newly elected President Fidel V. Ramos of the Philippines and presented him a check for one million pesos (U.S. $41,000) to help with the aftermath of Mount Pinatubo's eruption.

For reasons mentioned above—poverty especially—members can seldom put aside many provisions for hard times. Nevertheless, the Church has done much to prepare members before disasters strike. Bishops and branch presidents have kept stocks of food and other supplies for emergencies. The education and preparation process will never cease.

SELF-RELIANCE PROJECTS

During the past twenty years a number of projects have been undertaken to help Filipino members become financially stable. Commercial sewing machines were purchased during the 1980s to improve family clothing and to help women acquire employment. Marketing cooperatives, handicraft projects, a communal farming enterprise, and a small factory for making shell lampshades have achieved varying degrees of success.

One of the most successful projects has been a not-for-profit organization, the Philippines Enterprise Development Foundation (PEDF). Closely associated with Enterprise Mentors International (EMI), the group was established in the Philippines in 1989 to help small businesses and individuals "achieve greater productivity in their business endeavors, and thus an improved quality of life." [^30] Two sister organizations, the Visayas Enterprise Foundation (VEF) and the Mindanao Enterprise Development Foundation (MEDF), have since been founded in central and southern Philippines. EMI works through local affiliated foundations that provide small business loans, training, and guidance. In 1995 EMI reported assisting "over 10,000 people to greater financial independence." [^31] This assistance came through centers to train "street vendors, family firms, and small businesses to grow and become more productive." [^32] Individuals and families who have received assistance run businesses as varied as pig farms, upholstery shops, bakeries, fruit stands, and slipper and other clothing industries.

Employment and underemployment are serious problems among Church members in the Philippines. Employment missionaries estimated in 1991 that thirteen thousand active members were unemployed. The employment program of the Church, as outlined in the Welfare Services Resource Handbook, has long been part of the Church program in the Philippines. But in November 1990 missionary couples from the United States arrived to encourage the full implementation of the Church employment system. Since then, working in conjunction with EMI and other state and private organizations, but primarily through the units of the Church, the welfare services missionaries assigned to employment have held many training sessions for local Church leaders, sponsored business and job fairs, counseled and taught hundreds of job seekers, helped members connect with potential employers, and so on. Seventy-five percent of jobs are never advertised. Church members have been encouraged to use the "hidden job market." Job networking—that is, following up on every friendship, association, family relationship, classmate, business associate, club relationship, and so on—has been taught as the most promising way of getting a job or improving employment through the hidden job market.

A variety of innovative seminars and training sessions have been held in different parts of the country. For example, in 1992 the Church welfare department in the Philippines, the Church Educational System, and Visayan Enterprise Foundation sponsored a business and job fair. VEF presented "a structured exercise to enable [participants] to identify business opportunities and investments. A Personnel Entrepreneurial Competency Test was administered to assess abilities in pursuing successful business ventures." [^33] Those who scored high were encouraged to pursue careers in business. CES representatives detailed the process of applying for and receiving CES-sponsored education loans. And others outlined the process of getting a job.

The Philippines/Micronesia Area Presidency has been concerned and involved in the employment problem. They have regularly taught basic welfare principles, the need to pay a full tithing, to pray for the Lord's help, and to work hard at obtaining good employment.

CHURCH EDUCATION IN THE PHILIPPINES

Since its founding in 1972, the seminary and institute programs have flourished as in no other part of Asia. From the beginning, interest in religious education among the young Filipino members was high, but the size of these programs in terms of students, full-time and part-time faculty, and physical facilities has exceeded expectations. From the time when Stephen K. Iba returned to Utah in 1974 and Senen J. Pineda took over as CES area administrator for the Philippines, CES programs have been almost entirely in the hands of local administrators and teachers. The home-study seminary program grew to 4,000 students by 1979. Early-morning seminary was started in 1981. The Manila Institute of Religion was inaugurated in February 1982 and has grown steadily since then. In 1995 there were 11,848 institute students enrolled, and 11,282 daily and home-study seminary students were enrolled countrywide. The faculty and administration were large, consisting of 41 CES coordinators and institute directors, 21 paid secretaries, 470 volunteer institute teachers, and 897 volunteer seminary teachers. Various administrators have led Church education in the Philippines. From 1991 until 1996 Emmanuel Mascardo was the CES area director. By 1995 there were fifteen institute facilities, and two additional ones were under construction. Many of these facilities are attached to meetinghouses. [^34]

The institutes have done much to bring Latter-day Saint young people together in a wholesome environment. As is true elsewhere in the world, the Latter-day Saints Student Association (LDSSA) organizes and sponsors a variety of activities. Temple marriages are encouraged in classes and as part of special meetings and services.

Through the Church Educational System, thousands of dollars of loan money is allocated to worthy college students to help support their higher education. The Philippines receives a large percentage of CES's budget for this purpose. The primary purpose of the loan program is to help returned missionaries afford to go to school. Some four hundred Filipino students receive this help each year. They are required to provide part of the cost of their own education. The program is working quite well in the Philippines. [^35]

Beginning in 1993, a remarkable breakthrough occurred in Bacolod. Bishop Rufino A. Villanueva, CES coordinator for Negros Occidental, applied to the Department of Education, Culture and Sports and received permission for the Church to hold seminary classes during regular class periods in the three high schools in Bacolod City. Seminary students said that taking seminary at school helped them save time after school and also assured their safety when going home after classes. Clearly the notion of separation of church and state in the Philippines differs from that in the United States. [^36] The arrangement in Bacolod City is unusual. Most seminary classes are held in meetinghouses anytime from early morning to after school. Institute classes, on the other hand, are offered throughout the day, like regular college courses.

TRANSLATION OF SCRIPTURES AND OTHER CHURCH MATERIALS

Since the early 1960s, discussions have addressed the question of which language or languages should be used in the Church in the Philippines. Early on, mission leaders opted for English. A relatively high percentage of Filipinos were reported to know English, and the advantage of not having to translate scriptures and other Church materials into local languages appeared obvious. The widespread use of English has contributed much to the rapid growth and development of the Church in the Philippines. But the decision to use English also placed millions of people outside the circle of the restored gospel. The Savior commanded that his gospel should be taken to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people (see D&C 42:58; 90:11).

Even though all administrative and teaching manuals were distributed in English as early as 1963, in order to be more effective many missionaries were learning Tagalog and other Filipino languages on their own. Tagalog (or Filipino), the official language of the Philippines, is spoken by the majority of the people, but other languages are also of great importance. Ilocano is spoken in Northern and Central Luzon. Cebuano is the main dialect of Central and Eastern Visayas and Mindanao. Hiligaynon (Ilonggo) is spoken in the Western Visayas and some parts of Mindanao. Sunday School lessons and sacrament meeting talks were being given mostly in English, but with a significant admixture of Filipino languages. This practice has continued and grown to the present. When speakers wish to make their point clear in a talk or lesson, frequently they use Tag-English, a mixture of English sentences interespersed with Tagalog sentences. The same thing is done with English and other Filipino languages. In the provinces Filipino languages are often used more than English.

Leaders in the Philippines gradually recognized the need to provide scriptures, lesson manuals, and Church administration materials in local languages. By the 1980s articles were appearing in Tagalog in the Philippines Church magazine, Tambuli. In 1983 a local committee began translating parts of the Book of Mormon into Tagalog. Three years later the Church in the Philippines printed a few copies of the Tagalog translation for testing. In 1987, under direction of Kay Briggs of the Presiding Bishopric International Office and the Area Presidency, a committee under the leadership of Elder Ruben G. Gapiz, Regional Representative, as directed to complete an official translation of Selections from the Book of Mormon, "Mga Piniling Bahagi Mula sa Aklat ni Mormon." By working intensively, the last page was reviewed and approved for printing on June 10, 1988. Regarding the effort, Elder Gapiz said, "Our intention was to have a selection that is comprehensive and understandable to all levels without sacrificing its scriptural context." [^37] The first copies arrived in Manila on January 6, 1989, and were distributed immediately to Church leaders around the country.

By then interest had grown in producing Book of Mormon selections in other dialects. And additional Church materials in local languages were also needed. During the 1990s, as part of the operations of the temporal affairs office, a full translation office was created and work proceeded rapidly in many languages. Book of Mormon selections were completed in Ilocano (1991), Cebuano (1992), Hiligaynon (1994), Pampango (1994), and Waray (1995). [^38] In 1995 it was reported that the Church had printed Selections from the Book of Mormon in fifty world languages in 1994. "Of the 135,745 copies sold, 60.94% were in Tagalog, 19.56% Cebuano and 3.60% Ilocano—the top three in the list." [^39] In the September 1995 issue of Dateline Philippines, a short article stated, "Salt Lake City Printing Office confirmed that the full complement of the Book of Mormon in Tagalog, Cebuano and Ilocano will be off the press soon." These complete translations were expected for distribution before the end of the year. Translations of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price were also well under way by that time.

On February 26, 1996, the number of Church members outside the United States outnumbered those in the United States. Among the ten languages most used in the worldwide Church, three were Filipino languages—Tagalog, Cebuano, and Ilocano. By 1995 the translation office was providing a variety of materials in eight Filipino languages. Although English is the official language of the Church in the Philippines, great effort is being expended to make gospel knowledge available to as many Filipinos as possible. Missionaries, local and foreign, are learning and teaching the gospel in Filipino languages. [^40] The scriptural injunction to take the gospel to people in their own tongue is being fulfilled.

VISITS BY THE LORD'S SERVANTS

Filipinos respond to visits by prophets and apostles much like Polynesians, with great warmth, enthusiasm, and gratitude. Each visit by a member of the Quorum of the Twelve or a President of the Church has been celebrated as an event of highest importance. When President Spencer W. Kimball visited Manila a second time on October 18 and 19, 1980, the local Saints were thrilled to be in his presence. President Kimball spoke three times, once to priesthood leaders and twice in area conference general sessions. More than eighteen thousand members and friends thronged Araneta Coliseum to participate.

Members came from distant points throughout the country. Maria Carmen Nunez's sacrifice to help her parents attend the conference illustrates the dedication of many Filipino Saints. They came from three hundred miles away in Cebu. The Church News related her experience: "'See,' she said as she touched her dress. 'I don't have a new dress or shoes for the conference, but it doesn't matter as long as my father is here.'

"She earned the money to bring her father, mother and sister to the conference by airplane. 'My father is 83 and he's had two heart attacks. He was baptized just last February.

"'It was really a sacrifice coming here. It's such a blessing to see the prophet and hear his voice, and the nicest thing is that both my mother and father could be here.'" [^41]

As he had done in 1975, President Kimball met with President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines.

Members in the Philippines have been blessed to receive many visits by Apostles. Members of the Quorums of the Seventy, as they have presided in Area Presidencies, have visited district, take, and regional conferences. When the Manila temple was built, President Gordon B. Hinckley presided over the ground-breaking and dedicatory services. Among other members of the Council of the Twelve who have visited the Philippines, Elder Neal A. Maxwell conducted a special service in 1991—attended by only a select few—at the American War Memorial Cemetery. That place has become especially sacred to the Church in the Philippines. Elder Maxwell gave an apostolic blessing there on January 23, 1991, in which he appealed to the Almighty to bless the land with greater and sufficient political tranquillity and economic stability since the Filipino people have already paid such a dear price for freedom.

When President Gordon B. Hinckley, now President of the Church, addressed one of the dedication sessions of the Hong Kong Temple on May 26, 1996, he mentioned that part of his schedule over the next few days included firesides with Church members in Manila and Cebu. He said he expected to meet with twenty thousand people in Manila. Several days later, on May 30, he spoke at the Amoranto Sports Complex to more than thirty-five thousand people, to that date probably the largest live audience to which a President of the Church had spoken anywhere in the world. "Initially, hundreds were turned away from the doors," wrote Gerry Avant in the Church News. "However, officials of the facility were so touched by the members' tears of disappointment that they relented and allowed them to enter." Sister Avant went on:

Many of those who traveled long distances to Manila went to the grounds of the Manila Philippines Temple, where they spent hours, even days, until time to go to the fireside. Four LDS meetinghouses were used as sleeping accommodations for members to stay at night. The Church provided sleeping mats, which were spread on cultural hall and classroom floors, and portable cook stoves, which the travelers used outdoors to prepare their meals.

A happy, almost surreal atmosphere seemed to settle on the temple grounds the evening before and the morning of the fireside. One could not help but think of the Book of Mormon account of the people who had gathered around the temple to listen to their beloved leader, King Benjamin. Here in Manila, members gathered around the temple in an exquisitely beautiful setting as they prepared to hear the words of today's prophet, a man they obviously love and revere. [^42]

When President Hinckley spoke, he told the audience that he had been interviewed by the media three times that day. One of the questions he was asked was, "Why is this Church growing as it is in the Philippines?" "The answer," he said, "is simply this: This Church and this gospel fill a need in the lives of the people. We live in a world of shifting values. Moral values are crumbling throughout the world in nearly every nation, including this nation. And this Church stands as an anchor, a solid anchor of truth in a world of shifting values. Every man and every woman who joins this Church and clings to its teachings will live a better life, will be a happier man or woman, will carry in his or her heart a great love for the Lord and his ways.

"I've been asked another question, to the effect that people don't regard us as Christians. I'm sorry if that's the case. If that's the case, it comes of their ignorance of what we stand for. I don't know how anybody could stand stronger as witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ than do the people of this Church." [^43]

On the following day, May 31, President Hinckley traveled to Cebu, where he addressed another capacity crowd of 9,200 in the Cebu Coliseum. The response from members was equal to the meeting in Manila.

Before leaving Manila, President Hinckley visited the American War Memorial Cemetery, where he goes each time he travels to the Philippines. The cemetery and memorial hold deep feelings for the prophet. He considers it hallowed ground, not only because of the great sacrifices that were made for freedom by those whose remains lie there, but also for the place it holds in the history of the Church in the Philippines. Thirty-six years after he offered his prayer of rededication and commencement of missionary work in the Philippines, his joy in the growth of the Church must have been unbounded.

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] See Leon B. Gold, "Thailand," in Donald E. Hoke, The Church in Asia (Chicago: Moody Press, 1975), p. 636; see also "Thailand," in Patrick Johnstone, Operation World (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Publishing House, 1993), pp. 530-33.
[^2] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 9 December 1964.
[^3] As quoted in Hinckley, Journals, 2 November 1966.
[^4] As quoted in ibid.
[^5] Hinckley, Journal, 2 November 1966. The entire prayer is printed in: Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 129-31.
[^6] See ibid.
[^7] See ibid., by date.
[^8] Larry R. White, "A Short History of the Church in Thailand," Thailand Bangkok Mission Manual, 1993; copy in possession of the author.
[^9] Craig B. Christensen, "The Beginnings in Thailand," Improvement Era 73 (March 1970): 32.
[^10] Anan Eldredge, interview by the author, Bangkok, Thailand, 8 September 1995, tape recording.
[^11] Christensen, "Beginnings in Thailand," pp. 33-34.
[^12] Ibid., p. 33.
[^13] See Alan H, Hess, Journal, 30 November 1968, LDS Church Archives.
[^14] Larry R. White, "A Conversion Story: Srilaksana Gottsche," Bangkok, Thailand, September 1993; copy in possession of the author.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] See Joan Porter Ford and LaRene Porter Gaunt, "Raised by a Queen," in "The Gospel Dawning in Thailand," Ensign 25 (September 1995): 55. See also Srilaksana Suntarahut Gottsche, interview by the author, Bangkok, Thailand, 8 September 1995, tape recording.
[^17] Srilaksana interview.
[^18] Paul D. Morris to Dale Patterson, 19 October 1974, quoted in Dale Patterson, "One Thoughtless Moment" (Research paper, Brigham Young University, 1974), p. 15, in possession of the author.
[^19] See Manoth Suksabjarern, "Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Latter-day Saints Missions in Thailand: An Historical Survey" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1977), pp. 89-90 and most of chapter 6.
[^20] Bart Seliger, interview by the author, Bangkok, Thailand, 8 September 1995, tape recording.
[^21] Peter Ashman, "Thailand: An Example of Mass Media Utilization in the Mission Field" (research paper, Brigham Young University, 1980), pp. 6-7; copy in posession of the author.
[^22] Ibid., p. 8.
[^23] Marion D. Hanks Oral History, interviews by Gordon Irving, 1983, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 9.
[^24] See Lynellyn D. Long, Ban Vinai, The Refugee Camp (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), chapter 3.
[^25] In April 1983, Gist, a U.S. State Department periodical, reported: "Since the fall of the noncommunist governments of Laos, Kampuchea (Cambodia), and Vietnam in 1975, more than 1.5 million refugees have fled from Indochina. More than 600,000 of them have sought asylum in Thailand; 500,000 have sought asylum in nine other first-asylum destinations (Hong Kong, Macau, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan); and approximately 410,000 have left Vietnam directly for resettlement elsewhere. Since 1975, the US has resettled 629,000 refugees."
[^26] Abridged from Marion D. Hanks et al., "International Health," pp. 13-17.
[^27] Rita Edmonds, telephone interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 28 December 1995.
[^28] Hanks Oral History, p. 14.
[^29] Only one or two articles on the Mormon refugee effort were printed in Church periodicals. Elder Hanks did not want wide publicity for the project. The best article was "Helping refugees begin new life," Church News, 21 March 1981, pp. 7-10.
[^30] Ibid., p. 16.
[^31] Mary Ellen Edmunds, who has been influential in welfare services work, captures well the feeling of the work at the camp near Phanat Nikom in her chapter titled "Are We Not All Refugees?" in Love Is a Verb (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995).
[^32] See Ford and Gaunt, "Gospel Dawning in Thailand," p. 54; and Suchat Chaichana, "Church Education System, Thailand Historical Report, 1993"; copy in possession of the author.
[^33] See David Mitchell, "The Saints of Thailand," Tambuli 17 (May 1993): 44-45; and Anan Eldredge interview.
[^34] David N. Phelps, interview by the author, Bangkok, Thailand, 7 September 1995, tape recording.
[^35] Anan Eldredge interview.
[^36] Mitchell, "Saints of Thailand," p. 42.
[^37] White, "Short History," 4.
[^38] Phelps interview; and Larry R. White, "An Apostolic Blessing in Bangkok, June 1992," typescript in possession of the author. I have drawn on both sources for this section.
[^39] White, "Apostolic Blessing."
[^40] See "Anand appointed premier," Bangkok Post, 11 June 1992, p. 1.
[^41] Troy Corriveau, interview by the author, Bangkok, Thailand, 7 September 1995, tape recording.
[^42] David Mitchell, "Pornchai Juntratip, Spiritually Prepared," Tambuli 17 (February 1993): 44.
[^43] Ibid., p. 43.
