R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THAILAND AND CAMBODIA 1961-1996

A Foothold in the Shadow of the Buddha

In Southeast Asia every forward step for the Church has been hard won. Missionaries to this part of the world have known that they were pioneers who needed the same qualities of vision, courage, hard work, and faith that were required of the early Mormon pioneers to achieve dominion over the American frontier.

Thailand is a missionary frontier because Latter-day Saints have never confronted a people who are so completely devoted to their country, their king, their religion, and their local traditions. More than in China, Korea, or even Japan, the people of Thailand confront Christian missionaries with customs, beliefs, and cultural characteristics that are different from those of the Christian world. Although Roman Catholics have proselyted in Thailand for 400 years and Protestant missionaries have taught their from of Christianity for more than 160 years, Thai Christians comprise fewer than 1 percent of the total population. (In 1995 Thailand's population numbered some 60 million, including 226,500 Protestants and 236,000 Roman Catholics.) Between 93 and 95 percent of the people are Theravada (Orthodox) Buddhists; the remainder follow Islam or Chinese traditions. Most Thais are as much controlled by animism, a belief in local spirits, as by formal Buddhist beliefs. [^1] Christian missionaries have had relatively few direct problems from the Thai government because local social pressure—whether Buddhist or animist—has been more than sufficient to convince all but the most determined students of Christianity that they do not wish to leave the local tradition. Most Thais believe it is not only anti-Buddhist to convert to Christianity but also unpatriotic and anti-Thai.

Nevertheless, even though the advantage has clearly been with the traditional culture, LDS missionaries have succeeded in winning a growing number of devoted converts to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Formal LDS activities began in Bangkok in 1961. In June of that year, Max and Janet Berryessa and their four sons, from Brigham Young University, arrived on an assignment as education advisers to the Thai education department. Within days they met fellow Latter-day Saints Colonel Joseph Meacham and his wife, Shirley, and moved into a home next door to them. The two families held informal Church services together and soon invited another LDS family, Captain Robert and Virginia Liday, to join with them. In early 1962 President Robert S. Taylor of the Southern Far East Mission traveled to Bangkok to officially organize the first group of the Church. Berryessa was sustained as group leader with Brother Meacham as assistant. The group grew steadily as LDS military and technical advisers were assigned to the country in conjunction with the Vietnam conflict.

In May 1963 Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, supervisor of the Church in Asia and the Pacific, visited Thailand. While there he met with members of the Bangkok group and asked if Thailand was ready to receive missionaries. The response was positive but guarded because of the deep dedication the Thai people held for their Buddhist religion. In December 1964 Elder Hinckley again visited Thailand. In his journal he noted his positive impressions of the people, their relative prosperity, the general stability of the government, and the missionary-mindedness of the members. Twice he observed that he thought the Church should have missionaries working there. He wrote: "When we come to this part of the world we are almost overwhelmed by a realization of the immensity of our task in preaching the restored gospel. Nevertheless, I feel that with the planning done by our American brothers and sisters who are living here, we could begin to do some missionary work." [^2]

During this time the group was gaining in strength and the organization of the Church was becoming more complete. In September 1964 a modest Mutual Improvement Association was organized. In May 1965 the group outgrew the home in which they were meeting and arranged to meet in the private dining room of a restaurant. The American members had an active missionary program going. On January 21, 1966, Jim McElvee, a serviceman, became the first convert to be baptized in Thailand since 1854. Then, on September 11, 1966, Sister Nangnoi Thitapoora was baptized, the first Thai to join the Church. She worked for and lived with an American LDS family.

Several other important events occurred in 1966. On March 27 President Keith E. Garner organized the Thailand District of the Southern Far East Mission with Stirling Merrill as president. Because of the buildup of the Vietnam War, there were by this time a number of servicemen's groups, mostly in the northeast. By July the Bangkok group had more than two hundred members, and President Merrill saw fit to organize the Bangkok Branch, the first branch in the country, with Gordon M. Flammer as the first branch president.

TURNING THE KEY FOR THE PREACHING OF THE GOSPEL

On November 1, 1966, Elder Hinckley and Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Council of the Seventy, in company with mission president Garner and their wives, arrived in Bangkok after touring other areas of the Southern Far East Mission. That night they met with 145 members and investigators of the Church in a quarterly district conference. Elder Hanks noted that "a strong organization of the Church is now operating in Thailand." [^3] The following morning Elder Hinckley dedicated Thailand and "turned the key" that opened the country for the preaching of the gospel. Elder Hanks described the occasion:

Lumpini Park is a lovely oasis in the busy city of Bangkok, Thailand. Its beautiful lake and flower beds and trees and vast expanses of lawn draw many important visitors and have been the scene of many significant events. It is not likely, however, that the park has seen anything comparable to the event that occurred there at 6:30 A.M. on the morning of November 2, 1966.

At that hour in this center spot of the ancient kingdom of Siam, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley of the Council of the Twelve . . . dedicated modern Thailand to the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

The sweetness and solemnity of the sacred occasion touched and subdued the hearts of all who stood in the small circle on the slight prominence amidst the trees at lake side in Lumpini Park. [^4]

In his prayer Elder Hinckley prayed that the Lord's Spirit might rest on the land, the people, and their nation. He prayed that the government officials would be kind to the missionaries. He also prayed that the tongues of the missionaries might be loosened so that they could speak the language of the people and "that they shall be effective in proclaiming Thy word; and may there be many, Father, yea, thousands and tens of thousands who will hearken to their message." [^5]

Later the same day, Elders Hinckley and Hanks, along with others, visited Colonel Pin Muthukanta, director general of the Ministry of Religions. Colonel Pin (Thais use their first names almost exclusively) explained the procedure for registering the Church and offered to help them accomplish that task. Pin explained that although most Thais were Buddhists, there was religious freedom in Thailand. [^6]

In December the process of legally incorporating and registering the Church in Thailand was begun by the leaders of the Bangkok Branch. Branch president Flammer was appointed president of the LDS legal entity. During their November visit, Elder Hinckley and Elder Hanks also selected a property, which by the time of Elder Hinckley's next visit to Bangkok in October 1967 had been purchased as a chapel site. The two-third-acre plot cost $77,000. The registration procedure was moving along well at that time, and Elder Hinckley expected missionaries to be in Thailand before long. On November 16 he announced to the Brethren in Salt Lake City that on November 1 the Church was officially incorporated and registered in Thailand. [^7]

After two or three months of delays, the Church received permission to send missionaries into the country. But Thailand had strict limits on the number of aliens who could live in the country. Foreign missionaries, LDS and others, were required to leave the country every seventy-five days to renew their visas. Although Elder Hinckley and the mission president hoped that this regulation could be set aside by the government, it was not changed until 1978, when foreign missionaries were allowed to stay in the country on one-year visas. Even after that the Thai government would change its position several times.

FULL-TIME MISSIONARY WORK BEGINS

On February 2, 1968, President and Sister Garner and six missionaries, Peter W. Basker, Craig G. Christensen, L. Carl Hansen, Alan H. Hess, Larry R. White, and Robert W. Winegar, arrived in Bangkok to commence full-time missionary work. Elder Hess came from Hong Kong; the other five were transferred from Taiwan. International tensions were high at the moment because of the Tet Offensive of the Vietnam War. And "Due to the fighting in Vietnam," Elder White wrote later, "Bangkok's Don Muang Airport was crowded with troops when the missionaries and the mission president and his wife arrived. The troops could not return to their bases because they were under attack in Vietnam. This created a dramatic setting for the commencement of the work in Thailand." [^8] President Garner soon found a residence for the missionaries that was also suitable for holding meetings. When the Garners left for Hong Kong three days later, he gave the missionaries rather terse directions: "Learn the Thai language and arrange to have the six missionary discussions translated." [^9] They followed both instructions carefully.

Through intensive language study at a local school and through getting out among the people and using the language, they became conversant in a few months. All six missionaries had already learned either Mandarin or Cantonese. According to White, "On March 6, 1968, the six elders began full-time proselyting in the Thai language. On March 17, 1968, the first Thai meeting in the Thai language was held." The elders were helped greatly by the translation ability of Anan Eldredge, the first Thai male to join the Church. President Garner asked Anan to live with the elders, help them learn the Thai language, and help lay the foundation. [^10] Anan had been adopted by an American LDS family.

Following instructions, the elders hired a translator, and by October 1968 the missionary discussions were printed in romanized Thai (i.e., using the Western alphabet rather than the Thai script), along with a Thai glossary. The next July, shortly after W. Brent Hardy replaced Garner as mission president in Hong Kong, Hardy asked the missionaries to revise and correct this translation of the six discussions. "This proved to be a ponderous task," said Craig G. Christensen, supervising elder, "for the native Thai translators who had been hired were faced with two major problems: (1) they were not familiar with the Church terminology and doctrine, and (2) the Thai language makes no provision for Christian concepts. For example, 'Savior' must be translated 'the Holy One who helps.' To date [1970], no suitable equivalent for 'priesthood' has been discovered or coined." [^11] A month later, November 1968, Joseph Smith's Testimony was published in Thai, the first Latter-day Saint material to be printed in that language.

By that time, the elders had brought several Thais into the Church. Boonepluke and Rabiab Klaophin, who had been introduced to the missionaries by branch president Flammer, were baptized on May 15 in the first baptismal service held by the missionaries in Thailand. Regarding the cultural obstacles to Brother Boonepluke's baptism, Christensen commented: "A Thai man who rejects Buddhism is looked upon as somewhat of a traitor, because Buddhism and the Thai government are inextricably related historically, ceremonially, and philosophically. Such a person becomes a social outcast in many circles and is almost certain to bring disgrace upon his family." [^12]

Nevertheless, he joined the Church. Unfortunately, pressures were too great and he soon fell away. Not long after, on July 4, 1968, Sister Srilaksana Suntarahut Gottsche and two of her daughters were baptized. By late 1968 Thai groups had been organized at Bangkok and Korat.

It was also during November 1968 that Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve visited Thailand on his first official visit since being assigned as supervisor of the Asia area. Prior to his visit for district conference, he informed President Hardy and the missionaries that he desired an audience with His Majesty, the King of Thailand, Bhumibol Adulyadej. When the elders in Bangkok began trying to make arrangements, they were discouraged by local officials. Nevertheless, on the eve of Elder Benson's visit, and after a special fast by the elders, permission was granted. Benson's former position as U.S. Secretary of Agriculture no doubt helped open the king's doors. Although an official told Elder Benson and his party that they could have no more than fifteen minutes with the king, the king was "so congenial and interested" in Elder Benson's message and purposes "that he didn't let them go for over 45 minutes." Elder Benson presented the king with copies of Meet the Mormons, a leather-bound English version of the Book of Mormon, and the Thai version of Joseph Smith's Testimony. The elders later learned that the king had kept a stadium full of people waiting while he conversed with Elder Benson. [^13] According to Elder Benson, the interview was helpful because it brought the Church's presence in Thailand and the purposes of the Church to the attention of the king.

In the beginning, the missionary force was small. At the end of 1968 there were only eight elders in the country, and by the end of the next year the number had increased to only twenty-five. By then Thailand had become part of the new Southeast Asia Mission with headquarters in Singapore. Beginning in 1970, Thai was taught to missionaries at the Language Training Mission at the Church College of Hawaii in Laie. (During May 1975 all language training was consolidated at the LTM—the Language Training Mission, as it was then called—at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah.)

When President G. Carlos Smith Jr. and his wife, Lavon, established the Southeast Asia Mission in November 1969, it was possible for him to devote much more time to Thailand than the presidents of the Southern Far East Mission had been able to do. During late 1969 and 1970 the work moved faster. In December 1969 translation work was started on the Book of Mormon. Church Translation Department leaders D'Monte W. Coombs and Watanabe Kan hired Mr. Prayoon Nanakorn, a non-Mormon, to be head translator. His work was reviewed by a small group of elders and a recent convert, Srilaksana Gottsche. Sister "Sri," however, ended up, along with elders and other members (there was always a committee involved), doing much of the final translation that was published in 1976.

Sister Sri's conversion to the gospel was something out of the ordinary. Elders Larry R. White and L. Carl Hansen found her at home on March 20, 1968, only six weeks after they arrived in Bangkok. When she entered the room, having been called by a maid, she greeted them in English. Years later, Elder White recounted: "It was my turn to give the introduction, and I began to tell her of the Book of Mormon in English. I had no sooner begun when the Spirit fell upon me and told me with great force that this lady would join the Church. This manifestation was so forceful that I was overcome by emotion and unable to continue speaking. (This had never happened to me before during an introduction. It has also never happened to me again since that time.) I passed the book to Elder Hansen to finish the introduction. He did so ably." [^14]

Srilaksana Suntarahut Gottsche—Sister Sri—was the principal translator into Thai of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. (Photo by author)

Thus began a series of meetings with Sister Sri. She says she was quite uninterested and didn't want them to come back. But White especially persisted, and eventually she accepted an English copy of the Book of Mormon. White continued: "In the middle of May, a transformation took place. I learned many years later what had happened. . . . She was waiting to go out with some of her friends when she noticed the Book of Mormon on the shelf. Because she had paid ten baht (about 50 cents) for it, she felt that she should at least read a little. She casually took the book off of the shelf and opened it at random. As soon as her eyes fell upon the first passage, she began to shake, and she felt something which she had never felt before. Immediately, she knew the book was true." [^15]

Beginning at that moment, she read almost nonstop until she had completed every page. Sister Sri made a tremendous sacrifice to accept the gospel, and she has remained true to her testimony. She had been reared for much of her childhood as a companion to the queen. Her life had been filled with associations with Thailand's royalty and society's elite. Joining the Church ended these associations. She had learned English while in the best The Asoke chapel was constructed with funds largely donated by American service personnel. It now serves as stake center and Church Educational System offices. (Photo by author) Catholic schools. After attending Chulalongkorn University, she became the financial secretary for a group of high-level government officials. Her language skills were excellent. [^16] Fortunately, she turned those skills to the service of the Lord as the principal translator of the Book of Mormon. Along with Anan Eldredge and other committee members, she also translated the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. When asked how she learned to be a translator, she replied, "By the gift of the language. By the Holy Ghost, by the Lord." She explained that when troubled with a word like priesthood, she would fast, pray, and talk to the Lord for many days. She finally received the answer to that word problem in a type of vision. She saw the word thana purohit ("in the air on the ceiling"). It does not have a literal meaning in Thai, but it became the word used for priesthood in all LDS publications in Thailand. [^17]

In 1970 construction was started on what is called the Asoke chapel in downtown Bangkok. The property had been purchased in 1967. Most of the funds for construction were contributed by LDS servicemen stationed in Thailand. This project took much longer than local leaders hoped or expected. It was dedicated by Elder David B. Haight, then an Assistant to the Twelve, on August 28, 1974. For many years the Asoke chapel was the only LDS constructed building in Thailand. Having recently been remodeled (1995), it serves as the stake center and CES head-quarters for the country.

Also during 1970, President Smith sent missionaries to Chiang Mai in the north and to Khon Kaen in the northeast. (Twelve other cities were opened during the next six years.) President Smith had started a missionary basketball program in 1969 as a means of increasing the visibility of the Church. During 1970 the elders' team played in tournaments in various parts of the country and brought favorable publicity. Later that year, in August, missionaries arranged to have Music and the Spoken Word, which originates from Temple Square in Salt Lake City, aired over Thai radio in Korat. At the same time, the elders initiated an open-house program in Chiang Mai. The purpose of this proselyting method was to introduce non-Mormons to the Church in a non-threatening, comfortable setting.

THE BUDDHA-IMAGE DEBACLE

Although President Smith and the missionaries worked earnestly to plant the gospel firmly and to create a good public image, notoriety came to the Church in an unexpected and unfortunate way. On June 22, 1972, a group of missionaries traveled to Sukhothai, the ancient capital of Thailand. This city, now in ruins, is important not only because of its historical significance but also because it contains many Buddhist relics and statues. While they were wandering through the area enjoying the lush vegetation and Thailand's ancient monuments, one of the elders climbed a statue of the Buddha (something akin to climbing the statue of Christ in the LDS visitors' center in Salt Lake City) and sat on the shoulders with his legs around the neck looking over and higher than the Buddha's head (for the Thai people, the head is the most sacred part of the body). Another elder took a picture. The Thais call this incident khii Khss phra, meaning "sitting on the neck of the Buddha." Although nothing malicious was intended, from the Thai point of view the two missionaries could not have committed a more disrespectful act of desecration.

The elder who took the picture took the film to a photo shop in Nakhon Sawan, the city where he was serving, for developing. An employee noticed the subject of the picture (a slide), made a copy, and sent it to a newspaper, the Siam Rath, where it appeared on Sunday, July 9, 1972. Other newspapers picked up the photograph and printed it, and the matter exploded into a national scandal. Seemingly every newspaper in the country became involved as the elders were accused in the newspapers and in court of conspiring to desecrate and insult the Buddhist religion and the Thai nation. The Thai Christian community, especially, made every effort to disassociate itself from the Mormons. Some of the articles that were written by members of other Christian faiths were the most vehement against the Church.

Three days after the picture first appeared in the Siam Rath, the two elders were arrested by the Nakhon Sawan police. The following day, before their lawyer could even prepare a case and before newly arrived mission president Miller F. Shurtleff could make the trip from Singapore to Nakhon Sawan, the elders were tried and found guilty of desecrating a Buddhist image and of committing contemptuous, insulting actions against the Buddhist religion. The judge sentenced them to six months in jail, the maximum the law allowed. They served the entire term. Following their release from jail, they were deported from the country, an event that was reported widely in the newspapers in Thailand and over Associated Press and other wire services.

There have been many consequences of this mistake. Nakhon Sawan had to be closed as a proselyting area, and only gradually did the furor die down elsewhere in the country. (At this date, 1996, there are still no missionaries in Nakhan Sawan.) Although some elders reported that more people had an interest in them and their purposes than before, the number of baptisms dropped throughout the country for the next two years. Fortunately, government officials handled the matter deftly. They simply warned the missionaries that such actions could not be tolerated. Two years later, however, President Paul D. Morris summarized the ongoing consequences of that innocent but thoughtless moment:

"The position of the Church in Thailand is still extremely tenuous. Everyone remembers our total foolishness in that serious insult to the Thai people and their religious beliefs. Thai members of the Church receive a great deal of very real persecution and abuse because of that mistake by two supposedly informed elders. The Thai people are extremely nationalistic. . . .

"It is most important that we do nothing at this time that may give people an excuse for further attacking the Church here." [^18]

Perhaps no act by LDS missionaries during the past twenty-five years has more strongly emphasized the need for greater maturity, more cultural knowledge, and increased sensitivity everywhere in the Church than the Buddha-image problem in Thailand. [^19] This incident has cast a dark shadow upon the Church in Thailand that affects relations with Thai bureaucrats to the present.

THAILAND BECOMES A MISSION

Because of the vastness of the area that the Southeast Asia Mission president had to supervise and because Thailand needed closer supervision, on August 6, 1973, the First Presidency created the Thailand Mission (the name was changed to the Thailand Bangkok Mission on June 20, 1974) and called Paul D. Morris as president, who was already residing in Bangkok. Morris and his wife, Betty, had served missions in Hong Kong. At the time of his call, Morris was employed as an economist by the U.S. Agency for International Development in Bangkok and was also serving as president of the Thailand District of the Southeast Asia Mission. Because of his long experience in Asia, President Morris was able to teach his missionaries many important concepts that improved Thai-LDS relations. The missionaries themselves were keenly aware of the need to adapt teaching materials, pictures, tracts, fliers, and the like to the Thai setting. [^20]

Between 1973 and 1976 President Morris pressed the work forward on a number of fronts: many books and manuals were translated (between 1969 and 1980, about thirty different tracts were translated and printed in Thai), local leadership was strengthened, missionaries and members performed on radio and television, the family home evening program was expanded, and local members published articles about the Church in Thai newspapers. During that time sister missionaries were called to Thailand and were particularly helpful in the welfare services area.

A LATTER-DAY SAINT MUSICAL GROUP

In August 1976 Harvey D. Brown, another U.S. government employee who had many years of experience in Asia (he had held responsible positions in the Church in the Philippines and Vietnam) became the second president of the Thailand Bangkok Mission. His era is best remembered for the excellent progress made in building the image of the Church. In September, having received permission from Elder Hinckley, he announced to the missionaries his plan to re-form and enhance the usefulness of a singing group. Auditions were held, and six elders were selected to serve full-time in the Sidthichon Yuk Sud Tai ("the Latter-day Saints"). A few weeks later they gave their first performance. Their unique blend of Western and Thai sounds made them an instant success. By Christmastime 1976 they were touring the country and performing before thousands. They had already performed on television in Bangkok with positive reviews. The results were exactly what President Brown had hoped: interest in the Church increased markedly.

One of Brown's desires was to help various charities raise money. The group performed at many functions to benefit such organizations as the Thai International Red Cross, Bangkok Teachers College, various hospitals, and a fund-raising concert for a drug rehabilitation program. The Sidthichon Yuk Sud Tai received a special invitation to perform at a fund-raiser for one of the king's charities. One of the participants described the experience: "This concert proved to be a highlight in Church history in Thailand. After the music group finished its part of the show, which included songs written by the king, Queen Sirikit and King Bhumibol asked to meet the music group. The next day, the same newspaper which carried the picture five years earlier of a missionary desecrating a Buddha, carried a picture of the king receiving the formal bows of the music group members." [^21]

Until this time, the group had been cautious about identifying their real purposes as missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now, they decided to take the risk and let audiences, live and on TV, know who they were. Their popularity continued to grow. Referrals resulting from the group's activities kept the missionary force busy for more than a year. "In its twenty-eight months of existence," wrote Peter Ashman, one of the members of the group, "the music group appeared on TV over seventy times, recorded five albums, [gave] three royal performances, and did over 500 live performances for over one million people in every major city in Thailand." [^22]

Believing that the purposes of the group had been fulfilled (the visa situation had improved considerably and many Thais viewed the Church more positively), President Brown discontinued the group in July 1979.

PROBLEMS WITH MISSIONARY VISAS AND NUMBERS

At the end of 1976 the missionary corps had grown to 170 missionaries, but in 1978, in spite of the success of the singing group, the government pressured the mission to drop its numbers to about 125 elders and sisters. In 1985 the number of missionaries was reduced to fewer than 100. And to make matters much more difficult, in 1986 the missionaries were required to leave the country to extend their visas every ninety days. The Cambodian border was closed because of internal warfare, and the missionaries were forced to make an expensive and time-consuming trip south across the border of Malaysia. The ninety-day renewal policy was not changed until 1992.

Under Presidents Morris and Brown, missionaries averaged one convert baptism each per year. In 1978 a total of 144 Thais joined the Church. There were ten local full-time missionaries serving, and membership exceeded 1,150 at the end of that year. One by one Elder Hinckley's dedicatory prayer that "thousands and tens of thousands" of people would join the Church was being fulfilled.

SERVICE TO THE DOWNTRODDEN

In May 1980 Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Quorum of the Seventy was assigned as Executive Administrator over Southeast Asia. He had under his care eleven missions, including Thailand. Soon after assuming his responsibilities in Asia, two realities became clear to him. First, the Church was not perceived well by many influential people in Asia. The Church was known for its aggressive proselyting but not for Christian service, such as building hospitals and schools and caring for Asia's poor and downtrodden. "That, of course, was disappointing to me," Elder Hanks said later. "I felt and feel that we need to establish ourselves, not theologically according to their definition, but, at least in terms of behavior, we need to be able to identify with what we so earnestly pronounce ourselves to be, and that's Christian." [^23]

Second, the effects of the Vietnam War and the horrors of the Pol Pot regime in Cambodia were still being felt in 1980, for more than one million Vietnamese, Cambodian, and Laotian refugees had sought asylum in new lands since 1975. Numerous refugee camps had sprung up along the Thai-Cambodian and Thai-Laotian borders, and other camps had been situated in other parts of the country. [^24] (At one time there were twenty-one camps, including processing, holding, and transit centers.) In 1980 there were more than 250,000 refugees in Thailand, and by 1983 more than 600,000 refugees had crossed into the country. [^25]

On a trip to Thailand, Bruce Opie, area director for temporal affairs, and a missionary couple took Elder Hanks to see Lumpini camp in Bangkok. Brother Opie had formerly served as mission president in Western Australia and had implemented extensive service projects among his missionaries. He was interested in seeing the Church pursue humanitarian service undertakings as a means of helping the helpless and building the reputation of the Church for Christian service. Elder Hanks was deeply moved by what he saw and experienced. As a consequence, the two matters—the way the Church was perceived and the problems of the refugees—came together in Elder Hank's mind, and he conceived what he hoped would be a way of modestly helping some refugees while performing true Christian service in the name of the Church. He would involve the Church in service to refugees.

ESTABLISHING THE REFUGEE WELFARE SERVICES MISSIONARIES IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

Elder Marion D. Hanks

In April 1980 we learned we were going to Asia. I knew that in Asia there were enormous refugee problems, great concentrations of people who were in terrible trouble who were not being served adequately.

The Brethren were wonderfully cooperative. [Elder Gordon B. Hinckley gave special support.] A refugee fund was established by the Church. It was announced, the Firsd Presidency gave their backing, and permission was given me to make some effort to intrude on the tremendous challenges that were out there—again, in a very modest way.

A new camp was contemplated out near the Gulf of Thailand, 100 miles out of Bangkok. I surveyed that setting, tried to make arrangements with the United Nations official, and was rejected. He told me that the mere mention of my coming—that is, a Mormon official—had aroused such antagonism and opposition in all the voluntary agencies that they had gone out of their way to foreclose any future for the Mormons in helping with refugee work in that area.

A miracle of sorts occurred. I was able to persuade—and I meant it—this wonderful young Swiss, who was giving his life to the work, spoke a dozen languages, and was a Christ-like person, that we could come in and give expert assistance without proselyting. I guaranteed it.

He said, "I am assured that Mormons are such aggressive proselyters that it is not possible for you to engage in this kind of work without your proselyting program."

"I am responsible for the Church in Asia," I replied, "I give you my personal assurance that it can and will happen and that we can give you something you are not getting from these other wonderful people. We will come with qualified people and will do a job for you that you will be grateful for."

Mario Howard later described his action as a great leap of faith, but he agreed to our coming. I was then notified that we were assigned the cultural orientation responsibility at this large camp in Phanat Nikhom, Chon Buri Province, Thailand. I telexed home: "I need now to back up my word. We need qualified teachers. We need materials to supply them."

While [a videotape] was being prepared, my wife and I took our first trip around the missions of Asia, our direct responsibility. First, we went to Kaohsiung in Southern Taiwan and held a missionary meeting just for get-acquainted purposes with those 150 missionaries. As part of the meeting, the mission president called on six missionaries to give us an idea about the place and the people.

When the sixth spoke, President [George A.] Baker leaned over to me and said, "Is that all you would like to hear from?"

I said, "Well, I am satisfied, but I would be happy to hear from any others if you have others you would like to call on." "Well, maybe one more, if I may." He called on a sister missionary.

She was a lovely looking young woman, and at the pulpit she said, "I joined the Church in Florida out of a very, very Catholic family. My joining was a great wrench to them and has been very disruptive to family unity. I am on this mission because I have a testimony of the gospel. I know the whisperings of the Spirit which brought me into the Church. Last night those whisperings came again. I was told I would speak today and what to say and so I prepared. When President Baker listed the six missionaries to speak, I began some serious self-examination. Had I mistaken the Spirit? Then I saw President Baker lean over to President Hanks, and I knew the word was getting through; and so, I was called and this is what I am to say to you." She then gave us the best two-and-a-half minute talk on love and forgetting ourselves and serving the Lord I have ever heard. She sat down.

The meeting ended and we stood up at the front shaking hands with the missionaries as they came by. But two didn't come; they went out the back door. Just as we were finishing shaking hands the two returned and came up to the front. I shook hands and said "Wait a minute."

A conversation ensued. The American was Rita Edmonds. I asked her a rather unusual question, three times, "What are you doing here?" Her first answer was that she was a welfare service missionary, her second was that she was trying to help the people, and her third answer, "I guess I don't know what you mean. I am here as a missionary trying to do the work."

I smiled and said, "What did you do before you came here?"

"I worked with a college president."

"What is your educational background?"

She mentioned a master's degree, and a doctor's degree from Columbia University.

"In what field?"

"In community education, family education."

I smiled again. "Shall I tell you what you are doing here? You are going to be the leader of the first organized team of Latter-day Saints moving into a refugee camp in Asia to help them get ready to go to their third country."

She began to cry. "Brother Hanks, for eight months I have been here pleading with the Lord to either help me get satisfied with what I am doing—which is very good work and which should satisfy me—or to fulfill the promises made in my blessing that I would be able to help some downtrodden refugee people in my lifetime." [Sister Edmonds had seen in her mind's eye the place where she was to serve. When she finally arrived in Phanat Nikom, Thailand, she felt that she was where she was supposed to be.]

My wife and I went to lunch with the Bakers. I asked President Baker, "How would you like to lose your finest sister missionary?"

Sister Baker said, "Oh, not Sister [Karen] Gerdes!" (She had given the talk on love.)

"Well," I said, "I really didn't have her in mind but that is a marvelous idea. How would you like to lose your two finest sister missionaries?" Those two with their credentials—one a social worker with university credentials, the other with a doctor's degree in community education—came to Thailand as forerunners of the team the Mormons were gathering to keep our promise.

I established three objectives for the Brethren as we began. The first was: we want to do it because it needs to be done. These are God's children. They are in terrible trouble. We're his disciples. We ought to be helping.

We have never, to my knowledge, breached the rule of the camp against teaching religion. We haven't had one single complaint. These wonderful young people have taught principles by the Spirit so that a Jesuit, a marvelous man and a Christ-like person, who watched them greet groups of arriving refugees, said, "There is something about these young women different from anybody else on earth. I have never seen refugee children leap into the arms of voluntary agency workers. Your people have something that is different and real."

Regarding the work which our LDS sisters performed in Hong Kong, [where the work was later extended], a letter came from Mr. Morgan, vice-president of Red Cross International, acknowledging that the camp would be closing and commending us:

"There is no doubt that the services your Church has provided have been enormously appreciated by the refugees. So often these poor people have been bewildered and overwhelmed by the mere act of survival in a hostile environment. Your Church members have given them the moment of respite, the instruction, and the hope for a future that will help them pick up the shattered threads of their lives. But your members have given something else too. There is a better understanding of your own objectives and ideals to the members of the other agencies and the people working in this center. Working together we have all moved closer and become ourselves much more understanding and tolerant. We are all going to miss you very much."

The second objective was to improve our institutional credibility, not because we wanted credit but because we wanted the credibility that comes when you do something worth being appreciated for.

[The third objective was to build the Kingdom.] I have told the Brethren I didn't know whether I would live to see it, but I had every confidence that we would see a strengthening of the kingdom if we just did the work of the Lord for those who came seeking, even though the initial result would be incidental to our purpose. We have seen that hope fulfilled in such measure as could be called miraculous. [^26]

Rita Edmonds and Karen Gerdes flew from Taiwan to Hong Kong to begin their new assignment on September 17, 1980. While there they held numerous meetings with Bruce Opie and Elder Hanks and visited refugee camps and agencies that were involved with that service. Two weeks later they went on to Bangkok, where they received further orientation and sought inspiration regarding how they should proceed. On October 3, while sitting in an orientation meeting at the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Staff, Sister Edmonds had the plan fall into place in her mind. After spending a week filling out the details of how the Mormon refugee effort should operate, she called Elder Hanks, shared her thoughts, and asked for specific welfare services missionaries from several missions in Southeast Asia. Two Thai sisters who had previously served missions had been assigned by this time. Ten additional sisters were brought to Thailand by the end of October. [^27] These were women of unusual ability—teachers, nurses, social workers, linguists. Regarding these sisters, Elder Hanks said:

"It is a miracle as large as any I ever heard of that these twelve were all there, all over cultural shock, they knew the languages of the Orient, and they were high quality, very attractive people, without exception. They were musically on a genius level. They could play everything. And they were, most importantly, filled with the Spirit. In almost every case . . . they were awaiting the fulfillment of their patriarchal blessings and their mission settings apart." [^28]

In October 1980, when these sisters set up headquarters at a new refugee camp near Phanat Nikhom, Chon Buri Province, about one hundred miles south of Bangkok, their modest sign said simply "WSURT, Welfare Services Unit for Refugees in Thailand." Church media experts at Bonneville Productions in Salt Lake City had produced A New Home, a thirty-minute videotape in English to help refugees understand the process of moving to a third country and a few basics regarding life in the United States. The welfare services sisters were ready when the first refugees arrived. Sixty thousand refugees were assigned to that camp at any time. [^29]

The initial missionaries were replaced by others after about six months (with the exception of Sister Edmonds, who remained for a year), and a missionary couple from the Thailand Bangkok Mission was assigned to support and help. The refugee project went on in one form or another for ten years in Thailand and was instituted in Hong Kong and the Philippines as well. The missionaries taught no religion, for that was the original commitment. But they exemplified Christianity through their lives, and they taught some beautiful songs, such as "I Am a Child of God." Elder Hanks described service in action with these words:

"Here's a picture of this beautiful little black-haired missionary from Provo on her knees, totally unconscious of the fact that there were 500 refugees sitting there. She's got a little brown baby in her arms and there's a diaper on the floor. They had never seen a diaper. She holds this little brown child and smiles and warms him, and somehow he didn't cry. She kissed him on the cheek and then she laid him gently down—she had the diaper sitting on her sweater on the concrete floor—and put the diaper on him and then held him up. And the women crowded around. They treated her about like they would the Lord, if they had understood Him." [^30]

They taught the refugees about the basic things of life in a modern country. With old equipment, such as a telephone, toilet, stove, chairs, table, bed, a refrigerator, and some paint purchased with a contribution from the LDS Refugee Fund, they set up a model home and helped the refugees understand how things worked.

"At Christmastime they put on a performance of the Nativity," recalled Elder Hanks. "Sister Edmonds was the mother with a little brown baby. I'm saying we didn't break any religious rules, but we were representing what we are. They put on this pageant and gave them a little Christmas party. The people came up after, and a lady said to Rita Edmonds, 'Jesus' story is a refugee story, isn't it? His parents had to leave their home. If those people in the restaurant—"the inn"—had known who He was, they'd have given Him their bed.' They'd never heard of Christ before. Well, this kind of thing was going on and people were being touched."

The hungry, the thirsty, the naked, the homeless, the sick, the friendless, were cared for by the refugee missionaries. [^31] Many lives were changed, and after coming to America a number of refugees sought out the Church, learned of the restored gospel, and accepted baptism. In one form or another, the welfare services and the humanitarian services mission of the Church has continued since that time. Also, it is clear that the four hours of service that Mormon missionaries offer each week throughout the world had its inception, at least in concept, in the refugee missions of Thailand, Hong Kong, and the Philippines.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF SEMINARY AND INSTITUTE IN THAILAND

The first seminary classes in Thailand were offered to expatriate youth during the 1960s. Ten Thai members reportedly attended a seminary class in 1979. Suchat Chaichana, a missionary, was assigned to translate some seminary manuals into Thai in 1979 and 1980. Brother Suchat was asked to start the official CES program while serving on a Church-service basis from 1982 until 1984. In 1984 he was hired by CES as a full-time teacher and administrator. Since 1984 the seminary and institute program has gained numbers of students and faculty. In 1987 Brother Samart Kaivalvatana was hired as a second full-time teacher and administrator. He was assigned to the northeast and lived in Khon Kaen. Institute numbers have always been larger than seminary because of the common age of new converts; there are more members in the eighteen-to-thirty age bracket than in the younger group. Institute classes have played a major role in preparing and providing Thai missionaries. In 1987 thirty-five institute students entered the mission field. By the mid-1990s there were more than five hundred seminary and institute students in every branch in Thailand. Almost twenty teachers were involved and a number of daily seminary classes were being held. [^32]

1988 TO 1995: PERIOD OF REMARKABLE GROWTH

Mission president Anan Eldredge was born Anan Tubtimta and lived the early part of his life in a small village about five hundred kilometers north of Bangkok. When he was eight years old, his mother died, leaving him with lasting questions regarding life and death. His father was principal of a school and encouraged Anan to do well in his studies. "When I was sixteen," remembered Anan, "I left home and went to Bangkok, where I worked as a busboy in a hotel." He became friends with the youngest son of Louis and June Eldredge, Latter-day Saints who were working for the U.S. State Department in Thailand. They treated him like family, and when they were transferred north to a large military base, they invited Anan to come with them.

"I met two Latter-day Saint servicemen who discussed the gospel with me. Through them, I finally found the answers I had on life and death. I discovered who I was, where I came from, and where I was going." He studied for six months and then asked for baptism. Anan was baptized on December 24, 1967. [^33]

Anan Eldredge was the first Thai member of the Church to serve as mission president. As a young missionary, he taught American elders the Thai language and translated many Church works. (Photo by author)

Along the way, the Eldredges invited Anan to be a permanent member of their family, and he was formally adopted. He changed his name to Eldredge and later moved to the United States with his new family.

As mentioned earlier, shortly after his baptism, Anan moved in with the first six missionaries, taught them the Thai language, and helped with the first translations of LDS literature. From 1970 to 1973 Anan served a full-time mission in his homeland. After returning to California, marrying Margaret Brown (a convert from England) in the Los Angeles Temple, and earning a college degree, he served for five years as director of the new Church Translation and Distribution Center in Bangkok during the later 1970s.

In 1988, while living in Anchorage, Alaska, Anan was called to preside over the Thailand Bangkok Mission. He was the first Thai to serve in this capacity. During his tenure as mission president, President Anan (again, Thais use their first names almost exclusively) saw conversion rates increase considerably, and he and Margaret helped build up the Church in many ways. Anan constantly emphasized the need for members to fellowship and retain new converts and to activate less-active members. He also endured a period of personal suffering during which local newspapers, police, and courts harassed him for statements he had made regarding Thai traditions. During his time of difficulty, the members of the Church stood united behind him. [^34]

The first Thai temple excursions happened because President Anan received inspiration to pursue that goal. Each year he called all of the district and branch presidents and their wives together to counsel with them, teach, share testimonies, and encourage them in their callings. While in a Sunday meeting, Anan began a major address, but the Spirit constrained him to change the subject. Remembering the moment, he said: "Sometimes you have a prepared talk and you want to go ahead with it. Then, after a couple of minutes, somehow—I don't know what happened—but I closed the book. I said, Brothers, do you know what we need? We need to sanctify ourselves. How long have you been a member of the Church? Twenty years? Eighteen years? Fifteen years? None of them had been to the temple. I finally said, we need to go to the temple. All of us." [^35]

President Anan then challenged the leaders to sanctify themselves and to put aside the money necessary to take their families to the temple six months later. The leaders and their families made many sacrifices, but six months later 201 Thai Saints traveled in several groups to the Manila Philippines Temple to receive their endowments and be sealed as eternal families. CES country director Suchat Chaichana and his associate Samart Kaivalvatana traveled to each branch throughout the mission to teach the temple preparation course to the members.

President Kriangkrai Pithaphong of the Khon Kaen District listed the Manila temple excursion as one of several highlights of his life. "When we flew to Manila, it was a milestone in the history of the Church in Thailand. . . . We were all very excited," he recalled. "It was a trip we had planned for a long time. It was very expensive, approximately $350 per person. Everyone worked hard to raise the money to go. Even our ten-year-old daughter, Kesarin, made some money selling charcoal for cooking. It was a special time for us. . . . Being sealed together in the temple brought a special spirit to our family." [^36] In January 1993 the next mission president, Larry R. White, wrote that the temple excursion "resulted in an unprecedented infusion of strength and dedication into the lives of Church member in Thailand." [^37] Other smaller excursions have followed in subsequent years.

The years 1991 and 1992 brought political turmoil to all the people of Thailand. In February 1991 a military faction under the name of the National Peace-Keeping Council ousted the civilian government in a coup d'ètat. The council justified this move by claiming corruption in the civilian government. The pro-military faction appointed a civilian, the very popular and highly respected Anand Panyarachun, as prime minister. He served for a year with distinction and then graciously left office. He was replaced in March 1992 by General Suchinda Kraprayoon, one of the main leaders of the coup. But his appointment was not a popular one, because he had promised many times not to accept the office and also because he had not been elected to parliament, a legal requirement for election as prime minister. Soon the opposition parties began calling for his resignation and threatened to demonstrate in the streets.

On April 20, 1992, several weeks after Suchinda's appointment, fifty thousand people gathered in the Royal Plaza. For the next three weeks the calls for Suchinda's resignation became stronger and momentum increased. But he refused to step down. Demonstrations occurred nightly, with more than one hundred thousand people taking part. The movement also spread to other major Thai cities.

On May 18 the demonstrations became violent; at least six people were killed by riot police, and a state of emergency was declared. Missionaries were instructed to stay away from the demonstration areas and to use great care. The next day government forces fired at random on protesters, leaving many dead and wounded. President White instructed missionaries in Bangkok to stay in their apartments, and a district conference in Khon Kaen was canceled. David N. Phelps, a Latter-day Saint who had served his mission in Thailand and now worked as an attorney in Bangkok, was an eyewitness. He described these events this way:

What ended up happening at that point, which was very, very dramatic, was that His Majesty, the King, intervened. His Majesty does not have any parliamentary power or any political power, but because he is a monarch that is so highly revered and loved, he has intense power because of the position he holds in Thai society. And he called before him this general [the prime minister], and also the man who had pretty much emerged as the leader of the pro-democracy movement. They came to his palace and on national television, they got, pardon the pun, a royal scolding. He was very stern. It was very apparent as we watched his face that he had not one bone of happiness in his body at that point. He looked at the two of them and he told them that he wanted the violence, the shooting, the killing, to stop immediately. He told them that the two of them were waging a major personal battle and those who were losing were all of the subjects of the Thai nation and he wanted it stopped immediately. That was all it took and the bloodshedding stopped. [^38]

The king's intervention had a profound calming effect, but within a short time tensions increased. Although Suchinda resigned, the new candidate for prime minister from the military faction was not popular with most of the pro-democracy parties. Fears were high that more violence would erupt if he were elected prime minister.

This was the situation on June 7, 1992, when Elder Neal A. Maxwell and Elder Russell M. Nelson and their wives arrived in Bangkok for a district conference that day.

In the general session many profound and inspiring words were expressed by the Apostles and their wives, but the most meaningful moment came when Elder Maxwell pronounced an apostolic blessing. "Shortly before Elder Maxwell stood up to speak," President White recounted, "I expressed my desire to him that if possible he leave a special blessing on the King, the leaders and the people of Thailand because of the critical political situation." David Phelps, who acted as translator, added: "Elder Maxwell began his talk by greeting the members of the Church and by telling them that before he finished his talk he would pronounce a blessing. . . . He said, 'But the blessing that I will leave with you will not be an ordinary blessing, but under the office of the Holy Apostleship. I will leave an apostolic blessing.'" After giving an address on the Atonement of the Savior, Elder Maxwell said he wanted now to present an apostolic blessing. His words were eloquently simple, direct, and specific. In part, Elder Maxwell said:

"I leave a blessing on Thailand, the people, king, and leaders at this special hinge point in the history of this nation. I bless all those who have been named so there can be a spirit of reconciliation so what develops can be for the happiness and the good of the people of Thailand. Remember this blessing in your prayers to God today and tomorrow that these things will so occur. I bless you as a people that through your faithfulness, though your numbers are few, prayers and lives will be weighed in balance of this blessing. . . . I leave this blessing as an Apostle for myself and my colleague Elder Nelson." [^39]

Responding to the blessing, President White wrote: "The Spirit bore witness to me in a profound way at the moment that apostolic power had been exercised in a manner I had not previously experienced in my life and that powers unseen would bring to pass and fulfill the words of the Lord's anointed servants."

From this time on, matters moved quickly and in a most unexpected way. On Wednesday, June 10, only three days after Elder Maxwell's blessing, to everyone's surprise, Anand Panyarachun, who had served so well as prime minister for a year and who was so well respected and loved, was appointed to serve as interim prime minister again. The Bangkok Post said this was "a move greeted by a spontaneous outpouring of jubilation and relief." [^40] A feeling of peace came over the land.

Church leaders in Thailand were particularly pleased with Prime Minister Anand's appointment because they had worked well with his government while he was previously in office. Through the encouragement and assistance of political figures in Washington, D.C., the U.S. ambassador to Thailand (David F. Lambertson), and members of his staff, Prime Minister Anand's government created a new visa category that allowed Mormon missionaries to remain in Thailand for their entire missions and required them to renew their visas only once during that time. Mormon missionaries made their last trip to Malaysia in August 1992. At the same time, the government raised the number of missionary visas to one hundred. This allowed President White to send missionaries into a number of new areas to open branches. Convert baptisms rose to new highs in the wake of these stirring events. In 1993 the efforts of slightly more than one hundred missionaries resulted in more than four hundred baptisms.

By 1995 there were four districts and twenty-five branches in Thailand. Eleven chapels had been constructed, and others were under way. Church membership had surpassed the six thousand mark and was continuing to grow. Temple attendance, even at great cost and distance, was steadily increasing. New developments for the Church in Vietnam and Cambodia also came shortly after Elders Maxwell and Nelson left their blessings on Thailand.

The creation of the first stake in any nation is a signal event for Church members. Bangkok had been near the critical mass, so to speak, for some time. Shortly after Troy L. Corriveau, accompanied by his wife, Lynn, became mission president on July 5, 1994, he recognized that the Bangkok District was operating very much like a stake and, in his opinion, should be one. Not many changes and advances were required to be ready. In April 1995 President Corriveau submitted forms recommending that a stake be organized. Soon, he received word that the stake had been approved and that Elder Neal A. Maxwell would be returning along with Elder Tai of the Asia Area Presidency to organize the new stake on June 17 and 18, 1995. After interviewing potential candidates for stake president and other offices, Elder Maxwell told President Corriveau that there were many strong men to choose from. [^41] Thipparat Kitsaward, who served previously as Bangkok District president, was sustained as the first president of the Bangkok Thailand Stake. He chose Suchat Chaichana, country CES director, as first counselor and Seksan Siriphan as second couselor. The stake consisted of 2,260 members in five wards and three branches.

When Thailand's first stake was organized in June 1995 by Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve, he selected Thipparat Kitsaward, formerly district president, to lead the Bangkok Stake. He is shown here with his wife, Buathong. (Photo by author)

Of special significance was the selection of Brother Pornchai Juntratip as Thailand's first stake patriarch. Brother Pornchai has been blind since his teenage years. He met the missionaries when he was in his late twenties. They asked him if he had heard of Joseph Smith or the Church, and he responded that he had not. They told him of Joseph Smith's first vision and invited him to kneel and pray and ask Heavenly Father if what they had said was true. Brother Pornchai said, "When I got up from my knees, I had this soft, warm feeling down my spine." [^42]

The elders brought him braille editions of the Book of Mormon and a copy of James E. Talmage's book The Articles of Faith —both in English. Fortunately, his father had helped him learn English when he was a boy. Later, Brother Pornchai completed Pornchai Juntratip, Thailand's first patriarch, is blind, yet he holds a master's degree in English from BYU. (Courtesy David Mitchell/LDS International Magazines) a home-study course and received an American high school diploma. He believed he had been prepared for the elders' visit. Pornchai was baptized on December 6, 1976, at the age of twenty-eight.

Subsequently, Brother Pornchai studied English literature at BYU—Hawaii and BYU in Provo, where he received a bachelor's degree in 1983 and his master's degree in 1986. After he returned to Bangkok, the Church hired him as a translator of seminary and institute manuals. At first the process was cumbersome because he used tape recorders to record his translations, but he taught himself to use a Thai-language typewriter, which he soon replaced with a computer.

A couple years after returning home, Pornchai married Kwanjai, a returned missionary. Their marriage was sealed in the Manila temple in June 1990, when the large group went there. Their first son was born in August 1991. His name, Pituporn, means "patriarchal blessing," which can also be interpreted to mean "blessing to his father."

When Elder Maxwell began the interview process to select new stake and ward officers, he told the individuals who were involved that it would not be necessary to select a stake patriarch if a spiritually prepared person were not available. After interviewing Brother Pornchai, Elder Maxwell said, "Brother Pornchai is a patriarch." Brother Pornchai, though young at forty-two years of age, has a spiritually mature soul. He is, said a colleague, "a man without guile, untouched by worldly influences." [^43]

ESTABLISHING THE CHURCH IN CAMBODIA

Since the days of the Vietnam War, when many LDS servicemen served in Cambodia, Church leaders in Southeast Asia have looked forward to the time when the restored gospel could be established there. Groups of Latter-day Saints, usually hardly more than families or a couple of members, held Church services together in Phnom Penh in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Many missionaries from Thailand also crossed into Cambodia to renew their visas during that time.

The 1990s have proven to be the moment in the Lord's timetable to allow the Church to take hold there. The following section [^44] is the record President Larry R. White kept of developments leading to the establishment of the Church in Cambodia.

STEP BY STEP TOWARD THE OPENING OF CAMBODIA

Larry R. White

March 1993—Arrangements have been made to visit Phnom Penh, Cambodia, with Elder John K. Carmack in April. If conditions remain stable in Cambodia, it should not be difficult to gain permission for welfare missionaries to work there. We have some excellent contacts with the Cambodian government.

April 1993—From April 2 to May 1, Elder John K. Carmack and I, and our wives, together with a Cambodian member, Vichit Ith, visited Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and had very encouraging talks with the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs who reported to us that his country has religious freedom. Elder Carmack left a blessing on the land. After elections on May 23 through May 28, it will be clearer whether we can do anything in the country; however, we had informal invitations to send English teachers. If peace can be established in Cambodia, I see no reason why welfare missionaries could not be sent there.

May 1993—The blessing left by Elder Carmack on the nation of Cambodia on April 30 seems to have had a very beneficial and even miraculous result. The elections were accompanied by much less violence than expected with the Khmer Rouge having little influence. If, after the new government is installed, the situation remains stable, there should be no reason why we cannot send welfare missionaries to Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia.

June 1993—I have noted with interest the dramatic changes in Cambodia, and how events there seem to be moving towards a peaceful solution after 23 years of war. In my opinion, this will lead to the introduction of missionaries into that country in the not-too-distant future.

July 1993—Conditions in Cambodia continue to improve, and our sole Cambodian member in Thailand is serving as an advisor to Cambodia's prime minister-elect, Prince Ranariddh. The Area Presidency is fully involved and is directing efforts toward opening the country for the work.

August 1993—The situation in Cambodia looks even better than the one in Laos.

September 1993—On September 24, an auspicious event took place when King Norodom Sihanonk promulgated the new Cambodian constitution. A Cambodian member in attendance at the ceremony expressed surprise at the remarkable spirit of harmony, unity, and reconciliation that was present among the various factions. He felt that this was a direct realization of the blessing left on the land by Elder Carmack on April 30. One particularly touching moment was when the Prime Minister, Prince Ranariddh, publicly embraced young members of the royal guard who formerly had been members of the Khmer Rouge.

The establishment of a permanent government in Cambodia clears the way for the Church to begin preparations to send welfare missionaries there.

December 1993—December was also noteworthy in that on December 8, the Area President, Elder Carmack, and I met with the Secretary of State for the Ministry of Religion in Cambodia, who assured us that if the Church submitted its application for recognition, that recognition would be quickly forthcoming. A trip to submit that application is planned for January 11.

January 1994—Work on opening Cambodia and Laos is progressing apace with special progress occurring on January 11. Translation into Cambodian of application documents was completed on January 21 with plans made to present them on February 8.

February 1994—On February 15, Brother Vic Ith lodged the Cambodian language application with the Ministry of Religion for recognition of the Church, and on February 28, I received word that recognition had been granted, although I have not yet seen any documentation. (Recognition was actually granted on February 26.)

March 1994—On March 23, I accompanied Elder Donald C. Dobson and his wife, Sister Sharlene Dobson [who were transferred from the India Bangalore Mission], to Phnom Penh as we opened Cambodia for missionary work. Sunday, March 27, marked the first Church services. They were held at the Hawaii Hotel and nine Cambodian investigators were present together with some other members. The Joseph Smith story and the message of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ were preached in the Cambodian language as translated by Wayne Wright, a returned missionary living in Phnom Penh.

Commencing on March 23, we visited various government and educational authorities exploring the welfare project which is to be established there by the Dobsons. A feeling of joy, excitement, and optimism prevailed as another country is opened in partial fulfillment of the Prophet Joseph's prophecy contained in the Wentworth Letter and reiterated in President Kimball's prophetic address in 1974. It is a great privilege to be a witness to and a participant in the events which mark the expansion of the work in Southeast Asia, which is moving forward with increasing rapidity. I am grateful for the foresight and vision of the Area Presidency which have permitted these things to happen.

May 1994—On May 9, I accompanied Elder and Sister Tai to Cambodia and on that day we witnessed the first convert baptism in Phnom Penh, Sister Pahl Mao. We also established an English teaching program for the missionary couple with the Ministry of Religion. On May 10, the welfare service project application document was submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and on May 27, a missionary couple, Elder Ronald E. Oswald and Sister Dawn Oswald, was transferred from Bangkok to Cambodia.

June 1994—I was thrilled to hear that four Cambodian-speaking missionaries will be transferred from the United States to Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

President White's monthly descriptions of the steps followed to take the Church to Cambodia make clear the processes that are generally undertaken by Church leaders when the Church enters a new country. Since White's record ended, the process has continued in a most promising way.

On August 8, 1994, four Cambodian-speaking elders—Richard W. Henderson (California Anaheim Mission), Jamie T. Hipwell (Massachusetts Boston Mission), John T. Smith (California Fresno Mission), and Brian W. Strong (Washington D.C. South Mission)—were transferred to Phnom Penh. They hardly had their bags unpacked when they began teaching Cambodians. Forty investigators were waiting for them, and they baptized seven during their first month. Subsequently other elders were brought in, and by April 1995 eight Cambodian-speaking elders and four Vietnamese-speaking elders were serving in Phnom Penh. In March 1995 Cambodia was officially made part of the Thailand Bangkok Mission. Until then it had been part of the Asia Area Mission. [^45]

By summer 1995 four couples, retired college and CES teachers, had also been sent to Phnom Penh to set up seminary and institute classes and to work with the Royal Agricultural University in setting up a prototype feed mill and a model cannery. The wives were engaged teaching English as a foreign language at the university and in other locations. To show its goodwill, the Church shipped forty thousand pounds of rice to Cambodia to help relieve the suffering of drought victims. A similar amount of used clothing was also sent and distributed to rural villagers. More help of this kind arrived later.

The missionaries have been restricted to working during day-light hours because security is questionable. They cannot work outside Phnom Penh, but its population of more than one hundred thousand provides enough to do. In June 1995 the Phnom Penh Branch was under the leadership of branch president Oya Shigeyuki, a Japanese member. At that time the branch began meeting in two different groups consisting of Cambodian speakers and Vietnamese speakers. President Oya presided over both groups. [^46] On November 19, 1995, President Troy Corriveau of the Thailand Bangkok Mission organized the Phnom Penh First, Second, and Third Branches—two for Cambodians and one for Vietnamese. With the creation of the second Cambodian-speaking branch, the Church procured a new French-style villa to serve as a meetinghouse. The building is large enough to serve a number of functions: the first floor contains the chapel, meeting hall and classroom; the second floor houses the service couple missionaries; the third floor is home to the proselyting elders; and the fourth floor is open for further expansion.

On January 21, 1996, President Corriveau organized the Phnom Penh District of the Church, the first district in that country. The first Cambodian branch president, Ohm Borin, was sustained the following March. His willingness to accept this important calling was typical of many in the developing countries of the world. Brother Borin was serving as a counselor in the Second Branch when he arrived at branch correlation meeting and learned that the humanitarian service missionary who had been branch president (and his wife) had suddenly departed the country for medical reasons. The district president asked Elder Ohm Borin if he would accept the responsibility of being branch president. Ohm Borin asked if there was not someone more qualified. The district president said he felt that Ohm Borin should be branch president and asked if he would accept the call. "He paused a moment, took a deep breath, straightened himself as the mantle fell on him, and said yes, and immediately and commandingly took charge of the correlation meeting." [^47]

By the end of that year there were close to three hundred members in three branches. The number of proselyting missionaries rose to twelve by 1996.

To date the most important event in Cambodian Church history was the visit to Phnom Penh and dedication of that land for the preaching of the gospel by President Gordon B. Hinckley. On May 28, 1996, following the dedication of the Hong Kong Temple on May 26 and 27 and in company with his wife, Marjorie, Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve (who at that time was responsible for Church work in Asia) and his wife, Elisa, and Elder John H. Groberg of the Asia Area Presidency and his wife, Jean, President Hinckley met with 439 members and investigators at a fireside at the Cambodiana Hotel. The next morning a much smaller group, mostly missionaries and Church leaders, gathered on grassy banks of the watery intersection of the Mekong, Tonle Sap, and Bassac Rivers, and President Hinckley offered a prayer upon Cambodia and dedicated that land for missionary work and the establishment of the restored gospel. [^48]

In the months following President Hinckley's visit and prayer, the number of convert baptisms grew more rapidly (111 people were baptized in August, September, and October). And the added numbers made necessary the creation of the Phnom Penh Fourth Branch. A third building was procured, located centrally about halfway between the other two buildings. President Oya was called to lead the new branch and Elder Chea Pyden, a young and able local convert was called to preside over the first branch. At the end of 1996, missionaries and leaders were hoping that continued political stability would allow the Church to expand outside the capital city.

Since completion of this manuscript, the dual-prime minister system that temporarily sustained peace in Cambodia was ended when Hun Sen, one of the prime ministers, overthrew Prince Ranariddh, the other prime minister, and ousted him from government. During the upheaval and violence that accompanied those events, the president of the new Cambodia Phnom Penh Mission and all of the foreign missionaries were forced to flee from the country. At this date, August 1997, the situation has not been resolved, although it is anticipated that missionary work will resume as soon as political matters are stable.

THE CHURCH IN MYANMAR AND LAOS

Myanmar (Burma) and Laos are also within the purview of the Thailand Bangkok mission president's responsibility. Through the years, a number of missionaries have gone into Burma from Thailand. For a time a branch was organized there, but because of inaccessibility from outside and dissension inside, the branch was dissolved and no official activities were reported in late 1995. President Gordon B. Hinckley dedicated Burma for the preaching of the gospel on September 8, 1987, on the shore of Lake Inya in Rangoon. Elder Jacob de Jager, Asia Area President, and Sister Hinckley, were present. [^49]

Laos, on the other hand, promises a situation similar to Cambodia. Forty tons each of rice and clothes were contributed to the Laotian government's efforts to alleviate suffering caused by a drought. By late 1996 formal arrangements to send in humanitarian missionaries have not been completed.

NOTES

Even in the 1990s, the Buddha-head issue remains a problem in Thailand. That one moment has not been forgotten by Thai bureaucrats or visa officers. When problems occur, the details of the affair are dredged up again as though it had happened yesterday. That only two young individuals were involved has seldom been remembered.

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "The Church in the Far East," Improvement Era 65 (June 1962): 440; see also Gordon B. Hinckley, "A Silver Thread in the Dark Tapestry of War," Improvement Era 73 (June 1968): 48-50.
[^2] See "First convert joins Church in South Vietnam," Church News, 24 November 1962, p. 7.
[^3] Vietnamese names, like Chinese, Japanese, and Korean names, are given with the family name first. Confusion sometimes occurs because Vietnamese persons are "usually referred to—correctly and politely—by the last part of the given name" (The Chicago Manual of Style, 14th ed. [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993], p. 747.)
[^4] See Vietnam Zone Historical Report, 1962 entry, LDS Church Archives; hereafter cited as VZHR.
[^5] "Unusual Sacrament Meeting," Church News, 30 July 1966, p. 4.
[^6] Richard C. Holloman Jr., "The Snap of the Silver Thread: The LDS Church in Vietnam," (research paper, Brigham Young University, 1977), p. 4; copy in LDS Church Archives. This paper should be consulted for a more complete bibliography of Brother Minh.
[^7] VZHR, 30 October 1966.
[^8] See Desmond L. Anderson, "Meeting the Challenges of the Latter-day Saints in Vietnam," Brigham Young University Studies 10 (winter 1970): 188 passim.
[^9] Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), pp. 141-43; Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 30 October 1966; in possession of President Hinckley; George L. Scott, "South Vietnam, Thailand Dedicated for Missionaries," Church News, 19 November 1966, p. 5.
[^10] Hinckley, "Silver Thread," pp. 48-50.
[^11] In JoAnn Jolley, "Blessed Are the Peacemakers: LDS in the Military," This People (June/July 1984): 68-69.
[^12] Marion D. Hanks Oral History, interviews by Gordon Irving, 1983, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 3.
[^13] Anderson, "Meeting the Challenges," p. 187.
[^14] Holloman, "LDS Church in Vietnam," p. 10; and R. Lanier Britsch and Richard C. Holloman, "The Church's Years in Vietnam," Ensign 10 (August 1980): 27.
[^15] William S. Bradshaw Oral History, interviews by R. Lanier Britsch, 1974, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 50.
[^16] Robert J. Lewis to the author, 17 December 1996, in possession of the author; also telephone interview on the same date.
[^17] Cong Ton Nu Tuong-Vy, "Out of the Tigers Den," Ensign 19 (June 1989): 44-45. Sister Vy's and Brother Lewis's memories differ on these events. Since they were both involved, it is difficult to discern which memory is more accurate.
[^18] Ibid., p. 46.
[^19] Bradshaw Oral History, p. 55.
[^20] Ibid., pp. 55-56.
[^21] See ibid., p. 59
[^22] Jerry D. Wheat, Saigon Historical Report, April 1975, pp. 2-3; copy in possession of Richard C. Holloman Jr.; also Jerry D. Wheat, interview by the author, Hong Kong, 6 September 1995, tape recording.
[^23] Wheat interview.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] See Dinh Van Thinh, "From an LDS Evacuee," unpublished article, 1975; in possession of Richard C. Holloman Jr.
[^26] Nguyen Van The, as told to David L. Hughes, "The Saigon Shepherd and the Scattered Flock," manuscript, p. 8; in possession of author.
[^27] Holloman, "LDS Church in Vietnam," p. 44.
[^28] The, "Saigon Shepherd," p. 75.
[^29] See David L. Hughes, "An End, a Beginning," This People (April 1985): 50-51.
[^30] "Laotian linguist, 20, helps other refugees," Church News, 4 August 1985, p. 4.
[^31] Each article that follows has Vietnam as its focus: William E. Phipps Jr., "In a Vietnam Helicopter," Ensign 9 (August 1979): 56-57; Lu Jones Waite, "The Day I Learned What It Means to Be a Gram," Ensign 11 (March 1981): 28-29; Kevin Stoker, "Because of Snyder," Church News, 21 October 1984, p. 16; Gerry Avant, "Vietnam was 'land of opportunity' for gospel study," Church News, 23 November 1986, p. 6; Jon B. Fish, "Saved by Seminary," New Era 17 (March 1987): 18-19; Peter M. Hansen, "Seek Not after Your Own Heart," New Era 17 (May 1987): 8-11; Kevin Stoker, "One saved today," Church News, 30 May 1987, p. 16; Robert K. Hillman, "Peace amidst War," Ensign 19 (April 1989): 10-11; Larry S. Maloy, "The Army Nurse's Kindness," Ensign 20 (March 1990): 56-57; John L. Meisenbach, "Christmas in Vietnam," Tambuli 11 (December 1992): 24; Mark E. Hurst, "Airman in Vietnam survives pain of human unkindness," Church News, 29 January 1994, p. 12; and Robert K. Hillman, "I Knew It Wasn't Luck," Ensign 25 (September 1995): 62-63. This list is not complete.
[^32] "First Presidency Encourages Help for Refugees," Ensign 9 (October 1979): 79.
[^33] In addition to the articles in Church periodicals, studies document the immigration and adaptation of Indochinese Latter-day Saints. One example is: Robert G. Larsen and Sharyn H. Larsen, "Refugee Converts: One Stake's Experience," Dialogue 20 (1987): 37-55, which illustrates that the integration of Indochinese members has not always been an easy process. Another kind of study, recently undertaken by David H. Tanner and others at Brigham Young University, has been the Indochinese segment of the LDS Asian American Oral History Project of the Charles Redd Center for Western Studies.
[^34] Information for this section was gleaned from interviews with Kovalenko and from copies of "Lost and Found," the newsletter of VASAA; in possession of the author.
[^35] See Louise Helps, "Breaking New Ground in Hanoi," Cameo: Latter-day Women in Profile 2 (February 1994): 41.
[^36] Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Church donates medical gift to Vietnam," Church News, 11 January 1992, p. 3.
[^37] John K. Carmack, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 30 November 1995.
[^38] As quoted in Helps, "Breaking New Ground," p. 48. See "Vietnamese performers share musical talent," Church News, 30 October 1993, p. 3; and "Vietnam: musicians perform 'Messiah,'" Church News, 4 December 1993, p. 5.
[^39] Helps, "Breaking New Ground," p. 51.
[^40] "Pres. Hinckley dedicates Cambodia, Gives 'addendum' to prayer during his visit to Vietnam," Church News, 8 June 1996, p. 5.
[^41] Ibid.
[^42] Gordon B. Hinckley to R. Lanier Britsch, 12 May 1977; in possession of the author.
[^43] Ibid., p. 43.
[^44] Larry R. White, Personal Writings, by date, copy in possession of the author. Another source for this section is White's "The Opening of Cambodia," December 1994, copy in possession of the author. Brother Vichit Ith, who is mentioned below, was living in Thailand when these events first began. His relationship to several persons in influential positions helped in the establishment of the Church in Cambodia. In late 1996 he was living in Phnom Penh, where he held an appointment as a special adviser to the new prime minister. He also works as president of the national airlines of Cambodia.
[^45] Corriveau interview.
[^46] See Shane H. Harrison, "Brief History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Cambodia, June 1995-December 1996," correspondence with the author, 18 December 1996.
[^47] Ibid.
[^48] See "President Hinckley dedicates Cambodia," Church News, 8 June 1996, pp. 3, 5; and Leland D. and Joyce B. White, "Gospel Gains Foothold in Cambodia," Ensign 27 (January 1997): 77-78.
[^49] See Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), pp. 452-53.
