R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

VIETNAM 1962-1996

A Silver Thread Shining Through

Speaking in general conference in 1962, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley drew the analogy of a tapestry to illustrate the growth of the Church in Asia. He said, "The Lord is weaving the tapestry of his grand design in those foreign parts." Six years later, after seeing the Vietnam War escalate and following a number of visits to Vietnam, he borrowed from the same analogy. He called attention "to that silver thread, small but radiant with hope, shining through the dark tapestry of war." He was speaking of the "bridgehead," small and weak, that would one day grow and "spring forth a great work affecting for good the lives of large numbers of our Father's children who live in that part of the world. Of that I have certain faith." [^1] Spoken at the height of the Vietnam War, these were words of faith and courage.

Even at the end of the twentieth century, to most Americans the word Vietnam recalls unhappy memories that are best forgotten. The decade of the 1960s, during which the Vietnam War was at its height, was a time of domestic turmoil and discontent in the United States as well as in Vietnam. The spiral of economic inflation that continued into the 1980s had its beginning during the Vietnam War. Other problems in America and abroad also had their origins at that time. Never in the history of the United States, with the exception of the Civil War, had the American populace been so divided regarding an issue. Never before had so many Americans refused to serve in the armed forces during a time of war. Debate and argumentation were abundant wherever people met. The nation was almost rent apart by strong disagreements among honest people. In addition to these problems, the war brought brutality, pain, and suffering in Vietnam.

But while the war in Vietnam grew in intensity during the early 1960s, among those who were sent there was a small number of LDS servicemen who acted as advisers to the South Vietnamese forces. On June 30, 1962, President Robert S. Taylor of the Southern Far East Mission organized the first LDS servicemen's group in Saigon, with Cecil L. "Bud" Cavender as group leader, Reed A. Prestgard as first counselor, and Maurice H. Lee as second counselor. Cavender, along with five other men, had held what was probably the first LDS Church service in Vietnam at Tan Son Nhut Air Base on February 25, 1962.

The group had grown since then. The work of this small group of fewer than fifty Saints was impressive. They not only taught the gospel to American service personnel but also shared the message with their Vietnamese associates. On November 3, 1962, Captain John T. Mullennex of the U.S. Air Force was baptized. He was baptized by his friend, Captain Maurice H. Lee. [^2] Soon after, on February 3, 1963, two Vietnamese women, Duong Thuy Van and Nguyen Thi Thuy, joined the Church. [^3] They, as well as Mullennex, were baptized in a font made from a fivehundred-gallon water purification tank.

Several LDS families were living in Saigon at that time. Sister Patricia Bean had taught them English at the Vietnamese-American Association, but she also taught them the gospel. She was the first missionary to the Vietnamese people in their own country. Sisters Van and Thuy are believed to be the first Vietnamese to join the Church in Vietnam. Sister Van later translated Joseph Smith's Testimony, the first Church publication in the Vietnamese language. [^4] In September 1962, the group added a The "Bien Hoa LDS Servicemen's Group" chapel was constructed in 1965 under Captain Ray Young's supervision. This picture was taken in 1971 while Virgil N. Kovalenko was group leader. Included in the picture are Nguyen N. Thach and three of his nine living children. Thach's plight following the fall of Saigon was the impetus for the creation of VASAA, an international humanitarian organization to assist with refugee and other causes. (Courtesy Virgil N. Kovalenko) Sunday School, and in November they also organized a Primary, with Bud's wife, Kay, as president.

The buildup of American and other troops (Latter-day Saints from Taiwan, South Korea, the Philippines, Australia, and Europe also participated in the war) continued during the next three years, and by the end of 1965 several changes had been made in local Church organization. In May 1965 President Jay A. Quealy set apart Harper K. Morris as LDS servicemen's coordinator in South Vietnam. Soon after his appointment, Harper organized a servicemen's group at Bien Hoa Air Base, fifteen miles from Saigon. The Bien Hoa group was the first of many similar groups outside Saigon. It is noteworthy that by acquiring surplus materials and exchanging labor with an Italian contractor, this group constructed its own chapel before that year ended. No Church funds were used. It was a humble building with backless benches in the main meeting room, but it was a place of spiritual retreat for many servicemen. The Bien Hoa chapel was the only LDS chapel ever constructed in Vietnam. It was not unusual for servicemen to meet in small groups (sometimes as few as two) to renew their covenants and strengthen one another in the faith. The following report from the Church News in July 1966 illustrates this point:

The following meeting of the Ban Me Thout group was held at 1300 hours on Sunday, July 10:

Meeting: Sacrament

Opening song: Redeemer of Israel

Opening prayer: Nicholas Dereta

Sacrament song: I Know That My Redeemer Lives

Sacrament administered by James Hatfield and Nicholas Dereta

Speaker: James Hatfield, Nicholas Dereta

Closing song: I Need Thee Every Hour

Closing prayer: James Hatfield

Members present, two—members absent, none [^5]

After February 1965 the buildup of American troops was rapid. By December 1965 there were fifteen hundred LDS servicemen in Vietnam, and President Keith E. Garner made South Vietnam one of four zones of the Southern Far East Mission. The South Vietnam Zone was further divided into three districts: the Northern District with headquarters at Da Nang; the Central District at Nha Trang, near Cam Rahn Bay; and the Southern District in Saigon. By May 1966 the estimated number of LDS military people had grown to twenty-two hundred. Seeing missionary opportunities, the president of the Southern District called six men to act as district missionaries. This number later reached as many as fifteen part-time missionaries. They had success with Americans as well as among the Vietnamese. In 1966, there were more than thirty Vietnamese numbered among the Saints.

Although the number of Vietnamese Saints was growing, more Vietnamese women than men were in the Church. Vietnamese women worked for the U.S. military or the U.S. government as secretaries, receptionists, cooks, housekeepers, and so forth. Many of these converts were brought into the Church by LDS personnel for whom they worked. Vietnamese men, on the other hand, were frequently tied up in work away from home or in the Vietnamese armed forces and were not easily available to those who carried the gospel message.

During the buildup years and throughout the war, a number of nonmilitary Latter-day Saints were in Saigon. Among them were an architect named Robert J. Lewis and his family. He served in Vietnam for seven years, and Church services were held at his home for much of that time. Other civilian contractors and academics remained in Saigon for shorter periods.

Nguyen Cao Minh, the first Vietnamese elder, was ordained on October 2, 1966. Minh had been converted to the Church in Biloxi, Mississippi, while training for a military assignment in 1963. According to Richard C. Holloman Jr., who served as a missionary in Saigon and who studied the history of the Latter-day Saints in Vietnam, Minh "had the most far-reaching good effect on the Church in Vietnam of any Vietnamese member of the Church. In spite of military assignments that often kept him away from Saigon, Brother Minh gave over ten years of leadership to the Vietnamese priesthood holders and continually encouraged the translation and missionary work." [^6]

THE DEDICATION OF SOUTH VIETNAM FOR MISSIONARY WORK

Church leaders in Salt Lake City and Hong Kong kept a watchful eye on the LDS service people in Vietnam. As their numbers grew, General Authorities, particularly Elders Gordon B. Hinckley, Marion D. Hanks, Ezra Taft Benson, and Bishop Victor L. Brown, visited South Vietnam to encourage them to remain faithful to their families and the Church. On such a visit in October 1966 Elders Hinckley and Hanks came to Vietnam with instructions from President David O. McKay to dedicate South Vietnam for the preaching of the restored gospel, if they were impressed by the Spirit to do so.

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley dedicated South Vietnam for the preaching of the gospel on Sunday, October 30, 1966, in the roof garden room of the Caravelle Hotel in Saigon. Navy Chief Lou Pollister is shown here with Elder Hinckley following the service. (Courtesy Lou Pollister)

After visiting with servicemen at conferences in Da Nang and Nha Trang, on October 30 the visiting authorities met with 205 civilian workers and servicemen and women on the top floor of the Caravelle Hotel in downtown Saigon. Elder Hanks encouraged the fighting men to remember both battles they were waging, the one against the enemy in Vietnam and the "battle everyone is fighting; the battle to return to our Father in Heaven." [^7] (The Church was particularly concerned with "the danger of physical injury and death from [enemy] insurgency, and infringement of personal chastity." The home teaching program was designed so that every member would have regular contact with the Church, although finding all of the members was an ongoing task of considerable difficulty.) [^8]

Elder Hinckley then spoke at length. When he concluded, he paused and then informed the congregation that President David O. McKay had authorized him to dedicate South Vietnam. He offered a beautifully worded, exceptionally appropriate dedicatory prayer. He thanked the Lord for America and the U.S. Constitution and the freedoms it guaranteed. "We have seen in other parts of Asia," he prayed, "the manner in which Thou hast turned the hand and the work of the adversary to the good and the blessing of many of Thy children. And now we call upon Thee at this time that Thou wilt similarly pour out Thy spirit upon this land." He pleaded with the Lord that there might be peace and that freedom-loving men might be allowed their agency. He asked that an added measure of the Lord's Spirit might be poured out upon both the nonmembers and those who already had the gospel, so that the people might be more willing to listen to the message of the Savior and so that the members would be more eager to share the gospel. He also asked the Lord to "open the way for the coming of missionaries and make their labors fruitful of great and everlasting good in the lives of the people." [^9]

One might question the wisdom of dedicating a land for the preaching of the gospel at a time of war. Traditionally, the Church dedicates countries when missionary work is about to commence or shortly after it has started. The usual pattern has been to remove missionaries from areas of active warfare, not to send them in. Nevertheless, Elder Hinckley, Elder Hanks, the mission president over the area, and the servicemen who led the Church in Vietnam all believed this was a different situation. Somehow, notwithstanding the grim horror of war, they expected the gospel to be established in Vietnam. In Elder Hinckley's conference address of April 1968, he said: "I make no defense of . . . war from this pulpit. . . . I seek only to call your attention to that silver thread, small but radiant with hope, shining through the dark tapestry of war—namely, the establishment of a bridgehead, small and frail now; but which somehow, under the mysterious ways of God, will be strengthened, and from which someday shall spring forth a great work affecting for good the lives of large numbers of our Father's children who live in that part of the world. Of that I have certain faith." [^10]

Theirs was not a naive hope. Particularly in 1966, when Elder Hinckley dedicated the land, there was still a widespread belief that South Vietnam and the United States would win the war. Furthermore, many LDS servicemen and women were teaching the gospel to Vietnamese friends, and thirty or more had already joined the Church. All groups—military missionaries, new members, and potential investigators—needed the Lord's special blessings. Elder Hinckley said in his dedicatory prayer, "And so we feel it expedient at this time . . . to dedicate this land and invoke Thy blessings upon it."

There were other reasons for the hope held for Vietnam as a potential mission field. Most important was that Roman Catholics and Protestants had long been established in the nation and claimed 10 or 11 percent of the populace—possibly the highest percentage of Christians in any Asian nation except the Philippines and South Korea. Catholic missionary work began in the sixteenth century, and by the middle of the seventeenth century there were three hundred thousand baptized persons. Father Rhodes, the outstanding figure of the time, transliterated the Vietnamese (Chinese) characters into a script that is still in use today. When the Communists took control of the north, more than eight hundred thousand Catholic refugees came to South Vietnam from the north. Protestant missionary work began in 1911. Over the years they translated the Bible, which was of course helpful to Latter-day Saint proselyting efforts. A high percentage of the people were not followers of Buddhism or other Asian religions. Animism was common, and although LDS Church leaders were probably not aware of the fact, animists have come into Christianity in reasonable numbers and in all likelihood would have been attracted to Mormonism.

Whatever the justifications for dedicating Vietnam, to faithful Latter-day Saints only one reason really mattered: Elder Hinckley was told by President McKay to dedicate Vietnam if he felt impressed by the Spirit to do so. As it turned out, this Apostle of the Lord did receive a spiritual impression to dedicate the land, and he acted on it. Time is telling the full story.

Elder Hinckley had first visited Vietnam in April 1963, but he returned in 1966, 1967, and 1968. He was torn inside by the pain and suffering he observed. But he observed true manhood amid the misery. In 1966 he said, "No more faithful members are found anywhere in the world than among our servicemen."

A BROKEN SALTINE CRACKER

Joseph McPhie

I was asked to be president of the Southern Vietnam District, headquartered in Saigon. We had about twenty small Church units in the southern area, and every weekend we'd visit a few of them. My counselor and I went one Sunday morning to meet with members in one of these barren little outposts. We tried to contact the group leader and several other members, but they were all out on patrol. We were ready to leave but at the last minute decided to check the base chapel to see if anyone had shown up.

It was quite dark as we stood at the entrance of the chapel looking down toward the pulpit area. At first we thought nobody was there; then we saw a movement. As we walked down we saw two young men—one was a priest, one an elder. These two kids were standing there in their combat outfits with their guns set aside. Their group leader hadn't shown up and the elder was going to go ahead and hold the meeting.

[As part of the sacrament service] they had broken a saltine cracker in two and they had a canteen; one was going to drink out of the canteen, the other out of the cup. I've often thought what a beautiful picture that was of "where two are met in my name" (D&C 6:32). We broke the cracker one more time. I drank out of the cup and my counselor drank out of the canteen. Here were these young kids, ten thousand miles from home, nobody knowing where they were. But even without leadership, they went ahead with a meeting. We had one of the most beautiful spiritual meetings I've ever had in my life—just the four of us. [^11]

Elder Hanks, too, had direct responsibility for this area, and he, along with President Garner, visited Vietnam on many occasions. On military aircraft of some variety, they traveled to many stations in and near the battlefields. Concerning that period he later recalled: "It was a sobering and terrible time. We met men on Sunday or some other day of the week who would go out and be killed. I wrote many letters home. . . . I had so many sad experiences. When I'd get home I'd get a letter from a wife or a mother who would say, 'We thank you for telling us about our boy. Before your letter arrived, we had had no word from the Defense Department.'" [^12] Elder Hanks' words provided a measure of solace in times of grief.

American involvement in the Vietnam War reached its peak in 1968, when more than fifty-five hundred LDS servicemen and servicewomen were assigned to Vietnam. (Statistics show that Latter-day Saints were consistently 1 percent of the total number of American forces throughout the war.) Numbers were constantly changing, but by 1969 the Southern District had twenty branches and groups, "each presided over by a president, two counselors, and clerk, under the direction of the Vietnam Southern District Presidency and twelve District High Councilmen. The district is similar to a stake in the built-up areas of Zion and the branches and groups are similar to wards. A program of priesthood, Sunday School, Relief Society, MIA, home teaching, missionary activities, and sacrament meeting is carried on in some of these branches and groups; priesthood and sacrament meetings, home teaching, and missionary work are carried on in all of them." [^13]

In addition to the Saigon Branch, there were sixty groups throughout South Vietnam. For record purposes, all Vietnamese members were part of the Saigon Branch. Six LDS chaplains were assigned to Vietnam. In order to help and supervise Church activities, President Garner, and later Presidents W. Brent Hardy, G. Carlos Smith (of the Southeast Asia Mission), William S. Bradshaw, and Jerry D. Wheat visited the war zone at least every other month and usually monthly but sometimes more often. All five men found the work exhausting because of the intense pace that was required, but it was also highly rewarding as they met and counseled with servicemen, local Saints, and investigators. For a little less than a year, from November 1, 1969, until October 20, 1970, the Vietnam Church Zone was transferred to the Southeast Asia Mission. But because of transportation problems and unequal burdens on mission presidents, this arrangement proved unworkable. Hence, Vietnam was transferred back to the Hong Kong—Taiwan Mission.

In his study of the Church in South Vietnam, Richard C. Holloman summarized the extent of the Church's efforts to serve the members in Vietnam: "There were many evidences of deep concern for the Saints among the leaders of the Church on all levels. Elder Hinckley arranged for special Church films and films of conference sessions to be sent regularly to the servicemen. KSL conducted special interviews with LDS servicemen geared specifically for Utah audiences. The zone presidency arranged for a special Christmas message to come from the First Presidency of the Church to the servicemen. District meetings were often held to plan ways to incorporate Vietnamese members into the full workings of the branch. There was a continual concern for helping the Vietnamese Saints become more capable of leading themselves." [^14]

In 1971 the U.S. government began removing troops from Vietnam. President Richard M. Nixon had campaigned for president on a promise to get America out of the war. The withdrawal of troops signaled to Church officials to prepare local leaders to operate the Church in Vietnam. With this in mind, on May 24, 1971, Southern District president Myrne R. Riley called Nguyen Cao Minh to be the first Vietnamese president of the Saigon Branch. Minh was released several months later because of a new military assignment, but his successor, Ralph Kurihara, selected two other Vietnamese elders, Nguyen Van The (pronounced "Tay") and Dang Thong Nhat, as his counselors. Brother The later replaced Kurihara and served as the last branch president until the 1990s.

THE ERA OF FULL-TIME MISSIONARY WORK IN SAIGON

William S. Bradshaw became president of the Hong Kong Mission, which included South Vietnam, during the summer of 1971. Since his first visit to Vietnam, he recognized the growing need to bring full-time missionaries into the country, largely to take the place of the departing servicemen. The Americans who were in Vietnam then "had a sense of destiny and a sense of the importance of building the Church among the local Vietnamese." [^15] From that time onward, President Bradshaw made preparations for the entry of elders from Hong Kong.

He met with Phan The Ngoc, an attorney who had obtained legal recognition for the Church in 1967, and obtained documents assuring that the Church still had the right to exist and own property. On obtaining this assurance, Bradshaw wrote to U.S. ambassador Ellsworth Bunker to ascertain whether there were any problems or obstacles from an American point of view. At the same time, March 1972, President Bradshaw discussed the question of sending elders to Saigon with Elder James A. Cullimore, an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve. On receiving encouragement from him, Bradshaw wrote to Elder Marion G. Romney and explained his feelings and justifications for wanting to move missionaries into Saigon. This letter turned out to be poorly timed. It arrived on Elder Romney's desk at about the same time as did some grim news concerning the war and delayed the process for a time.

Finally, in November 1972 President Bradshaw received a reply to his March letter to Ambassador Bunker. It contained much legal information of worth, but more important was its positive tone, which led Bradshaw to believe that there was nothing in particular to worry about. Saigon was quite secure even though sometimes there were battles only fifteen or twenty miles away. Military advisers such as William R. Heaton Jr., a former Hong Kong missionary but now a Ph.D. in political science and an officer in the air force, had access to intelligence reports, all of which were favorable with respect to what the Church could anticipate in the near future.

Contrary to the situation in Indonesia, where the elders entered the country and then began work on the translation of Church books and literature, in Vietnam local members and American personnel who had formerly served missions in Hong Kong but who had learned the Vietnamese language had begun translating Church materials into Vietnamese as early as 1963. By the early 1970s a number of tracts, pamphlets, and other items were in print in Vietnamese. In 1970 W. Brent Hardy, President Bradshaw's predecessor, had established an official translation committee and set apart Sister Cong Ton Nu Tuong-Vy as head translator. Sister Vy, as she is known, a former high school teacher and a person of royal heritage (the word Cong in her name means "countess" in Vietnamese), led out in the translation of the Book of Mormon into Vietnamese, a project that was well under way by 1972.

Mrs. Vy was introduced to the gospel by Robert J. Lewis, who had met her in her successful real estate office in Saigon. Elder Hinckley had authorized raising funds for a possible future chapel, and Brother Lewis, an architect, thought he would survey possible land for a building. He asked a trusted Vietnamese friend who the most honest real estate person in Saigon was. He sent Lewis to SVP (from the French s'il vous plait), where he met Mrs. Vy. She later described SVP as an "information and travel service," but she evidently also handled real estate. In Lewis's words, "I could not know at the time that I was looking at the person whom the Lord had chosen to translate the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price into Vietnamese. I thought I was there to buy real estate." She drove him around Saigon as they looked for potential building sites. In the process she asked which church he represented, what its members believed, and so on. Her interest was sincere, and she asked to be taught the gospel. Brother Lewis and a returned missionary, Cong Ton Nu Tuong-Vy, Sister "Vy," was the principal translator of the Standard Works into Vietnamese. Beside her is Nguyen Van The, Saigon Branch president at the time of the fall in 1975. (Courtesy Virgil N. Kovalenko) Captain William Shumate, taught her the discussions in her home in Saigon. Like many others, she was baptized at the "villa" where the Saigon Branch met, in a baptismal font constructed out of a cistern for water storage. A member had welded steel steps leading up onto the cistern and down into it. Brother Lewis baptized Sister Vy, and Brother Shumate confirmed her. [^16]

Brother Lewis, who was branch president at the time, asked Sister Vy to help with the translation of the Joseph Smith's Testimony pamphlet. (Evidently the earlier translation had fallen into disuse.) When another translator failed to produce a satisfactory translation, she decided to attempt the job herself. "I took the pamphlet home," remembered Sister Vy, "and stayed up all night reading it. As I read, something strange happened to me. It was as if someone unseen was helping me understand. The first translator translated word for word; but as I finally understood part of the testimony, I put it aside and wrote my translation in my own words. I translated according to the thoughts and feelings impressed upon me. I did not know it at the time, but I was translating by the Spirit." [^17]

The Vietnamese members read the new translation and said they understood what it meant. Sister Vy was then asked to translate four or five other tracts and pamphlets. As she worked on those pamphlets, she "began to love the Church and the doctrines and teachings of the gospel."

When Sister Vy was asked to help with the translation of the Book of Mormon, she sold her very successful business, secluded herself in a cottage she had built on a betel nut farm outside of Saigon, and devoted her full time to the work of translation. "When trying to translate the difficult parts," she later wrote, "I pondered and prayed. I would often dream at night about the parts and see where I could find help in my library. So I began to write. And as I translated, I pondered. I forgot myself. It was almost as if someone else was helping me write." [^18] The undertaking took two years, but before it could be published, Saigon fell. She, along with the committee, also translated the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. These products too were not published until after the fall of Saigon. Sister Vy did not see the published versions of her work until 1985. She was brought out of Vietnam to Canada by VASAA (the Veterans Association for Service Activities Abroad) in early 1987. In April 1988, again through the help of VASAA, Sister Vy attended general conference, did her own temple work, and had an emotional reunion with President Gordon B. Hinckley, whom she had known from his many visits to Vietnam.

On January 27, 1973, the warring powers announced a ceasefire, the forthcoming withdrawal of all American military personnel, and the release of American prisoners of war from Hanoi. (Among the POWs who were released were a number of Latter-day Saints. Best known were Jay R. Jensen and Larry Chesley, who wrote books about their prison experiences, but there were others, such as Jay Hess and David "Jack" Rollins, who were introduced at general priesthood meeting in April 1973 and whose stories became known within the Church.) Withdrawal of American troops from South Vietnam was swift; the last troops left on March 29. Before that date President Bradshaw began receiving notes from Church leaders in Salt Lake City, among them Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, who asked about the status of the Church in Vietnam and particularly about what plans were being made for the Saigon Branch when the withdrawal of the LDS servicemen was complete.

With these questions on his mind, in late February 1973 President Bradshaw went to Vietnam. He asked again the questions he had been asking for more than a year: What's the prognosis for the war? Are the Vietnamese forces going to be strong enough to hold? What are the prospects for good missionary housing? What about medical care? How many LDS American government people will be on hand to lend stability to the branch and the work of the missionaries? What about missionary security? Anticipating the assignment of missionaries to Saigon, President Bradshaw asked members in Saigon to translate the six-lesson missionary plan before the elders entered the country.

Before President Bradshaw left Saigon on February 26, he was satisfied that all conditions were positive or at least satisfactory. Before leaving for Hong Kong, he pleaded with the Lord for a confirmation of his positive feelings. "What came," President Bradshaw said, "was an affirmation of our feelings and a very sweet peace concerning the future of the Church in South Vietnam." [^19] This feeling removed all reservations from Bradshaw's mind. He wrote to Elder Hinckley the day after he returned to Hong Kong and firmly recommended that missionaries be sent. He also mentioned the high quality of the branch facilities and the housing that was available for the elders, and he described the brethren who would be remaining in Saigon, men such as Dr. Lester Bush, a physician who was connected with the U.S. Embassy, and several others.

President Bradshaw described the events of the next two weeks: "A few days intervened . . . and then I wrote on March 7 a formal letter to the Missionary Committee restating all the things that I had written Elder Hinckley privately. On March 13 I received this letter from the Missionary Committee over the signature of Elder Hinckley: 'Dear President Bradshaw, Your letter of February 27'—this was my letter to him, not the formal letter to the Committee—'concerning the work in Saigon was read to the First Presidency and the Twelve. After consideration of the matter, it was determined that you might be permitted to send four missionaries to Saigon.' That's as far as I got in the letter when I literally shouted for joy. I really did, and the missionaries who were in the office came running to see who had shot me." [^20]

After President Bradshaw calmed down, he read the rest of the letter, which included some precautions. Among other requirements, the Brethren suggested that Bradshaw should obtain the written approval of the parents of the missionaries who were to go to Saigon.

The letters from the parents were obtained, and on April 6, 1973, President Bradshaw, in company with Elders James L. Christensen, Richard C. Holloman Jr., David T. Posey, and Colin B. Van Orman, flew to Saigon. They immediately established themselves at the branch headquarters, a villa at #253 Thanh Thai, in a lovely area near Cholon, the Chinese sector of the city.

The elders began formal study of Vietnamese on April 7, and on the following day they looked on as President Bradshaw reorganized the Saigon Branch presidency. Nguyen Van The was set apart as branch president, with Dang Thong Nhat and Lester Bush as counselors. The membership was around ninety-five, including four active Melchizedek Priesthood holders and six or seven Aaronic Priesthood bearers.

With only a few exceptions, the elders followed the normal proselyting procedures of LDS missions. Going door-to-door was neither wise nor necessary, so they did no tracting. The missionaries had many referrals from local members and from servicemen who had returned to the United States. They had no trouble meeting people in public places, on buses, or in English-language classes that they organized and taught. They taught the gospel not only in Vietnamese but also in English, French, and Chinese.

They learned the language quickly and associated freely with the people. The evidence of war was ever present in the form of rolls of barbed wire along most streets and armed guards at every corner of the city. Occasionally they heard sniper fire, and acts of sabotage destroyed buildings. The sky was sometimes black with the smoke of burning oil and other material, but the elders were not hampered much in their work.

The elders recognized a need to adapt the standard missionary lessons to the Vietnamese audience. Not having a Judeo-Christian background, most Vietnamese could not understand references to prophets, Apostles, revelations, angels, God, and Christ, all of which are referred to in the first discussion. The elders created special lessons or explanations to supplement the regular lessons. Until they mastered the Vietnamese language, however, it took the elders three or four hours to deliver each lesson. At first they needed six months to teach the full set of discussions.

During 1973 and 1974 Sister Vy, as part of the translation committee, completed the translation of the Book of Mormon. The translation committee, consisting of branch president The (chairman), Nguyen Cao Minh, and some nonmembers who were paid to assist in review, approved the final manuscript. President Bradshaw photocopied fifty copies of the manuscript and distributed them to the members and missionaries in May 1974. This was an unusual procedure, but it proved to be wise in the long run. During 1974 the translation committee also completed Vietnamese versions of LeGrand Richards's A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. [^21]

In July 1974 Jerry D. Wheat, new president of the Hong Kong Mission, toured Vietnam for the first time. More than 150 members attended a conference at that time. By then, adults outnumbered youths, and males and females were nearly equal in number. A year before, when the missionaries were first in Saigon, youths and females had considerably outnumbered adults and males. The emphasis the elders had placed on working with families had borne fruit.

Tension in the war began to mount during the fall of 1974. The South Vietnamese government regularly reminded Saigon residents of the atrocities committed by the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces. The evidences of war came ever closer as rocket fire seriously damaged Bien Hoa Air Base and word of skirmishes in the countryside reached the elders and members. On November 1 the U.S. Embassy issued a warning to all Americans to stay off the streets of Saigon because of large demonstrations, violence, and political disturbances. But the elders knew the streets of the city better than most Americans, and by avoiding large crowds and trouble spots they were able to continue their work. They were fortunate that a number of American Latter-day Saints who held government or contracting jobs were still living in Saigon. One such person was Melvin L. Madsen, who worked for the U.S. State Department. His home became a refuge for the elders. His door was always open; cake and milk were in good supply. He also helped if problems arose with civilian authorities. When Saigon fell, Madsen not only helped the missionaries leave the country but also gathered Vietnamese members and assisted them with the evacuation process.

In mid-January 1975 three new elders arrived in Saigon. They brought to fifteen the total number of missionaries to serve in Vietnam. About the same time, however, the public transportation system began to fail. This made proselyting more difficult, but by giving more lessons at the branch chapel the elders increased the number of people they were teaching. As the threat of a Communist takeover grew, the number of Vietnamese who desired to learn of the restored gospel also grew rapidly. During February and March 1975, proselyting success was at its height. New converts were joining the Church each month. There were close to 250 Vietnamese members in Saigon by the end of March.

On March 31, however, Louis Eldredge, an active and helpful Latter-day Saint who worked for the U.S. government in Saigon, called President Wheat and strongly suggested that the missionaries should begin exit procedures from Vietnam and apply for reentry visas into Hong Kong. President Wheat, who had plotted the movements of the Communist forces on a map, had made a previous decision to remove the elders from Vietnam as soon as the Communists were within one hundred miles of Saigon. Two days later, after considerable difficulty, he was able to make airline reservations for seven of the elders on April 3 and reservations for the other two on the following day. Concerning these events, President Wheat wrote: "If I was not on the phone, I was on my knees, giving deep consideration to what this would do to the morale of the missionaries, to the members, and everyone concerned. I felt very sick inside to think that we would have to move our missionaries out when they had thirty or forty people ready to be baptized in the next three weeks. The missionary work had never prospered as it had the last three or four weeks. Yet I knew the feelings of the parents having their missionaries there under such conditions." [^22]

In Saigon the elders had, in a sense, become immune to the seriousness of their circumstances. They believed that the current problems would blow over and that they would be able to continue their work. Had it not been for the visit of Paul Bennion, an LDS civilian who ran into the chapel and yelled hysterically, "Elders, get out of here!" and a call from Sister June Eldredge, saying, "You had better prepare your visas and get out of here," the elders might have questioned President Wheat when he called and ordered them to leave the country. Almost miraculously they all completed the necessary paperwork in time to leave the country on their scheduled flights. The last two elders to leave, Elders Richard T. Bowman and Dee Oviatt, together with some Vietnamese members, destroyed all American-influenced materials and brought the branch records with them to Hong Kong. The evacuation of the elders may have taken place a few days earlier than absolutely necessary. [^23]

From April 4 onward, President The devoted himself almost full-time to the needs and concerns of the members. President Wheat and Elder Bowman kept him informed by phone about changes in U.S. policy and plans for the evacuation of the Vietnamese members. On April 16 Wheat and Bowman flew back to Saigon and held a brief conference with the branch. More than 150 members showed up on short notice, verifying the effectiveness of a communications network President The had initiated among them. President Wheat and Elder Bowman did not know how dangerous the situation was in Saigon until they arrived at the airport. Church member Harrison Ted Price was shocked that they had returned to the country, but he met them at the airport and drove them around. The first night they were there they watched the firefights and heard the explosions of bombs all night. When they left for Hong Kong, they were fortunate to get on the last civilian flight out of Saigon. [^24]

President Wheat's visit was hard on him and the members. He was under strict orders from the U.S. Embassy not to discuss evacuation plans with anyone but President The. Some members thought the mission president was trying to make them feel overly secure. Others asked why the elders had not stayed and risked their lives to save them as other Americans appeared to be doing for their friends and congregations. (Virtually all Americans were evacuated within a few days, leaving the local people on their own.) Although their actions were largely unknown to the members, President Wheat, along with Elder Bowman and President The, had been spending almost every waking hour working on membership lists and lists of investigators closely aligned with the Church. Through the influence of Latter-day Saint David C. Hoopes, who was well placed at the White House in Washington, D.C., the member lists were accepted by the U.S. government and became the basis for evacuation priority ratings. Government priorities were, first, U.S. citizens and their families; second, high-echelon officers in the Vietnamese military and government; third, U.S. government and U.S. contractors' employees; and fourth, individuals who had been working with any U.S. organization and could obtain affidavits for evacuation. Most of the Saigon Branch members fell into the fourth category. [^25] But having a priority rating was one thing and getting out of the country was another.

A few members got out of the country during the week before April 27, the last Sunday when LDS worship services were held in Saigon. Through the efforts of Roger Shields of the U.S. Department of Defense in Washington, a Colonel Madison at Tan Son Nhut Air Base in Saigon had come to the aid of some Church members and placed them on C-130 Hercules transport aircraft that departed the country. But most of the Saints gathered on that day to receive instructions and make plans for leaving their native land. Years later, President The recalled the events of that painful hour:

So it was that on Sunday, April 27, 1975, with the enemy at our very gates, members of the Saigon Branch met to discuss our collective fates. Cut off by the war from our lines of Church authority, we were afraid and felt utterly helpless. We reverently and humbly bowed our heads for opening prayer and then sang, "Come, Come Ye Saints" from the depths of our souls. Our tiny branch, so far away from the main body of the Church, conducted its own funeral. We knew that some of us might escape to freedom and others might be left behind. Some of us were not sure which would be worse. Either way, we would have to endure many difficult things we were not prepared to face. As we drew together at this perilous moment, we only knew that each of us, in addition to the gospel, had one thing in common: life as we knew it was over. "All is well, all is well."

But all was not well. . . . [^26]

President The hoped for calm, but the confusion caused by several desperate members finally caused Nguyen Cao Minh to stand and chastise the congregation and to plead with them to humbly support President The.

Several families went directly to the airport after the meeting. Another sixty members had been camped there for a few days, ready to take any means of escape. Spaces on the planes and helicopters were extremely limited because of the low priority assigned to the members of the Church. At least five more LDS families made their way into the airport just before the massive April 28 Communist shelling of the air base and the resultant twenty-four-hour curfew. President The's wife and children were flown to safety on one of the last airplanes out. A few other Church members were shuttled by helicopter to boats waiting offshore. But President The, Nguyen Cao Minh, Dr. Nghia, Sister Vy, Le Van Kha (second counselor in the branch presidency), Brother Pho and his family, Nguyen Hai Chau and his family, Nguyen Ngoc Thach and his family, and several other prominent LDS families were trapped in the city because of the unexpected rapidity of the Communist takeover. Saigon fell to the Communists on April 30. "Just over one hundred members of the Church are known to have left Vietnam" during the evacuation. [^27] This left approximately 150 who were not able to escape. Brother Thinh, one who escaped, asserted that among the group of trapped Latter-day Saints were faithful Vietnamese members who were most deserving of blessings.

Those Saints who were evacuated were taken to refugee camps in Guam and the United States, generally to Camp Pendleton, California, where the Church established a branch. Before many months passed, they found their way into the stream of American life by obtaining new jobs and places to live. The Church found sponsors for eighty-three Vietnamese members, and other agencies helped the remaining few.

But what of those who remained behind? After April 30, 1975, it was as though a light went out, leaving everyone in near total darkness. Following unsuccessful attempts to leave the country by boat, several of the brethren returned to Saigon. They found that Saigon had been renamed Ho Chi Minh City and that new administration and laws were being implemented. Although branch members gathered once after the Communist takeover, when three or more people met they were required to fill out a report. The restrictions were too great, so no further meetings of the branch were held. The chapel was confiscated, and the membership was scattered. "The Saigon Branch, for all intents and purposes had ceased to exist, except in our hearts." [^28] Before long, Brothers The, Thach, Nghia, and others were imprisoned in "reeducation camps." Their experiences were always difficult and sometimes brutal. By April 1977 Sister The, who settled in Provo, Utah, had received only one letter from her husband. Although Sister Vy was more successful in getting letters out of Vietnam, she was unable to say much that cast light on the situation.

But later some remarkable things happened. Following many months of inhumane suffering, political indoctrination, and "reeducation," President The (who spent twenty-seven months in prison), Brother Minh (who hid out until he fled), and many other Saints managed to escape from Vietnam. Like hundreds of thousands of other Vietnamese who could not endure life in Communist Vietnam, they took to the sea in overloaded and unreliable boats and became part of the "boat people" who caused so much concern for the international community. By 1980 most of the 150 members who were not evacuated before the Communist takeover had left Vietnam. By 1985 all but eighteen LDS families had escaped. [^29]

THE CHURCH AND VIETNAM FROM THE FALL OF SAIGON TO THE 1990s

This history does not include the story of the growth of the Church among the various populations of Asians who live in the United States, Canada, Australia, or Western Europe, where many Koreans, Vietnamese, Laotians, Chinese, and other Asians have found the Church and become Latter-day Saints. Many wards and branches now serve one ethnic group or combined groups in non-Asian nations. And since the late 1970s, missionaries have been called to serve among the various refugee populations as well as among other Asian populations in many cities in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Western Europe. But the effects of the Vietnam War have had a much greater and more lasting influence on the Church and its members than the war itself.

The pages of the Church News, the Ensign, the New Era, Tambuli, and various other official and unofficial periodicals of the Church have frequently included stories of inspiration and blessing written by ex-servicemen who had their testimonies strengthened through battle or other experiences in Vietnam or Indochina. And stories of ordeals and miraculous escapes from Communist prisons, reeducation camps, or difficult situations have been told by Vietnamese or other Indochinese members of the Church. A brief example of the latter appeared in the Church News on August 4, 1985, ten years after the fall of Saigon. In part it read:

[Tien Van] Pham escaped from Laos with four other boys, ages 12-14. They journeyed through the jungle by night to avoid patrols, and hid in trees by day. After three nights, they reached the turbulent waters of the Mekong River. When they could not find the man who was to take them across the river, they tried to cross by themselves. None of them could swim, so they clung to empty gas cans or plastic bags as they crossed. Floating branches punctured the plastic bags, and only three of the five survived.

After crossing the river, they were taken to a refugee camp. Pham endured two years in the camp, and then emigrated after locating an older brother who lived in Salt Lake City. Pham met LDS welfare missionaries at the refugee camp, although they did not teach him anything about the Church. He joined after arriving in Salt Lake City. [^30]

Examples of inspiration gained from experiences in Vietnam are numerous. At least twelve articles appeared in Church periodicals between 1979 and 1995. [^31] There are also several books about prisoner-of-war experiences. Church periodical articles (and articles in magazines and journals with an LDS focus) that deal with escape from Vietnam, Laos, or Cambodia are just as numerous. The Ensign article about Sister Vy, "Out of the Tiger's Den," noted earlier, relates her difficult period of hiding in a cave for several years before leaving Vietnam to immigrate to North America. At least ten articles with related content have appeared since the late 1970s.

But a third category of articles manifests the impact of the war on members of the Church. Beginning in 1979, articles on refugees in the United States became more and more common. The Church had been helping LDS refugees since 1975, but now, as the number of refugees was rising (peaking in 1980), the First Presidency encouraged members to "support programs helping Southeast Asian refugees resettle." [^32] Members were encouraged to become sponsors or to provide volunteer assistance. But most of the articles focused on Indochinese who were being baptized in growing numbers all over North America and who were forming branches of the Church. Hmongs, Laotians, Vietnamese, Khmers (Cambodians), and others were joining in Seattle, Oakland, Salt Lake City, Long Beach, Stockton, Elgin, Philadelphia, Chicago, Toronto, Vancouver, and elsewhere. The total number of Indochinese who have become Mormons outside of their home countries is not known to the author. But in 1994 a Church employee did a name-by-name count and found that there were about 6,000 Vietnamese Latter-day Saints, 4,500 of whom resided in the United States. Considering that there were only 250 Vietnamese members in the Saigon Branch in 1975, the growth among that people is amazing. [^33]

The Veterans Association for Service Activities Abroad (actually the group's fourth name with the same acronym) has been particularly tenacious in its attempts to help Vietnamese members leave Vietnam, enter a temple for individual and family blessings, and find homes and work in the United States and Canada. VASAA was organized in 1982 in response to a letter from a member in Vietnam who asked for help. Seven years had passed since the fall of Saigon, and only then did the Communist government allow mail to begin flowing freely out of the country. Recognizing the needs of members in Ho Chi Minh City for financial assistance, clothing, and spiritual support, Dr. Virgil N. Kovalenko, a retired air force officer, contacted other veterans and civilian workers from the war era, returned missionaries from Vietnam, and Vietnamese members to consolidate their efforts to help the member families in Vietnam. From 1982 to this writing (1996), VASAA has continuously worked toward the goal of finding and "extracting" members from Vietnam and rendering other forms of assistance. Kovalenko and other VASAA members have raised money, collected clothing, gone to Vietnam and other Asian nations, cooperated with and kept Church authorities informed, made arrangements through various government and international relief and refugee organizations, guided members in correctly participating in the Orderly Departure Program, paid for airfare, collected life stories, reunited families, recovered Church membership records of the Saigon Branch, helped with the settlement of refugees in North America, and on and on. Every family was numbered. In 1996 the last of the families who were eligible or qualified, the Nguyen Ngoc Thach family, was brought out of Vietnam. (Some LDS families remain in Vietnam.) Brother Thach and his family cared for and held Church services in the Bien Hoa chapel after the American service people departed Vietnam. He was cruelly abused in prison for several years before being reunited with his family in Ho Chi Minh City. The Thach family had been listed as the number-one priority by VASAA, but ironically they were the last to come to America and the temple. [^34]

THE 1990s: A PERIOD OF GROWING RELATIONSHIPS AND FRIENDSHIPS

Time is a great healer. It has allowed many bitter memories to be forgotten and has helped one-time enemies to bury their animosities. or several years before the U.S. government recognized the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in 1995, relations between the two nations had steadily improved. Questions of MIA accountability slowed the process, but finally reasonable assurances of good faith were recognized in Washington, D.C., and relationships were normalized.

By the 1990s the population of unified Vietnam was more than seventy million, and the total land area was slightly larger than New Mexico. Unfortunately for the people of Vietnam, the economy was among the weakest in Asia, and many features of the developed world were lacking. The infrastructure—transportation, electricity, water, and so on—was poorly developed and incapable of supporting much modern industry. Evidences of the constant warfare that had engulfed the country from the 1940s until 1975 stood as reminders of a painful and disrupted past. Nevertheless, visitors to Vietnam—academics and business people—reported a high level of friendliness and a warm openness among the people. Many nations were allowing their citizens to make investments in Vietnam or to carry on commerce and trade.

Since 1985 the Asia Area Presidency had looked toward the day when representatives of the Church, either humanitarian or proselyting missionaries, could move into Hanoi and other major Vietnamese cities. Following an earlier unsuccessful attempt to enter Vietnam through the help of VASAA, Elder Merlin R. Lybbert, Asia Area President, visited Hanoi from November 13 through 15, 1991. Accompanying him were Dr. J. Craig Merrell and a group of surgeons who were part of Operation Smile, a humanitarian organization of plastic and reconstructive surgeons who twice yearly visited Vietnam to perform reconstructive surgery. (Dr. Merrell had earlier done similar work in the Philippines.) They operated mostly on children with congenital deformities such as cleft lip or cleft palate, making it possible for them to smile (hence the name Operation Smile). Dr. Merrell was also president of Chesapeake Virginia Stake and helped with the Church's reentry into Vietnam. [^35]

Elder Lybbert traveled with the Operation Smile people to present a state-of-the-art surgical microscope to medical professor Dr. Nguyen Huy Phan and the Tran Hung Dao Hospital on behalf of the Church. He was the first General Authority to enter the country since the Vietnam War ended in 1975. The gift made it possible for Vietnamese surgeons to perform microsurgery, a more complicated level of surgery than had been possible before in Vietnam. The Operation Smile team also taught local surgeons how to perform these difficult operations. "This training and the gift now opens the doors to these extremely talented Vietnamese surgeons to perform state-of-the-art surgery and life-transforming surgery to thousands of patients over the years," Dr. Merrell remarked. [^36]

Elder Lybbert's visit made it possible to establish contact with the country's high-placed leaders. Friendly relations were established, top officials invited Elder Lybbert and his associates to return, and an invitation was extended to bring English teachers to Hanoi on a volunteer basis.

In June 1992 Elder Lybbert and Elder John K. Carmack, also of the Asia Area Presidency, traveled to Hanoi to build relationships and make arrangements to have English teachers enter the country. In the process of a number of meetings, they met with Mr. Vu Quang, head of the Government Board for Religious Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Dr. Phan, who had become a good friend, was a college classmate and dear friend of Quang. Although Vietnam had undergone fifteen years of religious repression after 1975, Mr. Quang informed Elders Lybbert and Carmack that religious liberty was now allowed and that "the official party has taken a position that religion is good for people, being the major source of instruction in moral and similar matters. People are free and even encouraged to practice their religions." [^37] Vietnam's constitution of April 1992 allows freedom of religion.

Although there was much encouragement, Professor Phan cautioned Elders Lybbert and Carmack that any Church representatives who came to Vietnam should use great caution in teaching the gospel.

Before they left for Hong Kong, the Brethren received from local leaders at the hospital and at the Children's Palace—an enrichment center for Hanoi's schoolchildren—a firm invitation to send English teachers to Hanoi. During the next six months two qualified couples were selected and arrangements were made for their entry into Hanoi.

On January 6, 1993, Elder Carmack accompanied missionaries LaVar and Helen Bateman and Stanley and Mavis Steadman to Hanoi. They were the first LDS missionaries to serve in the northern part of Vietnam and the first missionaries to serve in Vietnam since 1975. Professor Phan and his colleagues at Operation Smile had made most of the visa and other arrangements. Their year in Hanoi was fruitful in many ways. They were extremely successful in teaching English to doctors from the Tran Hung Dao Hospital and to young people at the Children's Palace. The highlight of the year was their participation in a performance on October 28 and 29, 1993, of selections from George Frederic Handel's The Messiah with the National Vietnam Symphony Orchestra and a selected chorus of professional musicians. Although most of the musicians were Buddhists and unfamiliar with the music and score, they felt that they were performing important music. The director, Do Dung, said, "This is not just religious music; it is great music." Regarding his preparation to conduct the music, he said, "I have been far too busy and have no time—but I have received inspiration to interpret the music from your God." [^38] Elder Steadman spearheaded the concert. Church Public Affairs made a significant financial contribution to underwrite the performance.

On August 28, 1993, the Salt Lake Tribune reported that the Church was planning to open a mission in Vietnam. Two days later, The Daily Universe, the Brigham Young University newspaper, headlined an article on the same topic and titled "LDS Missionaries to Enter Vietnam." Evidently the article was picked up by international wire services, for articles derived from it were printed in France and other countries. The problem was that neither article was true. Because couples were being prepared to enter Hanoi to replace the Batemans and the Steadmans, and also because six young elders were studying Vietnamese and English-teaching methods at the Missionary Training Center, a writer had concluded that a mission was planned. Church leaders in Hong Kong had received permission to bring more teachers, but they had no intention of creating a mission until all legal formalities had been completed to do so.

Within two weeks Elder Carmack was in Hanoi to meet with Vu Quang and other authorities. They were very gracious and expressed understanding of the awkward situation. But the matter did not go away. In January 1994 Elder Carmack again met with Vu Quang and others to discuss this and other matters. By this time a number of adversaries of the Church had called or written with complaints regarding the Church. Polygamy was again brought up, and its history had to be explained. Since this visit, the Church has not had further repercussions. Vu Quang has become a good friend of LDS leaders in Hong Kong and has handled matters fairly and with understanding.

Following the January 1994 meeting, Professor Phan advised Elder Carmack that the time was right to move ahead with an application for recognition of the Church. In February Elder David E. Sorensen of the Area Presidency, carried application materials to Hanoi. Although a number of meetings have been held with Vu Quang since that time, the application has not been acted upon by the prime minister.

Nevertheless, the Church's interest in helping Vietnam in humanitarian ways has grown. By the end of 1994, eight missionaries were serving in Hanoi and a number of humanitarian projects had been initiated. In 1995 the number of projects had grown to include English teaching, radiology training at two centers, neonatal training in modern techniques of newborn resuscitation (a budget of $50,000 supported this program for physicians and nurses throughout Vietnam), and training surgeons in improved oral and maxillofacial surgical techniques. In addition, the Church had sent several shipments of medical equipment for use in hospital in Hanoi. When in late 1994 several villages in Vietnam suffered extensive damage from typhoons and floods, the Church donated $50,000 to rebuild schools and medical clinics in four villages. The humanitarian efforts that were pursued in the refugee camps in Thailand, Hong Kong, and the Philippines in the 1980s were being echoed in Vietnam in the 1990s. Many lives were being blessed through the services of humanitarian missionaries and the contributions of the Church.

"Once LaVar [Bateman] was walking down the street," wrote Louise Helps, "and a little old man came up who looked just like Ho Chi Minh, with a long beard. Grabbing both of LaVar's hands, he cried, 'Volunteer! Volunteer!' It was a simple moment, but one LaVar can never forget." [^39]

Proselyting missionaries were not in Vietnam in 1996. When they would be allowed was not known. But the Church was making many friends and serving the needs of a great people in a truly Christian manner. Expatriate members of the Church were authorized to organize a branch in Hanoi in 1993. By late 1996 some thirty members were gathering regularly. An American banker, David K. Baggs, was the first branch president. And in September 1995 Neal Krautz, an Australian who works for a telecommunications company, was sustained as president of the newly reorganized Saigon/Ho Chi Minh City Branch. (President The was finally officially relieved of that responsibility.) At least three LDS Vietnamese families had been given permission to attend Church meetings, but for political reasons they usually met separately from the foreign members. In December 1996 two older sisters and one couple were serving as humanitarian missionaries in Ho Chi Minh City.

Undoubtedly, the most important moment in Church history in Vietnam since the 1970s was President Gordon B. Hinckley's visit to Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi on May 29, 1996. As part of a seven-nation tour in conjunction with the dedication of the Hong Kong Temple, President Hinckley and his party met with twenty-six members of the Ho Chi Minh Branch at the home of President Krautz. Later that day President Hinckley flew to Hanoi, where he was welcomed by Professor Nguyen Huy Phan, who had been working with the Church and its representatives for several years. Professor Phan expressed gratitude for the many humanitarian acts that Church members had extended to the Vietnamese people.

While meeting with nineteen members of the Church at the home of President Baggs, President Hinckley spoke of an address he had given at BYU while the Vietnam War was raging. It was titled "A Silver Thread in the Dark Tapestry of War." The Church News reported that he talked "of how he felt that the Lord, in His own timetable and in His own way, would cause the gospel to be taught to the people of Vietnam. Then, in what he said was inspired by the Spirit, President Hinckley said he felt impressed to give what he described as an 'addendum' to the dedicatory prayer offered 30 years ago. He offered a prayer dedicating the entire land of Vietnam for the preaching of the restored gospel." [^40]

President Hinckley has repeatedly expressed his faith, as he did in Ho Chi Minh City, that in "the due time of the Lord, this land will be opened, and many wonderful people will become beneficiaries of the gospel." [^41] President Gordon B. Hinckley wrote the same message to the author in 1977: "Personally, I am satisfied that while there has been a distressing pause in the work in Vietnam, the day will come when it will be resumed and will again be fruitful." [^42]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] See Dale S. Cox, "A Brief History of the LDS Church in Singapore," June 1978, mimeographed copy, p. 1. This item is found in Southeast Asia Mission, historical records and minutes, LDS Church Archives. Cox, the son of Soren F. and Fern Cox, a couple who served the Church in Singapore for five years, wrote this history from primary sources (letters, reports, minutes, mission publications, quarterly and yearly historical reports) and from personal interviews with his father and other Church members in the area.
[^2] See ibid., p. 3.
[^3] As quoted in Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 158; emphasis mine.
[^4] See Cox, "LDS Church in Singapore," p. 4.
[^5] As quoted in Pang Beng Ling, A History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Singapore: Journey to Stakehood, 1964-1997 (Singapore: C. O. S. Printers Pte Ltd, 1997), pp. 64-65.
[^6] See G. Carlos Smith Jr. Oral History, interviews by William G. Hartley, Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, 1972, typescript, p. 41.
[^7] See Cox, "LDS Church in Singapore," pp. 6-7.
[^8] Hawthorne to Jones, 30 November 1979, in Joseph Talmage Jones, Collection 1968-1982, LDS Church Archives.
[^9] First Presidency (Spencer W. Kimball, N. Eldon Tanner, Marion G. Romney) to J. Talmage Jones, 21 April 1980, Joseph Talmage Jones, Collection 1968-1982, LDS Church Archives.
[^10] Ibid., 3 December 1980.
[^11] See J. Talmage Jones, In Singapore (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1984), pp. 29-30.
[^12] Walk in His Ways: Basic Manual for Children, Part B (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1993), pp. 201-5; and Pang Beng Ling, History of the Church . . . in Singapore, p. 45.
[^13] In History of the Church . . . in Singapore, Pang lists the footnote for this account as follows: "Letter of 28 Oct 1993 to Pang Beng Ling from James N. Kimball on behalf of Jon Huntsman." This quote appears only in a prepublication manuscript in possession of the author.
[^14] See "Ambassador's term brief, yet notable," Church News, 5 June 1993, p. 11.
[^15] Jones, In Singapore, p. 72.
[^16] Pang, History of the Church . . . in Singapore, p. 39.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 42-43.
[^18] The original wards were the Bedok Ward, the Singapore First Ward, the Toa Payoh Ward, the Clementi Ward, the Singapore Second Branch (Mandarin), and Singapore Third Branch (Philippines). The Ang Mo Kio Ward was organized on August 13, 1995.
[^19] Robert Hague to R. Lanier Britsch, 12 July 1995; copy in possession of the author.
[^20] See "Members dine with royalty," Church News, 17 December 1994, p. 12.
[^21] See "Malaysia converts see Church grow," Church News, 23 May 1981, p. 13.
[^22] See Joseph Walker, "Church in Malaysia is small but faithful," Church News, 14 March 1981, p. 12; and "Church acquires first property," Church News, 28 April 1979, p. 5.
[^23] See Jones, In Singapore, p. 9; and Jones to Carlos E. Asay and Jacob de Jager, 27 February 1980, Jones, Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^24] Jones, In Singapore, p. 10.
[^25] See ibid., p. 112.
[^26] Robert and Delores Hague, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 26 October 1995, tape recording. See also Robert Hague to R. Lanier Britsch.
[^27] See "Members dine with royalty," p. 12.
[^28] The, "Saigon Shepherd," p. 75.
[^29] See David L. Hughes, "An End, a Beginning," This People (April 1985): 50-51.
[^30] "Laotian linguist, 20, helps other refugees," Church News, 4 August 1985, p. 4.
[^31] Each article that follows has Vietnam as its focus: William E. Phipps Jr., "In a Vietnam Helicopter," Ensign 9 (August 1979): 56-57; Lu Jones Waite, "The Day I Learned What It Means to Be a Gram," Ensign 11 (March 1981): 28-29; Kevin Stoker, "Because of Snyder," Church News, 21 October 1984, p. 16; Gerry Avant, "Vietnam was 'land of opportunity' for gospel study," Church News, 23 November 1986, p. 6; Jon B. Fish, "Saved by Seminary," New Era 17 (March 1987): 18-19; Peter M. Hansen, "Seek Not after Your Own Heart," New Era 17 (May 1987): 8-11; Kevin Stoker, "One saved today," Church News, 30 May 1987, p. 16; Robert K. Hillman, "Peace amidst War," Ensign 19 (April 1989): 10-11; Larry S. Maloy, "The Army Nurse's Kindness," Ensign 20 (March 1990): 56-57; John L. Meisenbach, "Christmas in Vietnam," Tambuli 11 (December 1992): 24; Mark E. Hurst, "Airman in Vietnam survives pain of human unkindness," Church News, 29 January 1994, p. 12; and Robert K. Hillman, "I Knew It Wasn't Luck," Ensign 25 (September 1995): 62-63. This list is not complete.
[^32] "First Presidency Encourages Help for Refugees," Ensign 9 (October 1979): 79.
[^33] In addition to the articles in Church periodicals, studies document the immigration and adaptation of Indochinese Latter-day Saints. One example is: Robert G. Larsen and Sharyn H. Larsen, "Refugee Converts: One Stake's Experience," Dialogue 20 (1987): 37-55, which illustrates that the integration of Indochinese members has not always been an easy process. Another kind of study, recently undertaken by David H. Tanner and others at Brigham Young University, has been the Indochinese segment of the LDS Asian American Oral History Project of the Charles Redd Center for Western Studies.
[^34] Information for this section was gleaned from interviews with Kovalenko and from copies of "Lost and Found," the newsletter of VASAA; in possession of the author.
[^35] See Louise Helps, "Breaking New Ground in Hanoi," Cameo: Latter-day Women in Profile 2 (February 1994): 41.
[^36] Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Church donates medical gift to Vietnam," Church News, 11 January 1992, p. 3.
[^37] John K. Carmack, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 30 November 1995.
[^38] As quoted in Helps, "Breaking New Ground," p. 48. See "Vietnamese performers share musical talent," Church News, 30 October 1993, p. 3; and "Vietnam: musicians perform 'Messiah,'" Church News, 4 December 1993, p. 5.
[^39] Helps, "Breaking New Ground," p. 51.
[^40] "Pres. Hinckley dedicates Cambodia, Gives 'addendum' to prayer during his visit to Vietnam," Church News, 8 June 1996, p. 5.
[^41] Ibid.
[^42] Gordon B. Hinckley to R. Lanier Britsch, 12 May 1977; in possession of the author.
