R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

SINGAPORE AND MALAYSIA 1968-1996

Establishing the Church in the Hub of Southeast Asia

SINGAPORE: HUB FOR SPREADING THE GOSPEL

Situated at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, a little above the equator, the small tropical island that is the Republic of Singapore is the hub of communications and economic activity in the islands of Southeast Asia. The name Singapore is derived from the Sanskrit words Singa Pur, meaning "city of the lion." Two-thirds of the nation's 2.7 million people live in the 37-square-mile city of Singapore, one of the most densely populated areas of Asia. The nation is stable and prosperous, and Singapore is among the cleanest, most modern cities in the world, with striking skyscrapers, beautiful parks, well-maintained roads, an efficient subway system, and an extremely attractive and well-planned airport. Eighty-eight percent of the populace is literate (generally the schools teach in two languages, English and Mandarin Chinese). The economy expanded rapidly during the 1970s and early 1980s (with an average annual growth rate of 9 percent), making Singaporeans wealthy by Southeast Asian standards (the per capita income by the early 1990s was more than $13,900 a year, and most Singaporeans own their own homes or condominium apartments).

The populace is ethnically diverse—truly a nation of immigrants—consisting of Chinese (76.4 percent), Malayan (14.9 percent), Indian (6.4 percent), and others, including Caucasians (2.3 percent). The principal religions of Asia are all represented: Chinese Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism and animism, Hinduism, Sikhism, Islam, and Christianity. The Christian community is fairly large, with about 220,000 believers (8 percent of the nation's population). Singapore has no state religion, and religious freedom is allowed.

Opening the Work

Latter-day Saint interests in Singapore began in the late 1950s when Elder Mark E. Petersen planned to visit Singapore but canceled his trip because of political turmoil. Elder Spencer W. Kimball visited there in the early 1960s but found no members. In May 1963 Elder Gordon B. Hinckley found three members, all British, and held meetings with them. On December 10, 1964, Elder and Sister Hinckley and President and Sister Jay A. Quealy of the Southern Far East Mission met with three families who had been holding regular Sunday services since the previous September. At that time Elder Hinckley concluded that the Church should be fully established there, but four years passed before LDS missionaries entered the country, and only then did any native Singaporeans come into the Church. Elder Marion D. Hanks was also involved in the development of the Church programs in Singapore during these early years.

On March 19, 1968, about a month after President Keith E. Garner took the first six missionaries to Thailand, he sent Elders Todd Bake, Joel Richard III, Kim Shipley, and Melvin Shurtz to Singapore to begin proselyting work. Their efforts were soon rewarded when Alice Tan was baptized on May 4, 1968, and other local people joined the Church soon after. [^1]

By October 1968 additional missionaries had joined the staff, new converts had joined the Church, and the Singapore government had recognized the Church as a legal corporation. On October 13, one day after the registration of the Church, President W. Brent Hardy, who had replaced President Garner, organized the Singapore Branch. He called a missionary, Elder John McSweeney, as branch president. Seventy-five people were in attendance at the organizational meeting, half of whom were investigators. Nearly forty people joined the Church between the arrival of the elders in March and the end of 1968. [^2]

In April 1969 Elder Ezra Taft Benson, then supervisor of Asian missions, visited Singapore and, under authority from President David O. McKay, dedicated the nation for the preaching of the restored gospel. The service was held on the evening of April 14 on Mount Faber. Forty-five Saints, including President and Sister W. Brent Hardy, attended. In his address to the group, Elder Benson made two statements that he also reiterated in his prayer: "We expect confidently that thousands upon thousands of people in this choice country will hear the message and will accept the gospel, and that this may someday become a center from which the gospel can be directed and sent into other countries which have not yet heard the message of the restored gospel." And again, "This will be a training ground for missionaries and others who will be able to go out from here to carry the message to other nations in Asia." [^3] In the decades that have followed, Singapore has played a much larger role in the growth of the Church than could have been foreseen when Elder Benson's words were uttered. Singapore has been the hub from which hundreds of missionaries have been sent to serve in various nations of South and Southeast Asia and from which the various programs of the Church have emanated.

Church leaders in Salt Lake City evidently had much more in mind for Singapore than Elder Benson was at liberty to discuss at the dedicatory service, for not long after that the First Presidency called G. Carlos Smith Jr. to preside over the soon-to-be-organized Southeast Asia Mission. This mission was to encompass Burma, Brunei, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Singapore, Southern Far East Mission president W. Brent Hardy (fourth from right), missionaries, members, and friends gathered atop Mount Faber overlooking Singapore to witness Elder Ezra Taft Benson dedicate that nation for the preaching of the restored gospel on 14 April 1969. (Courtesy Greg Gubler) Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam, most of which were new to LDS efforts. When the Smiths arrived in Singapore on October 24, they had the pleasant experience of moving into an established branch where the missionaries and members had affairs well organized. Two days later, on October 26, Elders Ezra Taft Benson and Bruce R. McConkie met with the Smiths and the missionary force to officially initiate the mission. "Under the direction of President Smith," wrote Dale S. Cox, "the work was stepped up significantly, and the missionary force in Singapore was increased to 48 in the latter part of 1969. . . . Also during this period a comparatively large number of strong local men were baptized who were qualified to take responsible leadership positions." By the end of 1969, 118 people had entered the waters of baptism. [^4] Many of the individuals and families who joined the Church in Singapore during the first several years have remained faithful and have provided strong leadership ever since.

Making the choice to become Latter-day Saints was usually not easy for Singaporeans. Long-held ideas and family traditions made accepting the gospel a challenge. A. C. and Helen Ho, who were baptized in 1969, described how they overcame these obstacles:

The idea that there is such a thing as the "right church" hit us like a cannonball at first and left us several painful days to ponder over the matter. It was our belief that all churches belong to God and if a man would choose any church and worship God in all sincerity, he would be on the right path. It had never occurred to us that a particular church could be any "righter" than another until the missionaries introduced us to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . .

We had never heard of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints until the missionaries visited us one evening at home. At first we were skeptical. The introduction of the Book of Mormon hit us like a second cannonball—this time with greater impact than the first. We had to examine and handle the book physically before accepting it as scripture. It took us a while to read the Book of Mormon and pray before we accepted the gospel. We are glad that we have received the gospel in its fullness. It has changed our lives. It has also helped us realize our duties in serving our brothers and sisters and setting the example by living according to the teachings of Christ. [^5]

Expulsion of LDS Missionaries

Probably because the white-shirted Caucasian missionaries were so visible, and also because most (90 percent, President Smith estimated) [^6] of their converts came from other Christian churches, newspaper editors and leaders of other Christian churches joined together in an effort to discredit the LDS Church. An article in the Straits Times of January 28, 1970, reported on the developing friction between the Church and the Inter-Religious Organization of Singapore: "One letter condemned the Mormon door-to-door campaign as an 'invasion,' describing the doctrines preached as 'naive fundamentalist medieval dogmatisms of the American Middle West.'" Although the polygamy issue had been a dead matter in many parts of the world for decades, newspapers headlined polygamy and the Church. One Protestant minister claimed the right of the Mormons to have the same privileges as all other religions, but at the same time he sharply criticized the Church for its intolerance because it claimed to have the true gospel. He suggested that the Latter-day Saints did not understand Singapore and the delicate balance that existed among the various religious communities, and he worried whether the Church's presence would create unwanted and unnecessary tensions within the relatively small community. Tensions among the ethnic groups in Singapore were an honest concern. Terrible riots and frictions had taken place as late as 1965, and few people wanted to see such problems arise again. A truce and balance had been established. Some people honestly feared that the peace would be eroded by the introduction of a new variable—the Mormons—in the equation.

The attacks against the Church caused strong feelings and eventually brought government action. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and his government insisted on total stability and refused to allow even the possibility of religious upheaval. Without allowing the Church to defend its position, the government expelled twenty-nine LDS missionaries in March 1970. It also refused to grant any new visas or to renew old ones. When the announcement was made to the missionaries, it was a day of mourning. The mission secretary wrote, "The heavens quietly wept." By November 1970 the missionary force consisted of only the mission president, his wife, and three foreign elders. By 1973 the number of foreign elders had been reduced to only one, and this remained the size of the expatriate missionary force for a number of years. The unfavorable publicity generated a great deal of prejudice against the Church and caused the government to stop the remaining elders from tracting door-to-door during the few months before the last missionaries departed for home. To the present, such tracting has not been resumed. The missionaries have generally found it necessary to depend on the members for referrals.

Local Missionaries Rise to the Challenge

Of course, the expulsion of the missionaries set the Church back considerably. After 1970, when 124 people joined the Church, the number of converts dropped greatly: to 33 in 1971, 24 in 1972, 21 in 1973, and a low of 15 in 1974. But as has proved true elsewhere (in Tonga, for example), adversity has brought the Saints closer together and given them reason to manifest their commitment to the Church. Although the small membership base made it impossible for the two branches (the Singapore Second Branch was organized in June 1969) to produce a large number of local missionaries, they nevertheless provided a steady supply.

Elder Teo Thiam Chye was the first Singapore elder to receive a one-year missionary call. Until 1975 the Singapore missionaries received one-year calls from the mission president. But since then a number of young men and women have received calls from the prophet to serve as full-time, full-term missionaries. Serving a mission in Singapore is different from serving in most other places of the world. The missionaries simply leave home by driving to the mission office to begin their missions. Family and friends are still close at hand, and the sights and experiences of a lifetime are readily available. When release day comes, the missionaries still see their friends from their missions on the next Sunday at church. When Singaporeans attending school at BYU or BYU—Hawaii received their mission calls to Singapore, they returned home to a group of happy and eager family members to start their missions, whereas elsewhere in the world a mission call means separation from one's home and family. Only in 1985 did Singaporean missionaries begin going to the Manila Philippines Missionary Training Center to obtain their pre-mission training and to receive their endowments at the Manila temple.

These local elders and sisters were instrumental in greatly strengthening the branches and district in Singapore. Following their missions, many of them have gone on to school at BYU, BYU—Hawaii, and Ricks College, where they have distinguished themselves as scholars, student-body officers, and leaders in the Church. Upon returning to Singapore, they have served as branch and district leaders and now even as bishops in the Singapore stake. They have also taken work with various agencies of the Singapore government and helped to build their nation.

Although 1970 was a disappointing year, the Church in Singapore made some important strides forward. The branches moved into a remodeled Chinese mansion on Bukit Timah Road that served as a chapel until a new building was started on the same site in February 1972. Also in 1970, President Smith purchased a new mission home, and the government granted the Church a license to perform marriages. In 1971 the Church made further progress. On January 17 President Smith formed the Singapore District with Soren F. Cox as its first president. Dr. Cox, a professor of English from Brigham Young University, was teaching English at Nanyang University. Cox and his wife, Fern, who led the combined branch Relief Societies, made an important contribution to the Church at that time by helping other new leaders learn their assignments after the missionaries left so suddenly.

New Leaders Guide the Mission

In July 1972 Miller F. Shurtleff of Washington, D.C., replaced G. Carlos Smith as president of the mission. President Shurtleff was busy during his three years as president supervising missionary work in Thailand until the organization of the new Thailand Mission in 1973. He also led the work in Indonesia. (The new Indonesia Jakarta Mission was created on July 1, 1975, the day following Shurtleff's release.) The completion of the new chapel, mission office, and missionary quarters on the Bukit Timah Road property occurred under Shurtleff's leadership. He dedicated the new facilities, which had been started in February 1972, on May 23, 1975. Considering Singapore's role in the founding of the Thailand and Indonesia missions and the fact that the mission presidents in Singapore trained and supervised the missionaries who served in those areas, it can be said that Elder Benson's expressed hope and prayer that Singapore could be "a center from which the gospel can be directed and sent into other countries" was already in some measure being fulfilled.

Soren F. Cox returned to Singapore as mission president in July 1975. During his three years there, the number of convert baptisms grew from twenty-nine in 1975 to sixty-one in 1977. Ninety percent of the sixty-one converts were referred to the missionaries by members of the Church. By that time the missionary force had grown to include twelve full-time missionaries—ten Singaporeans, one Malaysian, and one American.

President Cox did much to consolidate the progress of the past. He called a six-member district council as well as counselors in the mission presidency and a clerk. With his support, but under the direction of A. C. Ho (Ho Ah Chuan) and then W. H. Lionel Walters, the seminary and institute program was instigated in Southeast Asia. Singapore was also made the center for LDS genealogical efforts in Southeast Asia. Walters and the Church Genealogy Society representative were brought in from outside on professional visas, indicating that a better relationship had been developed with the government. During Cox's time both branches completed their auxiliary organizations, and the full program of the Church was offered to the Singapore members. [^7]

In an effort to show their devotion and loyalty to their home government, members of the Church raised money to support a scholarship for a non-LDS Singapore student for study at BYU in Provo. Each year when this scholarship was granted, the mission president was invited to join with other contributors in a ceremony conducted by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. The results were positive for the Church and for the Singaporean students who were blessed to receive the scholarship.

When President and Sister Cox returned home in July 1978, the Singapore Mission was made part of the Indonesia Jakarta Mission for the next eighteen months. Winfield Q. Cannon, counselor in the Indonesia Jakarta Mission presidency, and his wife, Wanda, were assigned to preside over missionary work in Singapore. Having served as a stake president in Los Angeles and as a mission president in Germany, Cannon was a man of considerable experience who was for all practical purposes the mission president. In fact, in a letter to J. Talmage Jones, who reopened the Singapore Mission, President Lester C. Hawthorne said: "Contrary to what you may have heard in Salt Lake City, we have nothing to do with the Singapore Mission. Winfield Cannon is the presiding authority, and in Singapore he is known as the president of the mission." [^8]

Even though the mission was temporarily closed, Singapore's role remained important and missionary work continued. The band of about 550 Saints in 1978 grew to 660 when the mission was reopened in January 1980.

J. Talmage Jones and his wife, Vera Jean, were somewhat surprised to receive their call to Singapore. He had presided over a mission in Canada in the 1960s and as a Regional Representative for nine years following that. But his years of Church administration served him well as his responsibilities continually grew. His call was to preside over Singapore and Malaysia, but in April 1980 he received word from the First Presidency that India and Sri Lanka were being added to his areas of supervision, effective July 1, 1980. [^9] He was just getting adjusted to this new charge when in December he received another letter from the First Presidency informing him that "the Indonesia Jakarta Mission will be discontinued as a separate entity and . . . will be attached to the Singapore Mission." [^10] The change was to become effective as soon as proper arrangements could be made (officially it became effective on January 1, 1981). Fuller accounts of the work in India, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia are given later in this book, but it is important here to note the challenges President Jones faced in administering such a diverse mission. The distances were vast, the ethnic and religious differences were complex, the governmental restrictions on proselyting were difficult, the populations were enormous, and the languages were numerous. During the years since then, the Singapore Mission has had responsibility for various countries at different times. In 1996 it continued to guide Malaysia, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan as major undertakings. India was part of the Singapore Mission until January 1993, when the India Bangalore Mission was formed. The Singapore Mission also encompassed Indonesia during part of the 1980s and until July 1, 1995, when that nation again came under separate leadership.

A Boost from the Osmonds

In June 1980 the image of the Church in Singapore received positive support when Donny and Marie Osmond, popular musical performers and strong members of the Church, and their family visited Singapore. Press coverage was "very good to us," commented President Jones. The Straits Times printed several articles about the Church and gave the Osmonds considerable publicity. Thirty thousand people attended their show in the National Stadium. But missionary work was helped most when the Osmonds spoke at a fireside sponsored by the Singapore District. The event was attended by 2,200 people—400 Latterday Saints and 1,800 nonmembers. The long-term results included increased investigators for missionaries to teach, improved image and public recognition for the Church, and some baptisms. [^11]

Growth continued until it was necessary to divide the Singapore First Branch in July 1980 into the Singapore and Clementi Branches. A little over a year later, in September 1981, the Singapore Second Branch was divided into the Toa Payoh and Bedok Branches. Two years after that, in June 1983, the Mandarin Branch was organized for those who spoke Mandarin. These remained the units of the Church until January 3, 1993, when the Philippines Branch was formed to serve the needs primarily of Filipino sisters who were in Singapore as domestic workers.

A Temple Closer to Home

The 1980s brought other significant blessings to the Saints in Singapore. A major development was the opening of the Manila Philippines Temple in 1984. Before that time it had been necessary for members to travel to distant places—Tokyo, New Zealand, Hawaii, or the U.S. mainland—to participate in temple worship and blessings. Of course, the cost was prohibitive for the Saints in Singapore. Nevertheless, some members did sacrifice and make the journey to one temple or another. Eddie Chew (the first Singaporean to serve as district president) and his family estimated it would cost them around $10,000 to travel to a temple and be sealed as a family. The cost seemed impossibly high. But then prospects brightened:

One day, the mission president's wife told Sister Queenie Chew that the Lord will always find a way for his children to obey his commandments. With that encouragement . . . Sister Queenie Chew was determined to do all she could to save up money for the temple trip. Her three daughters prayed every day that the Lord would help them to be sealed in the temple. They saved all the money which their grandmother gave them for their birthdays for the temple trip. Later, Sister Chew was blessed with a job in the hospital as a nurse at night. [Brother Chew also] began to make sacrifices he had not thought of before and added money to the temple trip savings. The Lord blessed them in many ways and in three years they had saved enough money to go to the Salt Lake Temple to be sealed as a family. [^12]

Since 1984 the various branches (and now wards) took turns arranging an annual temple excursion to either the Manila Philippines Temple or the Taipei Taiwan Temple. These trips generally worked well, but occasionally problems arose. In 1995, because of tremendous anger directed at Singaporeans when their courts convicted a Filipino domestic worker of murder and carried out the sentence of hanging, the decision was made to take the excursion to Sydney, Australia, in order to assure the safety of the Singaporean members.

Continuing Governmental Relations

Singapore is a city-state, a very close society. The government was led from 1965, when Singapore separated from Malaysia and became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, until 1990 by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. He provided very strong leadership and created a society that allowed little deviation from a conservative path toward internal stability, multiethnic harmony, and economic progress. It was the quest for multiethnic harmony that brought the expulsion of foreign LDS missionaries in 1970. As late as 1988 the policy of allowing only two foreign missionaries (the mission president and one missionary, the president's wife being considered a dependent) into the country was still in force. Considering the loyal and steady service of the local missionaries following the events of 1970, one might question the need for the government to change its policy. However, there was a need to reinforce the local efforts, and in a remarkable meeting in early 1988 the policy was changed.

On March 18, 1988, Elder M. Russell Ballard, along with Jon M. Huntsman Sr., president of Huntsman Chemical Corporation, and Utah Senator Jake Garn met with Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. They were escorted to the meeting by U.S. Ambassador to Singapore Daryl Arnold. Sister Pang Beng Ling, local Church historian, described what transpired on this momentous occasion:

They spent forty minutes with Prime Minister Lee, discussing government and business issues. The Prime Minister was interested in where Huntsman Chemical Corporation would expand in Southeast Asia. As they were about to leave, Prime Minister Lee asked how many children Brother Huntsman had.["[He] told him and then saw the opening to mention the Church and [its] emphasis on families. This naturally led to the issue of the ban on the number of missionaries. [Huntsman] came right out and asked if it could be lifted." The Prime Minister said, "Of course it can. I did not know there was a ban. This is no problem at all." President Lee then turned to his secretary [and said], "See that this is implemented. The Mormons are fine people. . . ." And so through his servants the Lord provided the way for the Church to grow in Singapore by opening the door for foreign missionaries to serve in Singapore again. [^13]

From that time greater numbers—ten or twelve—foreign missionaries have been granted visas to live and serve in Singapore.

Jon M. Huntsman Jr. also had a positive influence on relations between the government and the Church. Although his appointment as U.S. Ambassador to Singapore was strictly a political matter, his membership in the Church was acknowledged. After he presented his credentials on September 21, 1992, thirty-two-year-old Huntsman met reporters' questions with answers in English and Mandarin Chinese, which he had learned as a missionary in Taiwan. He was the first Latter-day Saint to serve as an ambassador from any country to a nation in Asia. [^14]

Church Values Versus Society's Values

Another problem that has resolved itself through changes in government policy is the issue of birth control and family planing. Because Singapore is small in size and the population density is considerable, the government early on created policies and negative incentives against large families. Family planning using all means of birth control, including abortion, was encouraged. Social pressure was also imposed by neighbors, friends, and employers. Families with more than two children were made to feel uncomfortable in many ways.

Members of the Church found themselves in a quandary: Should they openly oppose the government, which seemed to go against the twelfth article of faith ("We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law"), or follow the counsel of Church leaders, who encouraged having larger families if the health and well-being of the wife made it possible? Most of the members in Singapore were between the ages of eighteen and thirty, yet most of these young LDS families had no more than two children.

Church counsel on the matter was careful and wise, teaching correct principles but avoiding making statements that contravene local laws or regulations.

But to the joy of Church leaders and members alike, after more carefully studying the long-term implications of the two-child policy, government leaders in Singapore concluded that the general population was aging and there were too few children to grow up and handle the many jobs of a growing economy. By the 1990s, the policy had been reversed and the government had implemented financial incentives and tax breaks for families who would have more than two children.

Church Properties

Another matter that has brought the Church into regular interaction with the government has been the need to increase and improve Church properties. Space limitations alone make land acquisition a difficult matter, but government policy regarding religious structures has created an even more difficult situation. Only four religions are recognized when land is sold for religious purposes: Buddhism, Islam, Hinduism, and Christianity. "The government," according to Talmage Jones, "allows each [religious] group to buy property for one building within each housing development. This presents no problem for the first three groups, but for the Christians, all denominations compete for the prize and the price goes sky-high." [^15]

Over the years the Church has been able to purchase three properties for chapels: the first at Bukit Timah Road, the second in the Bedok area, and the third on Pasir Panjang Road. The building on Pasir Panjang is a large old mansion that has been remodeled for church use. At present the facilities are sufficient, but as growth comes the pressure of crowding will be felt.

Emphasis on Family Values

Wisely, the Church in Singapore has maintained a low profile. The difficulties of 1970 more or less mandated such a posture, but the sensitivity of many wise local leaders to the realities of life in Singapore has also led to a quiet, careful path regarding public relations. Gradually the Church has developed the trust and admiration of many in Singapore's close society. Evidence of this is most clear in the positive response that has come from the Church's efforts to encourage strong family values.

In October 1993 the Ministry of Community Development invited the Church, along with other churches and entities, to suggest ideas for a document on family values. Contributing was easy and natural for the Church leaders who participated in the discussions at public forums the ministry held on the topic. The Church's family home evening program gained the spotlight in several newspapers. A. C. Ho led out by writing a winning essay on the importance of family home evening. It was published in a national newspaper under the title "Building a Fortress." He and a friend also organized a family support group that met once a month for two and a half hours to discuss ways of teaching values to children.

The Straits Times featured the Ho family in its May 9, 1994, issue. The headline for the family section read "Every Monday is family night. Weekly ritual has been a Ho family tradition for over 15 years."

According to Pang Beng Ling, "More than 50,000 people attended the National Family Day exhibition on 19 June 1994. A Family Home Evening Resource Book was given to the Prime Minister, Mr. Goh Chok Tong, when he and his wife visited the Church booth that day. More than 80 Church members explained the Family Home Evening program and gave out fliers and book markers on that theme to the visitors at the exhibition." [^16] It appears that participation in the National Family Day is becoming a tradition—the government invited the Latter-day Saints to take part again in 1995. Also, A. C. Ho was invited to serve on a national committee on family values.

The Creation of the Singapore Stake

Total number of members is clearly not the most important ingredient in the creation of a stake. The new Singapore Stake, created on February 26, 1995, by Elder Neal A. Maxwell with Area President John K. Carmack assisting, had only 1,650 members; but those who made the decision to create the stake knew that the leaders were mature and capable of taking on the added responsibility. The district presidency had discussed more than a year earlier the possibility of making the Singapore District the two thousandth stake of the Church. But they wisely knew that they were not quite prepared and did not push to become a stake before they were ready.

The new stake president was Leonard Woo, age thirty-nine, formerly the first counselor in the district presidency. He chose as his counselors Jacob Soh, also a former district president's counselor, and Michael T. Fisher, a young attorney engaged in international business. Tan Su Kiong, the last district president, was sustained as stake patriarch. Pang Beng Ling wrote: "Elder Maxwell remarked that it was an exhilarating and historic day for Singapore and all Southeast Asia, the feeling one might have when racing downhill on a bicycle. He reminded the members that very soon they would have to start peddling. He told them to be a large stake spiritually although the Singapore Stake is a small stake of 1600 members. He also told them to be a beacon to the other countries in Southeast Asia. . . . Elder Maxwell closed the meeting by giving an apostolic blessing to the Singapore Saints. He blessed Singapore Stake that it will become more of a community of Saints, that the Saints would not go through the motions of membership but will go through the emotions of discipleship, and in the process of discipleship there will be a building of spiritual momentum in the stake, that it will be a light not only for Singapore but for other countries too." [^17]

Hoi Seng Leonard Woo, first president of Singapore Stake, was called to that office by Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve on 26 February 1995. (Photo by author)

The new stake consisted of four wards and two branches, and an additional ward was organized in August 1995, bringing the number of units to seven. [^18]

In conclusion, the Church in Singapore has truly come of age. With a stake to minister to members' needs in Singapore and the Singapore Mission to lead in missionary work there and in Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and other parts of Southeast Asia, the Church is well grounded to move forward in taking the restored gospel to the peoples of this vast realm. Elder Ezra Taft The so-called Bukit Timah (road) chapel houses the Singapore Stake offices. The five-story building behind it (opened in January 1998) houses the mission office, temporal affairs, and other Church activities. (Photo by author) Benson's words ring with prophetic clarity. Singapore has "become a center from which the gospel [is being] directed and sent into other countries which have not yet heard the message of the restored gospel."

GUARDED GROWTH IN MALAYSIA

The Federation of Malaysia was formed in July 1963. With a population of nineteen million in 1995, it presently consists of the Malay Peninsula (also known as West Malaysia) and the states of Sabah and Sarawak on the northwestern coast of the island of Borneo (East Malaysia). Eighty-two percent of the populous lives in West Malaysia. The governmental, religious, and ethnic situation is complex. The government consists of thirteen states under a constitutional monarchy, a bicameral parliament, and a prime minister. According to The Statesman's Yearbook, 1992-93, "The Constitution provides for one of the 9 rules of the Malay States to be elected from among themselves to be the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Supreme Head of the Federation). He holds the office for a period of 5 years." Because the nine rulers (sultans, rajas, and regents) are all Muslim, the king is always Muslim. Islam is the official religion, but there is freedom of religion. Unfortunately for Christians and other non-Muslims, considerable pressure has been applied to convert them to Islam, though it is strictly forbidden for Christians to proselytize Muslims. Fifty-five percent of the populace is Muslim, 25 percent are followers of Buddhist and Chinese religions, 8.6 percent are Christians (the percentage of Christians in Sabah and Sarawak is higher than in Western Malaysia), 8 percent are Hindus, and the remainder are animists, tribal, nonreligious, and so on. Ethnically the Malays are a majority at 52.5 percent. Chinese make up 30 percent, Indians 8.1 percent, and tribal peoples 8.9 percent. Bahasa Malaysia (Malay) is the official language, although most urban people speak English. A variety of Chinese, Indian, and tribal languages are also used. The urban centers are modern, boasting many high-tech industries. Per capita income in 1993 was U.S. $2,230.

The Introduction of the Church

Among this interesting variety of peoples and languages, the message of the restored gospel has taken root almost entirely among the Chinese and Indians of West Malaysia, although during 1995 Church representatives began working in Kuching, Sarawak (where a branch has been organized), and Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, both in East Malaysia. [^19]

As is true for Singapore and many other countries of Asia, the first Mormons in Malaysia were expatriates. Beginning in the 1960s, LDS Americans who were working there and Australian military personnel carried on family or small group services in different cities and bases. The first Malaysian to join the Church there was Anthony T. K. Lim, who was baptized in 1972. [^20] Today he serves as national director of public affairs for the Church. Other Malaysians were baptized earlier, but outside the country—Guan Chye Teh in Australia and Ivan Bee Ho in Taiwan, and perhaps others. Brother Ho served as a district president in Taiwan before returning to his home in the capital city of Kuala Lumpur (known simply as KL) to establish a business in 1973. After he arrived home, he found Latter-day Saints Bruce Knudson, an American entomologist, and Nicholas Jamba, a technical adviser. They formed a group and started meeting in one another's homes. They were active in spreading the gospel. "We'd bring personal friends," remembered Ivan Ho, "to weekday meetings and prepare food, show some slides and sing a few hymns." Anthony Lim and Rodney How were added to the small group, and before long they formed a branch that met in a rented hall. [^21]

Under the guidance of the International Mission, Werner and Mercedes Kiepe were assigned to serve as Church representatives in Kuala Lumpur during 1978 and 1979. The Church received legal recognition in 1977, making it possible in 1979 for the Kiepes to purchase for the Church a two-level home that was large enough for meetings and social activities. [^22] Other couples followed the Kiepes as Church representatives.

In January 1980 Malaysia was transferred to the Singapore Mission, which was reopened at that time. The following month President J. Talmage Jones called Church representative J. Floyd Stoker as the first president of the newly formed Malaysia District of the Singapore Mission. The following day, February 25, the Joneses traveled to Penang, a small but important island a short distance off the coast in the Strait of Malacca, and officially organized that branch in the city of Georgetown (formerly known as Prince of Wales Island, where Elder Elam Luddington had stopped and preached the gospel for five days in late February 1854). There were fifty active members in KL and twenty in Penang. [^23] By July the Penang Branch had grown to forty-two members, half of them from Australia.

Obtaining Malaysian visas for representatives of the Church has been a difficult problem. In 1981 Chinese elders from Hong Kong and older couples from other British Commonwealth countries were allowed to enter without visas. But in early 1982 the Malaysian government became angry at the British government and reversed its open policy regarding Commonwealth visas. At that time three elders from Hong Kong and William S. and Laurel Redd from Canada were serving in Malaysia on Commonwealth passports. Since that time, a number of older couples have visited on tourist visas and helped with the development of the Church, but the government has never granted long-term visas. Missionaries are not allowed into Malaysia from any church.

Although much of the Church's growth is the result of temporary visits from elders and sisters from the Singapore Mission, much has been accomplished by local members who have served missions in their own country. As is true in India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Singapore, citizens are free to propagate their religion among non-Muslims. In 1980 President Jones pondered deeply how he could legally increase the size of the missionary force. The answer came in a letter from a Malaysian student in London who had recently joined the Church. The writer, David Soon Ewe Seang, wanted to serve as a missionary in Malaysia. Jones wrote: "On Sunday . . . I spoke on the need for local members to become missionaries. Following the meeting a young Malaysian, Chong Sun Fu, introduced himself as a student from Australia, home for holidays. He had joined the Church in Melbourne. . . . He said, 'You have impressed me to go on a mission.' This will give us two very excited Malaysian native missionaries." [^24]

The following June, the two elders, one converted in London and the other in Melbourne, commenced their missions in KL. They were the first full-time missionaries to be called to Malaysia. They were joined a year later by Elders Wu Yuk Choi and Yung Yik Wong, also from Malaysia. Two Malaysian sisters were called to serve about the same time. [^25] Other Malaysian elders and sisters have followed to the present.

In May 1986, J. Alden Richins, area director for the Church Educational System, and Richard Ang, associate area director for Singapore and Malaysia, visited KL to initiate the seminary and institute program in Malaysia. A small group of potential institute students was already meeting twice a month. In January 1987 the institute program officially began in KL, Ipoh, and Penang.

Chong Sun Fu, with his wife, Geok Lee, has been a stalwart leader in Malaysia. Most recently he served for seven years as district president. Brother Chong was one of the first two LDS missionaries in Malaysia. (Photo by author)

During 1981 a small branch was established at Ipoh, a city between KL and Penang. Since then the work has progressed steadily—181 members in the country in 1983, 300 in 1987, 500 by the end of 1991, and 550 Latter-day Saints in Malaysia in 1995. And the number of branches has increased. In 1995, in addition to the branches in KL (110 members), Penang (60 members), and Ipoh (60 members), there is a branch in Klang, near KL (70 to 80 members), and a singles branch of sixty young adults in Petaling Jaya, which was created to facilitate social interaction and marriages within the Church. The singles branch serves the entire KL metropolitan area. There is also a small group of three families in Melaka. The district president in 1995 was Chong Sun Fu, one of the first two missionaries to serve in his homeland. The Church owns meetinghouses in KL, Penang, and Ipoh. Activity is reported to be around 50 percent. [^26]

In late 1994 eleven leaders of the Church from Malaysia and Singapore were invited to dine with the newly coronated tenth king of Malaysia, Tuanku Ja'afar, and his wife, Queen Tuanku Najiha, in the royal palace. The Church News reported this major event for the Church in Malaysia in these words:

The meeting . . . was arranged by Brother and Sister [Vincent and Sandra] Gordacan, who are close personal friends of the king and queen. They met in Lagos, Nigeria, when Brother Gordacan was working for the U.S. State Department and the future king was Malaysia's High Commissioner in Nigeria. . . .

After the meal, Brother Gordacan expressed the gratitude of the group to the king and queen for meeting with them. He said he admired the royal couple for their humility, generosity, and understanding toward their subjects.

"To be good Mormons," Brother Gordacan stressed, "members of the Church have to be good Malaysians." He explained that Church members uphold the law of the land, support the king and queen, and respect other faiths. "We respect the rights of all religions to worship God," he concluded. [^27]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Frank L. Cooley, "The Growing Seed: A Descriptive and Analytical Survey of the Church in Indonesia," Occasional Bulletin of Missionary Research 1 (October 1977): 3.
[^2] "Indonesia," in Encyclopedia of Christianity, ed. David B. Barrett (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), p. 385.
[^3] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journals, 6 January 1967.
[^4] As quoted in "Indonesia Land Dedicated for Gospel Message," Church News, 29 November 1969, p. 3.
[^5] As quoted in Spencer J. Palmer, The Church Encounters Asia (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1970), p. 161.
[^6] As quoted in ibid., pp. 171-72.
[^7] See G. Carlos Smith Jr. Oral History, interviews by William G. Hartley, Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, 1972, typescript, pp. 2-4.
[^8] Southeast Asia Mission Historical Reports, 31 March 1970, LDS Church Archives.
[^9] See Jules L. L. Taulu, "Short History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Indonesia," typescript in possession of the author. Taulu writes: "Gradually the LDS Church was organized and developed, and upon the request of the Foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a permit was issued by R. I. Department of Religion, Dirjen Bimas KP No. Dd/P/VIII/25/294/70 dated 18 April 1970 in the name of the Foundation." This is the document that officially permitted the Church to move forward with its activities. See also Piet Tandiman, interview by the author, Jakarta, Indonesia, 13 September 1995, tape recording.
[^10] Effian Kadarusman, trans., "The History of the Translation of the Book of Mormon, according to the memory of and a few data from Han King Ishar," in possession of the author.
[^11] Alison Craig, "The Saints in Indonesia," Ensign 7 (January 1977): 88.
[^12] See Garth N. Jones, "Spreading the Gospel in Indonesia: Organizational Obstacles and Opportunities," Dialogue 15 (winter 1982): 79.
[^13] See Dale S. Cox, "The Church in the Third World: Singapore and Indonesia" (honors thesis, Brigham Young University, 1981), pp. 48-49.
[^14] See Southeast Asia Mission Historical Reports, by date, LDS Church Archives.
[^15] See Indonesia Jakarta Mission Historical Reports, 31 December 1975, LDS Church Archives.
[^16] See ibid.
[^17] See ibid.; and Alton L. Wade, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 July 1979, tape recording.
[^18] Cox, "Church in the Third World," pp. 56-57.
[^19] Mary Ellen Edmunds, interview by Dale S. Cox, Provo, Utah, 27 February 1979, tape recording.
[^20] Jules L. L. Taulu, interview by the author, Jakarta, Indonesia, 13 September 1995, tape recording.
[^21] See Cynthia Collier, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Indonesia," manuscript in typed and handwritten form, 1989; in possession of the author. The author expresses gratitude for Mrs. Collier's work.
[^22] Jones, "Spreading the Gospel," p. 80.
[^23] "President asks Catholic and Protestant leaders: Foreign missionaries should be replaced," Indonesian Times, 1 September 1979. This item is found in Indonesia Jakarta Mission History, 1979, LDS Church Archives.
[^24] Subandriyo, interview by the author, Jakarta, Indonesia, 12 September 1995, tape recording.
[^25] See Indonesia Jakarta Mission Historical Reports, 1979, LDS Church Archives.
[^26] See Cox, "Church in the Third World," pp. 61-62.
[^27] J. Talmage Jones, In Singapore (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1984), pp. 61, 63.
