R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

INDONESIA 1969-1996

Measured Progress in Indonesia

It is difficult for anyone who has not traveled in Southeast Asia to appreciate the vast territory that is encompassed there. Indonesia alone covers almost as much space on a map as the United States. Although much of this area is ocean, its size is tremendous all the same. Indonesians refer to their archipelago as Tanah Air—"land water." Indonesia consists of five large islands and 13,672 smaller ones (6,044 inhabited). Java, although not the largest island in size, has 107.6 million (60 percent) of the nation's 195 million people. The climate is tropical; the equator runs through several of Indonesia's main islands. The nation is large, diverse, beautiful, and generally fertile. The people speak many languages and form many cultural groups. Frank L. Cooley described Indonesia's complexity this way: "Geographical, ecological, geological and historical developments have combined to create conditions in which societies developed largely in isolation from one another for several hundreds, even thousands of years. This resulted in the formation of 200 to 300 distinct ethnic groups throughout the archipelago, each with its own language, social structure, customary law and folkways (adat), belief system, political system and sense of identity." [^1]

Indonesia declared its independence from the Dutch on August 17, 1945, but four years of wars and negotiations followed before the Dutch withdrew. When Indonesia became independent of Dutch control in 1949, the people agreed to share Bahasa Indonesia (closely related to Malay) as the common language. Today, most Indonesians are fluent in the national language, a blessing for LDS proselyting work. Taking the restored gospel to Indonesia through the use of 250 mutually unintelligible languages would be almost impossible. Eighty-five percent of the populous is literate. Local loyalties are still strong, but since the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) was defeated in its attempt to take over the government in 1965, the people have had an increased sense of nationhood and a strong anti-Communist feeling in government.

The constitution of 1945 stipulates in Article 1 that "the State is based on the recognition of one all-powerful God" and in Article 2 that "the State guarantees to each citizen the freedom to embrace the religion of his choice and to fulfill the religious obligations which conform to his faith." Liberty to propagate religion is guaranteed "on condition that it does not disturb religious peace." [^2] Because of its perceived "disturbing effect," open proselytizing is not allowed by the government; in fact, it discourages efforts by all religious groups to propagate their tenets. Hence, LDS missionary work has been limited to indirect methods such as radio broadcasts (used successfully during the early years of the mission), English-language instruction, speaking in worship services of other churches, and especially referrals from members. Over the years most of these methods have been limited or curtailed. Tracting and street contacting are not allowed.

Citizens are free to practice the religion of their choice, and some sense of religious toleration exists. But the choice has to be Islam, Protestantism, Catholicism, Buddhism-Hinduism, or since 1973, Kebatinan, or New Religions, of which national president Suharto was a member. Latter-day Saints have had trouble fitting into this limited list of religious options. For legal purposes in dealing with the Department of Religion, the Church has affiliated with the Protestants during the last few years. The influence of Islam is strong, and preference is often given to it by the Department of Religion, which is led by Muslims. Nevertheless, Islam is not the state religion. According to recent census figures, 87 percent of the populace is Muslim, but some observers believe a figure closer to 81 percent is more accurate. This figure includes many people who are only nominal Muslims. About 20 percent of all Muslims are devout, but the government lists as Muslims all persons who do not state a specific religious preference.

Indonesia is neither a religious state nor a secular state, as is the case in the United States, where there is separation of church and state. Indonesia calls itself a pancasila state—a state based on five principles: (1) belief in one all-powerful God, (2) humanitarianism based on justice and civility, (3) nationalism—the national unity of Indonesia, (4) rule by the people—democracy, and (5) social justice. The first principle, belief in one all-powerful God, was a compromise between nationalists who wanted a secular state and those who demanded an Islamic republic. For the most part, the government, particularly the military, has tried to treat all religions fairly. The military dominates state politics and has established policies to weaken Muslim activists who have sought greater control of government and politics. The result has been a state wherein the Muslim majority is more Indonesian than Muslim, more moderate than orthodox.

But not only the first principle has had a significant effect on missionary efforts; nationalism too has played a role. The government has consistently encouraged nationals to lead in every aspect of life. Foreign corporations and investments have been allowed and encouraged, but preference has been given to Indonesians. In the religious sphere as well, Indonesians have been encouraged to eliminate foreigners and to administer and staff their own organizations. As is true throughout this entire geographic realm, colonial powers are remembered and resented. The Muslim people of Indonesia, as well as elsewhere, remember and resent both the secularizing influence of the Western powers and the Christian missionizing of those nations. Most of the problems the Latter-day Saints have had with the government in Indonesia have not been directed specifically at the Church. The LDS Church has usually been lumped in with other Christian churches that have caught the attention of someone in government.

Christianity has grown rapidly since 1960 and is partly traceable to the political upheavals of the mid-1960s. Close to 10 percent of the population (church statistics show 12.5 percent; government statistics, 9.6 percent) now claims to be Christian. This has, of course, helped the LDS mission a little, but only 2 percent of the people of Java are Christian, and Java, until recently, was the only island on which LDS missionaries had taught the restored gospel. Protestant and Roman Catholic missionaries have been most successful working with animists. Few Indonesian Muslims have been converted. As a rule, Christianity has spread as a mass movement among the tribal peoples.

THE DEDICATION OF INDONESIA

For some time before Elder Ezra Taft Benson went to Indonesia in 1969 to dedicate that land for the preaching of the restored gospel, Church leaders in Hong Kong and Salt Lake City had considered opening this country as a mission field. Government instability before 1965 or 1966 had made Church leaders hesitant to move missionaries in, but by early 1967 E. M. ("Pete") and Maxine Grimm, who had a business friend named Jan Walandauw in Indonesia, suggested to Elder Gordon B. Hinckley that it would probably be possible to obtain visas for missionaries. [^3] Three years passed, almost to the day, before arrangements could be completed for the missionaries to move in. Mr. Walandauw helped the Church on a number of occasions by explaining its intentions and purposes to government officials and by acting as a legal sponsor for many missionaries.

In October 1969, while President G. Carlos Smith Jr. was en route to Singapore to open the Southeast Asia Mission, he joined Left to right: Elder Bruce R. McConkie and his wife, Amelia, and Elder Ezra Taft Benson and his wife, Flora, on a hilltop near Bogor, Island of Java, Indonesia, for the dedication of Indonesia for the preaching of the gospel, Sunday, October 26, 1969. Elder Benson offered the prayer. (Courtesy LDS Church Archives) Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of the Seventy, and President W. Brent Hardy of the Southern Far East Mission (soon to be the Hong Kong—Taiwan Mission) in Manila for a mission presidents' seminar. Together they traveled with their wives to Jakarta, Indonesia, where they were met by a small band of Latter-day Saints, all but two of whom were Canadian, Dutch, or American. After discussing the advisability of dedicating Indonesia, Elder Benson determined that services should be held on the morning of Sunday, October 26, at a village known as Megamendung, near Bogor, about a ninety-minute ride from Jakarta. "As we stood on the hill, prior to the prayer," recalled Elder Benson, "we looked over the valley with its rice paddies, banana groves and corn-planted terraces and contemplated the gospel being preached to the millions in Indonesia." [^4]

Twenty-three Saints and friends gathered as the Church leaders and others spoke. Elder McConkie explained why the Church dedicates lands for the preaching of the gospel: "When we perform a dedication in the Church, what we actually do is dedicate the people and the resources of the Church. . . .

"For all practical purposes, when we dedicate the Indonesian lands to the preaching of the gospel, we're both opening the door to the spread of truth in the nation involved and dedicating the resources of the Church and the talents and abilities of the members of the Church to spread the gospel in that nation." [^5]

Elder Benson spoke with confidence about the spread of the gospel in Indonesia. Among other thoughtful and meaningful words, he said: "Father in Heaven, bless these humble people, many of them living almost in abject poverty. May the gospel reach them. May Thy servants come here in great numbers and carry this message to these Thy children. . . . Touch the hearts of the leaders of this great nation. . . .

"Let the love of the holy gospel spread throughout this land. May they receive a witness of the divine mission of Thy Beloved Son and the ministry of the Prophet Joseph. May they know Thee, Holy Father. They love Thee although they do not understand the nature of Thy divine personality." [^6]

Following the dedication, the visitors left for other areas of Asia. G. Carlos Smith Jr., however, was left with the responsibility of getting missionaries into the country. [^7]

THE EARLY MISSION YEARS IN INDONESIA

On January 5, 1970, President Smith sent six elders who were serving in Singapore to Jakarta. They were Greg Hawker, Larry Hunt, Ross Marchant, Robert K. Meier, Dale Storer, and Franklin Willard. Two days later, Smith himself flew to Jakarta, rented a missionary apartment that could double as a meeting place, and started making arrangements for the Church's legal recognition. The Minister of Religion had a difficult time understanding why the Church wanted to send representatives to Indonesia, considering there were so few Mormons there. With the exception of Brother Sutrisno, the first Indonesian convert, and a couple others, the only Latter-day Saints living there were expatriates. But the official eventually granted permission for the missionaries to continue entering the country on tourist visas. The Department of Religion (Agama) has never allowed LDS missionaries to have long-term visas that provide for open proselyting as the Church generally expects to do.

During the next two months, the missionaries participated in a number of firsts, such as tracting (it was still allowed at that time), holding a priesthood meeting, teaching the missionary lessons in the Indonesian language, organizing the first branch (the Jakarta Branch, organized on February 15 with Dennis B. Butler, an American who was working in Jakarta, as president), and finally, on March 29, baptizing the first two converts (that is, the first two baptized by full-time missionaries). [^8]

Attending the first meeting was Mr. Siang Sililahih, who later became mayor of West Jakarta. Mr. Sililahih had become acquainted with the Church while attending Brigham Young University, where he received a master's degree in political science in the late 1950s. Although he was not a member of the Church, he had great respect for its members and teachings and desired that the people of Indonesia might have the gospel in their midst. He attended the first meeting of the Church to lend his influence and support. His friendship continued long after these early events.

The good beginning, notwithstanding, the work that President Smith had initiated to obtain recognition for the Church was not completed in time to satisfy the government. To the surprise of the missionaries, on April 11, 1970, the government stopped all LDS meetings and activities (such as door-to-door proselyting) until the Church was granted official recognition.

Fortunately, with the assistance of Briton McConkie, who represented the Church, and Siang Sililahih, who added his influence, on April 20 the Church received official recognition from the Central Government's Department of Religion under the name The Foundation of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or Yayasan OSZA. [^9] Under this legal organization the missionaries were allowed to continue teaching, and regular Church activities could be held. From then on, however, the elders were very careful in their proselyting methods. Of course, they were limited in what they could accomplish at that time because they spoke little Bahasa Indonesia. Until June they did not have an accurately translated version of the missionary discussions, and they had no literature to leave with interested individuals. It was not until April 1971, that the Church published its first literature in Bahasa Indonesia, a translation of Joseph Smith's Testimony.

THE BEGINNINGS OF TRANSLATION WORK

Everyone involved knew literature in the national language was essential to success, so translation projects were started early in the mission's history. On January 26, 1970, D'Monte W. Coombs, from the Salt Lake City headquarters of Translation Services, and Watanabe Kan of Tokyo, who directed all translation efforts in Asia, visited Jakarta to initiate the translation of Church books and materials into Bahasa Indonesia. One of the first translation assignments was given to Brother Sutrisno and Elder Larry Hunt, a missionary. They translated the name of the Church (Gereja Yesus Kristus dari Orang-orang Suci Zaman Akhir, abbreviated as Gereja OSZA) and the Articles of Faith. [^10]

On that first visit Coombs and Watanabe contracted with a professional firm to translate the Book of Mormon into Bahasa Indonesia. What started as a standard project that should have taken only a year or two eventually took until March 1977, to complete. A number of missionaries and members of the Church were also involved, particularly Budi Darmawan, who eventually worked full-time on this and other translation projects and founded Church Translation Services in Indonesia. He was assisted by Han King Ishar and Wasito Bambang Kusamoyudo, each of whom spent a year working full-time reviewing the Book of Mormon translation. In the lengthy process of two full reviews, Darmawan discovered and hired Sister Irma Shalimar Wyude, a member who had unusual abilities as a rapid and accurate translator. She presently manages translation operations for the Church in Indonesia. While the Book of Mormon was under way, other projects were also completed, such as the missionary discussions (completed in June 1970), Joseph Smith's Testimony (mentioned above), and a selection of fifty hymns (January 1973). Tracts and lesson materials were also translated and printed during this time.

TRANSLATING THE KITAB MORMON

Alison Craig

From the beginning, the translation [of the Book of Mormon] was hampered by some unusual problems. Although Bahasa Indonesia, the official language of the Republic of Indonesia, is spoken by about seventy percent of the people [in 1977], only a few speak it as their native language. Most Indonesians grow up speaking one of the hundreds of other languages in the islands, and only learn the official national language in school.

It is a simple and regular language. Meanings of words are changed by adding prefixes or suffixes. Plurals are formed by repeating the word—for example, orang means "man," so "men" is orang-orang. But such simplicity does not make translation from English into Indonesian easy. Indonesian, like English, uses the roman alphabet, but there the similarity ends. There are few cognates—similar words that mean the same in both languages—and no similar sentence patterns. A word such as consecration causes problems. We use this one word to mean many things: ordaining someone, giving everything to the Lord, setting someone apart, and so on. There is no single Bahasa Indonesia word that means all these things— and for some of these meanings there is no word at all! Figures of speech such as "harrowing up" also cause this type of problem.

Another translation problem was the level of the language. Of course, it wouldn't be appropriate for scripture to be translated into street slang. And yet the Book of Mormon should not be translated into such formal language that no one but the most highly educated can understand it. The translators worked to set the Book of Mormon in simple, understandable language that was literate enough to convey the power and beauty of the scripture.

And to top off these problems, right in the middle of the translation the Indonesian government changed the system of spelling! The entire manuscript had to be corrected.

Brother Budi Darmawan, language coordinator for the Church Translation Services Department in Indonesia, was responsible for preparing the first draft of the translation. In June 1975 he sent it to Church Translation in Salt Lake City, where Americans like returned missionary Arne Hallam and staff experts on the Book of Mormon went over the translation word by word to make sure that the Indonesian version conveyed the exact meaning of the scripture. Then the manuscript was returned to Indonesia, where Brother Darmawan and others used the corrections and polished the language so that it would read smoothly in Bahasa Indonesia.

The translation made several more trips between Indonesia and the United States before it was at last ready for the printer. And now the Indonesian Saints are receiving a book . . . that has the power to change the life of anyone who reads it "with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ." (Moro. 10:4.) [^11]

EXPANSION INTO NEW CITIES

By August 23, 1970, President Smith believed the elders were doing well enough in the language for them to train four new missionaries. He sent Elders Storer and Meier and two new missionaries to open the city of Bandung. It was in Bandung that the elders learned that by Indonesian law they would be required to gain permission to proselyte from the local government in every city where they desired to work. By September 4 they had received permission to proselyte there. Before the end of the year, more than sixty people attended a Christmas party in Bandung, and a few individuals had been baptized.

In November, Elders Frank Willard and Scott Cannon moved to Bogor, but they did not receive permission to proselyte until January 16, 1971. The first convert there was baptized on April 4.

The people of Jakarta, Bandung, and Bogor are called Sandanese. Missionaries from other Christian churches have had little success among them because they are generally strict Muslims. Nevertheless, the branches in all three cities grew steadily.

In late September 1971 G. Carlos Smith sent four elders to Jogjakarta, which lies close to the southern coast of central Java, to start working with the Javanese people. These people, although strongly Muslim, were more willing to listen to the missionaries. Through the help of a young couple named Moestadjab, who had friends in the Church in Jakarta, the elders found a home and began teaching the gospel. Two months later the Moestadjabs joined the Church, and within a year of the city's opening almost fifty people had been baptized. Over the next twenty-six months the elders opened five other major Javanese cities: Surakarta, Solo, Semarang, Surabaya, and Malang. The movement was ever eastward. [^12]

In July 1972 Miller F. Shurtleff replaced G. Carlos Smith as mission president of the Southeast Asia Mission. Shurtleff, a man of many years of government service and one who knew bureaucracies well, fit the needs of the Church in Indonesia. Several serious problems arose regarding missionary visas and the status of the Church. In 1973 the government tightened its restrictions on all foreign missionaries. For most Christian organizations this was not as serious a problem as it was for the Latter-day Saints. Other churches sent professional ministers and missionaries who remained in the country for many years. Thus their rate of attrition was not as great in numbers or as rapid over time. The LDS way of doing missionary work was different; the government was reluctant to constantly grant a comparatively large number of missionary visas. [^13] The missionaries all had to make expensive periodic trips to Singapore during their time in Indonesia to renew their visas. During this time the local government of Jakarta also made visits by Church authorities uncomfortable and less effective. When Elder A. Theodore Tuttle of the Seventy visited Indonesia, officials imposed a little-known law restricting foreigners from speaking in public. [^14] But on the positive side, the new missionaries were arriving better prepared because they had been taught Bahasa Indonesia at the Language Training Mission. And the Church was still growing. By the end of 1974 there were 770 Indonesian Latter-day Saints and six organized branches. [^15]

THE INDONESIA JAKARTA MISSION

Seeing the steady growth of the Church in Indonesia, the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve decided to make it a separate mission. In April 1975 President N. Eldon Tanner called Hendrik Gout (pronounced h&obar;t), a retired major in the Dutch Royal Army, and his wife, Johanna Maria, to preside over the new mission. President Gout, who was born in Java, spoke the language fluently; his genealogy went back four generations in Indonesia. Following World War II, during which Gout spent three years as a prisoner in Japan, he returned to Celebes (Sulawesi) Island. In 1950 he and all other Dutch army officers were sent out of the country for a four-month furlough. However, the new government did not allow any of them to return to Indonesia.

In 1953 the Gouts joined the Church in the Netherlands, where he served as branch and district president as well as in many other ecclesiastical positions. His first wife died in 1962, and he married Johanna late that year. When President Gout retired from the military in 1969, he became head of Church translation operations in Holland, a position he held when he was called as mission president.

Because of his familiarity with Indonesia and its people, President Gout was well prepared to lead the mission; but because of his status as an ex-colonial military officer, the Indonesian government did not wish him to enter or stay in the country. Nevertheless, with faith that the problems would be worked out, the Gouts (including eight of their twelve children—five by the first wife, seven by the second) served their full mission.

Hendrik Gout described himself as one "who knows his way around Indonesia and loves and understands the Indonesian people." With the strong encouragement of Elder Adney Y. Komatsu, area supervisor, President Gout strengthened local leadership and improved proselyting methods. For example, he taught the missionaries to "ask not what you can do for the members but what the members can do for you." His objective was to get the members more involved in preparing new families to hear the gospel. [^16] He also organized several new branches. Welfare services missionaries were integrated into the mission during this time.

THE FOUNDING OF THE LDS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL

President Gout's most important institutional contribution was the creation of an elementary school in Jakarta. Even before he came to Indonesia, Church leaders mentioned President Shurtleff's and their interest in establishing a school. By the fall of 1975 President Gout had informed CES leaders in Salt Lake City that he was ready to push the project ahead if they thought it was time. On October 28 and 29 CES commissioner Neal A. Maxwell visited Jakarta and investigated the merits of the proposal. He was satisfied that an LDS school could help the people of Indonesia and also make the Church's desire to help its own people clear to government officials. On November 11 Alton L. Wade, supervisor of Church schools in the Pacific, visited Jakarta and gathered more information. When he returned home to make his report, he learned that the Church Board of Education had already approved the new school. [^17]

During 1976 President Gout and other leaders gained government approval for the school, selected a site, and hired a faculty and two administrators. Mayor Siang Sililahih assisted the Church greatly in making introductions, cutting red tape, and helping to obtain approvals to open the school.

On January 6, 1977, the Church opened the doors of S.D. OSZA, the LDS Elementary or the Jakarta Elementary School, as it was often called. The school had only LDS Indonesians as teachers and administrators. Enrollment the first year was sixty-two, eleven of whom were members of the Church. Distance from the school and relatively high tuition evidently limited LDS participation. All students received daily gospel lessons and English instruction in addition to the normal Indonesian curriculum. The purpose of the school was to provide a service for the children of Indonesia (members and nonmembers), to build relationships with responsible citizens, and to further the image of the Church. Indonesian education officials soon recognized it as a school of "high standard." [^18] The school maintained a steady enrollment of more than two hundred until 1987, when it was closed (a story that will be told later).

WELFARE SERVICES MISSIONARY WORK

By the end of 1978, fifty-two missionaries were working in Indonesia. Eight of these were local and foreign welfare services missionaries. Their services were somewhat different from those of typical missionaries. Possibly more than in any other Asian nation where the Church was well established at that time, the members suffered from poverty, malnutrition, disease, and other problems that relate to economic underdevelopment. The welfare services missionaries worked to help the Saints and others overcome these problems. Mary Ellen Edmunds, who started welfare services missionary work in the Philippines (and served in Hong Kong and Taiwan), also began that service in Indonesia in 1977. She reported that the members were eager to learn about health care and sanitation, as well as all other welfare concepts.

Sister Edmunds also reported concerning the tremendous impact the restored gospel has on new members of the Church. "We [Caucasian Americans] have no feeling for what goes on in the homes of the people who are struggling to become Latter-day Saints. We totally change people's lives." Before they become Mormons, typical Indonesians were almost totally uninvolved in their former religions. Now, as Latter-day Saints, they were expected to attend Sunday meetings two or more times each week. Women, who had been taught from childhood to be passive and submissive, were called, often soon after baptism, to work in the Relief Society and other auxiliaries and to become leaders and teachers.

According to Sister Edmunds's report at the time, the Indonesian Saints knew the principles of welfare services before they learned of the program. They helped each other and shared what they had. When asked how she found out who needed assistance, a Relief Society president in Solo responded: "Oh, Sister, in Solo we don't have telephones. We have to ask the Spirit if someone needs help." Regularly that Relief Society president rode her bicycle to the homes of members whom the Spirit prompted her to visit. [^19] In many instances the Saints needed the welfare program only as a way to organize the acts of charity they already performed. As Elder Benson said in his dedicatory prayer, "They love Thee although they do not understand the nature of Thy divine personality." They lived many of the principles even though they did not know the names of the programs.

PROBLEMS BEGIN TO SURFACE

In Gout's second year as president, the head of Protestant Christian Affairs called in his counselor in the mission presidency, Jules Taulu, and told him that his office had received complaints from Muslims regarding door-to-door proselyting by Mormon missionaries and Jehovah's Witnesses. He said this was not allowed. Actually, until that time there was no law against such activity, but a law was created to control it, and since then Latter-day Saints have not tracted. [^20] This restriction caused some problems, but the missionaries have been innovative in the use of English-language classes, television and radio interviews, direct gospel discussions, and in meeting people in public places such as soccer games, barber shops, buses, and shops who were willing to invite them into their homes. The work was helped a great deal when the Book of Mormon, Kitab Mormon, was published in Bahasa Indonesia in early 1977.

The Church had grown considerably during its first nine years. By the end of 1978 there were almost sixteen hundred Indonesian Latter-day Saints, and the Church was established in all of the major cities on Java.

President Gout and his successor, President Lester C. Hawthorne, who took over in July 1978, were eager to expand the work beyond Java and into the pockets of Christians in the islands of Celebes, Kalimantan (Borneo), and Sumatra. But they were understaffed and unable to move beyond Java. At the end of 1978 only fifty-two missionaries were serving in the mission, and ten or twelve of them were local missionaries. Native Indonesian elders had initially been called as full-time missionaries in 1975. The first two were Tjan Hardjiono and Suharto (Indonesians frequently have only one name). These elders and other elders and sisters who were called later, such as Sister Aischa Meyer and Elder Subandriyo, were among those who would assume the responsibility of leadership in the mission soon after this time. The missionary experience was among the most important developments for Indonesian Saints. Through it these young members learned gospel doctrine and developed the necessary faith and leadership skills to lead the Church during the coming difficult period of the Church's history in Indonesia. [^21]

THE EXPULSION OF THE FOREIGN MISSIONARIES

The two and a half years of Lester C. Hawthorne's service as mission president were extremely stressful for him personally and for the Church, though the Church in Indonesia saw significant progress in several areas. On August 1, 1978, only a month after Hawthorne began his term as mission president, the Minister of Religion issued Ministerial Decree No. 70, which greatly curtailed LDS missionary work. The decree, which targeted all religious organizations, was intended to guarantee "the maintenance of national unity, security, and stability." As Garth Jones points out, it prohibited "religious proselyting when it:

"1. Directs its efforts towards a person or persons who already belong to another religious faith.

"2. Utilizes persuasion and/or material incentives (money, clothing, food/beverages, medicines) to attract persons of other religious faiths.

"3. Distributes pamphlets, bulletins, magazines, books and other materials in regions [communities] and at the homes where people with other religious faiths live.

"4. Involves visiting people who already adhere to other religious faiths in their homes for whatever reasons." [^22]

Fifteen days later a further decree specifically restricted expatriate missionaries from religious training of Indonesian nationals. This decree would apply to the mission president and all of the foreign missionaries. Conservative Muslims felt that Christians were "poaching" and had unfair advantages technologically and financially that led to conversions to Christianity.

A year later, on September 1, 1979, President Suharto declared that "foreign missionaries should be replaced." The Indonesian Times article that reported his position began: "President Soeharto has asked that members of foreign missionaries [sic] working in Indonesia should be gradually replaced by Indonesian nationals. . . . Like in business field, expatriates in religious field should eventually be succeeded by Indonesian nationals." [^23] The article stated that President Suharto thought a period of planning was required so that replacements could "run smoothly." But that which for other denominations was the beginning of a period of planning and perhaps a ten-to-twenty-year transition period was for the Latter-day Saints the beginning of a rapid end for foreign missionaries in Indonesia.

By late October, visa and other problems had become so severe that President Hawthorne predicted that a group of six departing missionaries would "be the last group of missionaries to serve a full two years in the Indonesia Jakarta Mission." He was almost right. The next day eleven missionaries were transferred to other missions because they could not renew their visas. This reduced missionary numbers to sixty, nine of whom were Indonesians.

The first few months following the August 1978 decree did not bring many changes, but in May 1979 pressure from the Department of Religion was stepped up. President Hawthorne's first indication that the mission was in real trouble came when he was told by the Minister of Religion that he could not preside as head of the Yayasan OSZA (the LDS Foundation) and that "all of the Church's activities in Indonesia would be stopped." The head of the Yayasan and the members were required to be Indonesian nationals. Since 1970 the officers of the Yayasan OSZA had been Indonesian members of the Church. They made up the board and took their responsibilities seriously. Shortly before this time, President Hawthorne thought that as president of the mission he should be the head of the Yayasan. He also reorganized the membership of the Yayasan by removing (he notified them by mail) the bapaks, the old-timers, and replacing them with younger men. Animosity developed toward the mission president. Feelings of nationalism were to arise in various branches of the Church during this time. [^24] There were also problems between the old members of the Yayasan and the new. None of this sat well with the Department of Religion. President Hawthorne quickly reorganized the Yayasan with Indonesian members in charge, and it appeared for a moment that the serious threat had passed.

But beginning in July 1979 the Indonesian visa officer in Singapore would only issue to missionaries one-month tourist visas with a sticker or stamp attached saying "Cannot be renewed." On August 30 five missionaries were transferred to the Philippines, the first to be refused re-entry into Indonesia. They had been in Singapore for about a month and were not allowed to renew their visas. Three weeks later eight additional elders were sent to the Philippines to finish their missions. The only slightly consoling news was that other churches were suffering from the same problem.

During October 1979 Elder David M. Kennedy, Special Ambassador for the First Presidency of the Church, flew to Jakarta to use his influence with officials he knew in government. He was hosted warmly, but his efforts did not prove helpful. Adam Malik, vice president of Indonesia, agreed to "look into the matter further so as to ascertain the best possible cooperation in this matter," but his general agreement to help did not override the position and policies of the Department of Religion. [^25] Later visits by Brother Kennedy, the last in 1983, did not bring the desired change. The lockout of new missionaries was enforced, but those who were already in the country in late 1979 were allowed to remain in the country until their normal missions were over. The last six foreign elders departed Indonesia in August 1981.

While all of this was happening, President Hawthorne saw the need to train local leadership. Consequently, he held numerous special leadership meetings. Knowing that local missionaries were going to be the salvation of the Church, he called more Indonesians to full-time service. He instituted a prospective missionary program in most branches for sixteen- to nineteen-year-old males. He also organized a Missionary Training Center (referred to as a mini-MTC) to better train the local missionaries when they entered the field. Mini-MTCs have continued to the present.

The Doctrine and Covenants was added to the list of translated works at the end of 1979. In addition to the Book of Mormon, fourteen tracts, some seminary materials, most priesthood handbooks, and some teaching manuals were available. [^26]

In November 1980 President Hawthorne experienced a mild heart attack. He was released from his mission seven months early and flew to Salt Lake City for heart bypass surgery. J. Talmage Jones, who was already presiding over Singapore, Sri Lanka, India, and Malaysia, was asked to lead the Church in Indonesia as well. In December he received word from the First Presidency that "the Indonesian Mission will be discontinued as a separate entity and . . . will be attached to the Singapore Mission, effective immediately." [^27]

THE CHURCH BECOMES AN "INDONESIAN CHURCH"

From the time of President Hawthorne's departure in December 1980, the Church has essentially been in the hands of local leaders. Expatriate members of the Church have helped along the way. For example, Terrill Hill of UNESCO served as a counselor under President Jones, but Jones's other counselor was Effian Kadarusman, who was the country director of the Church Educational System. Hill supervised the west part of Java, and Kadarusman handled the middle and eastern parts of the island. The missionary force since 1981, with the exception of humanitarian services missionaries and a few others who have entered on short-term visas in the 1990s, has been made up entirely of locals. Jones, like Hawthorne, had become converted to the value of local missionaries in Singapore and Malaysia and immediately saw the promise they offered in Indonesia. In early 1981 twenty-four Indonesians were serving in their homeland. That number increased to between thirty-five and forty-five over the next four or five years, and with the exception of a year or two at the end of the 1980s, the number remained quite steady.

Because of Indonesian visa policies, the Church has not been able to maintain a permanent foreign mission president in the country. Indonesia was part of the Singapore Mission from December 1980 until June 30, 1985. At that time Effian Kadarusman and his wife, Mary, became president of the reopened Indonesia Jakarta Mission. He served from 1985 to 1989, the final year being added to the normal term of three years because the person who had been recommended as Kadarusman's replacement needed to work another year before retiring. As it turned out, the Indonesian government would not allow the proposed president to remain in the country with a new religion visa category, so it was necessary to transfer Indonesia back to the Singapore Mission again.

This time, however, the Brethren called Piet Tandiman, an Indonesian member of long standing in the Church, to serve as full-time counselor to the mission president in Singapore. He lived in the mission president's home in Jakarta and was supported in the same manner as are other mission presidents. He was in charge of the Church in Indonesia, but he reported to President Warren R. Jones in Singapore. This arrangement was continued until July 1993, when Piet Tandiman's son, Juswan, was called as counselor in charge of missionary work and Dr. Dean Belnap, a child psychiatrist serving as a humanitarian services missionary at the University of Indonesia Medical Center, was called to assist with the members. In July 1994 Brother Subandriyo, country manager and physical facilities manager for the Church, was chosen to replace Juswan as counselor to Carl D. Warren in The growth of the Church since 1980 has been dependent on the service of Indonesian elders and sisters. A mini—missionary training center has been in operation in Jakarta for many years. Shown here are missionaries in training in September 1995. (Photo by author) Singapore. Juswan and his wife, Aischa, and later Subandriyo and his wife, Steffie, traveled to Provo, Utah, to participate in the Church's annual mission presidents' seminar at the MTC. They were responsible for operating the mini-MTC in Jakarta in a manner similar to the Provo MTC.

On July 1, 1995, Vern and Carol Tueller began service as humanitarian services missionaries at the University of Indonesia. Elder Tueller had taught dentistry at the University of California Medical Center in San Francisco for forty years and now turned these talents to the service of the Indonesian people. [^28] The Church also asked him to spend part of his time directing affairs in Indonesia. Even with an invitation from the University of Indonesia in hand, the Tuellers had trouble getting more than a sixty-day visa. Subandriyo continued on as counselor in charge of missionary work. [^29] He was the head of the Yayasan OSZA and was recognized by the government as the head of the Church in Indonesia. (In the 1980s the government required all churches to split the ecclesiastical and temporal parts of their organizations. The Yayasan OSZA was made responsible for the temporal parts of the Church, those that normally come under the director of temporal affairs or the country manager.

The Church continued to make progress on many fronts during the 1980s. Talmage Jones sought ways to build or buy more buildings for Church use. The Church owned only three buildings in 1981. A distribution center for Church materials was created, and publications in Bahasa Indonesian became more plentiful. In 1985 Subandriyo was hired to work full-time buying property and supervising the construction of chapels. By 1995 the Church owned ten chapels and leased two additional buildings for branch use. The most frustrating experience with property was the long-delayed completion of the Jakarta Selatan (South) chapel. After the elementary school's closure (see explanation in the section following this text), the decision was made to build a chapel on that property. The necessary approvals were obtained from the Church and the government, and construction commenced. However, when the foundation and pillars were up, opposition was raised by Muslim neighbors who did not want a competing religious structure in the neighborhood. Legal impediments stopped construction for five years. Finally, after working with the minister in charge of Protestant religions and completing some further clearances, the Church was allowed to proceed with construction and to complete the building in 1995. According to some members of the Church, the newly completed building has done much to enhance the image of the Church and to establish the Mormon presence in Jakarta. [^30]

Under Subandriyo's guidance, membership and financial records were computerized during the mid-to-late 1980s and in the process became much more accurate. [^31] Computers were also introduced in the translation process during this time, making that work easier to produce and correct. By 1995 electronic mail was in use between translators in Jakarta and the offices of the international magazines and the Translation Department in Salt Lake City. Facsimile machines, too, have greatly increased the efficiency of translation and other operations in Indonesia.

Effian Kadarusman, country director of CES and former mission president, has provided years of service to the Church in Indonesia. (Photo by author)

The seminary and institute program was initiated in 1980 but moved forward slowly. Numbers of potential seminary students more than doubled between 1980 and 1987, but the percent enrolled dropped from 46 percent to 23 percent. Total numbers enrolled grew by only 23, making a total of 122 students. Institute figures are not clear for this same period. By 1987, 45 percent of the potential 125 students were attending institute classes. President William R. Bradford of the Asia Area Presidency was deeply concerned about the activity of Indonesian youth in seminary and institute as well as in all Church programs. Although mission president Effian Kadarusman had his responsibilities as associate area director of CES for Indonesia somewhat reduced, on February 9, 1987, his position was reemphasized by President Bradford. Two other men were also hired part-time as regional coordinators to help direct this work. Elder Bradford said, "The salvation of the Church in Indonesia rests on the CES program preparing our young people to be missionaries." [^32]

The mission progressed as well as could be expected with the small number of missionaries. The local elders and sisters generally performed as well as their foreign counterparts had done, and membership continued to grow. By the end of 1987 membership stood at thirty-six hundred (up a couple thousand in six or seven years) in seventeen branches under three districts, the Jakarta District in the west, the Surakarta District in central Java, and the Surabaya District in the east.

THE CLOSING OF THE LDS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL

In addition to these manifestations of success, it appeared that the Jakarta Elementary School was serving the needs of the members as well as the nonmembers who were enrolled there. But for five years prior to 1987, when the school's closure was announced, CES leaders in Indonesia, Hong Kong, and Salt Lake City had been evaluating the effectiveness of the institution. For a time it had served the purposes of the Church quite well, but several things had changed. The student body was 90 percent non-Mormon, and most of those students were from families who could afford to enroll at other high-quality schools. The Church was paying 85 percent of the annual budget, but most of the children of the Church in Jakarta and throughout the island were not able to enroll because of distance and cost. Finally, the government issued a regulation against using the school as a proselyting tool. [^33] When the school was first opened, missionaries had taught some of the religion classes at the school, set up displays there, met parents while they were waiting for their children, and so on. [^34] These and other means of finding hearers of the gospel were closed off. President Kadarusman, who was also a CES director while serving as mission president, said: "We hardly baptized anyone from the Church school. If we baptized, we only baptized small children because it was an elementary school. Seldom did the parents join the Church because their children were baptized." He continued: "You can teach religion classes in that school, you can practice religion in that school, but you cannot persuade anyone to join the Church. So if they know you are doing religion activities to persuade people to join, your school will finally be closed down." [^35]

The board of trustees of the Church Educational System decided to close the school primarily because it was expensive, it was not serving the needs of enough Latter-day Saints, and Church funds could be reallocated to support other educational needs in Indonesia. Elder William R. Bradford, president of the Asia Area, was assigned to make the announcement in Jakarta. On February 9, 1987, he and other CES representatives met with the administrators and teachers at the school and announced the board's decision. Even though they had been forewarned that sooner or later the school would be closed, the closure caused great concern and upheaval in the lives of those employed by the school. The fallout from the announcement ultimately created great problems for the Church and personally for President Kadarusman. [^36] Ultimately, after negotiations with the PTA and parents, the school was closed the next year. All of the students had found new schools to attend. The Church paid entry fees to other schools for most of the students and did what it reasonably could to cushion the blow caused by the closure.

Because of the school closure and other related matters, the Church in Jakarta suffered and unity was disrupted. Ultimately, after suffering more than two years of difficulty arising from the troubles brought about by the school closure, President Kadarusman completed the fourth year of his mission and was released. A month later, he and his family moved to Hawaii, where he continued his higher education. He was temporarily replaced by Eddie Harjono, who acted as CES director in Indonesia until Kadarusman returned in 1992.

Since the school's closure, observers have attempted to evaluate the decision. Was it the right thing to do? Kadarusman never questioned the decision in spite of the problems he suffered. He was convinced that the reallocation of part of the support funds for scholarships to support studies of young Indonesian members at colleges and universities was the wisest use of the money. Some moneys were used this way, but bickering over who was worthy to receive the help has somewhat limited this program. Nevertheless, with these scholarships LDS students have graduated in veterinary science, mechanics, economics, law, and in other fields.

On another side is the reality that the Church does not have a flagship, so to speak, to manifest its concern for the people and government of Indonesia. The school, though small, did make friends for the Church. The real tragedy of its closing, as was so often true in the early days of the Church, was the disunity that arose in the Church.

THE CHURCH IN INDONESIA TODAY

The Church has moved forward in an almost remarkable way considering the external and internal difficulties that have been placed in its path. There is not yet a stake in Indonesia, as there are in Bangkok and Singapore, but the circumstances are quite different in all three locations. Unlike Singapore, which is confined in size and has a totally different social and economic structure, and Bangkok, where the Church has had serious government problems but has nonetheless had steady support from foreign missionaries, the Church in Jakarta, which is probably the first candidate for stakehood, and in the remainder of the country has had to develop largely on its own. Almost as many people have been brought into the Church in Indonesia (4,600 members) as in Thailand (5,300 members), and far more than in Singapore (1,650 members), over the same period of time. The Church is actually most successful and active in central Java. Jakarta is strengthened by the faith and experience of Saints who have moved there from other districts. In the mid-1990s missionaries have been sent to other islands. Two elders were serving in Medan, Sumatra, and four were assigned to Manado, Sulawesi, in 1995.

According to Elder Tueller, Church members throughout Indonesia are striving to live in accordance with the counsel of President Howard W. Hunter, who encouraged all adult members to obtain a recommend to enter the temple even if they could not actually use it because they lived so far away from a temple. When asked what the most important Church development has been during the past fifteen years—the years since the foreign missionaries were expelled from the country—Brother Subandriyo answered: "The major development is that the teachings of the Church have made members into strong and valuable persons. I can see that if the gospel had not entered their lives, they may not be what they are now. This has benefited the member himself, his family, his community, and the country, because they have developed themselves." [^37]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook 1992 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office), p. 155.
[^2] See Patrick Johnstone, Operation World (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1993), 273ff.
[^3] "India," in World Christian Encyclopedia, ed. David B. Barrett (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), p. 375.
[^4] There is a long history of anti-conversion laws in India, dating back to the period of British occupancy. Since independence, many laws have been passed in various states that were intended to prevent or limit religious conversions. The purported reason for these laws was to prevent forced, fraudulent, or induced conversions, but the reality is that they made genuine conversions illegal and punishable. The law in Madhya Pradesh, which is ironically called the "Freedom of Religion Act, 1968," is probably the best known. When it was tested before the Supreme Court in 1977, the five-member panel held that "there is no fundamental rights to convert any persons to one's own religion." The court's opinion was that "what Article 25 (1) of the Indian Constitution grants is not the right to convert another person to one's own religion by an exposition of its tenets. It has to be remembered that Article 25 (1) guarantees 'freedom of conscience' to every citizen and not merely to the follower of one religion and that in turn postulated that there is no fundamental right to convert another person to one's own religion because if a person purposely undertakes the conversion of another person to his religion as distinguished from his effort to transmit or spread the tenets of his religion that would infringe on the 'freedom of conscience' guaranteed to all the citizens of the country alike." The court went on to state: "We find no justification for the view that Article 25 granted a fundamental right to convert persons to one's own religion. . . . What is freedom for one is freedom for others, in equal measure; and there can be no such things as fundamental right to convert any person to one's own religion."
[^5] The words of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights generally ring true: "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance."
[^6] Charles W. Forman, "Freedom of Conversion—The Issue in India," International Review of Missions 45 (April 1956): 180-82.
[^7] Indian Christian writer Brojendra Nath Banerjee sharply condemns Hinduism, asserting: "Hinduism is a kind of totalitarianism. Its economic, cultural and social complex are undergirded by powerful religious sanctions. The Hindu system governs Hindu life from the cradle to the cremation; whether it is worship of God or Gods, social and ethical presumptions, legend or folklore—all are knit together to make that system. Although Hinduism is formless, it proves to be a successful force for religious, social and economic control. Anything that erodes this Hindu system will naturally be taken to be a threat and must be vehemently crushed down and not simply opposed" (Religious Conversions in India, p. 254).
[^8] Two documents are of considerable help in rebuilding Paul's history: "Report of The Church . . . in Coimbatore, India," by Paul Thiruthuvadoss, 30 December 1979; and "A Report about the L.D.S. Church in Coimbatore Area, December 17, 1979." Both reports are found in Joseph Talmage Jones, Collection 1968-1962, LDS Church Archives. (Paul was born on September 2, 1919, and died in February 1995.)
[^9] Gordon B. Hinckley, "'Whosoever Will Save His Life,'" Ensign 12 (August 1982): 4.
[^10] Gordon B. Hinckley, Journal, 12 December 1964; in possession of President Hinckley.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] See ibid., 13 December 1964.
[^13] Gilbert Mantano, Journal, 23 April 1965.
[^14] Gurcharan S. Gill, India Bangalore Mission Report, September 1995.
[^15] J. Talmage Jones's reference to this problem in his book In Singapore (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1984), pp. 141-42) is probably the most available account. In March 1982 he wrote: "We all were made aware of the awful discrimination that exists in most of India. The caste system is illegal, but very much in effect. Many natives do not speak to their neighbors. If one family becomes interested in our activities, those in a higher caste immediately lose interest. I interviewed two potential missionaries and four leaders of a group of 200 people, all of whom desire to be baptized. . . . It is an awesome responsibility to determine how fast we should go with bringing large numbers into the Church. Indeed, on this trip alone we met fine people who are anxious to bring at least 1,000 followers to baptism."
[^16] Raj Kumar Oral History, interview by Gordon Irving, 1987, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, typescript, p. 75.
[^17] See G. Carlos Smith Jr. Oral History, interviews by William G. Hartley, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1972, LDS Church Archives, typescript, pp. 15-16.
[^18] Elder Marion D. Hanks, who supervised Asia as Executive Administrator from 1980 to 1983, described the chapels in these words: "They're little places, concrete floor, no riser, no nothing, just go in and sit on the floor—the men in the middle, the kids in the front, and the women at the back" (Marion D. Hanks Oral History, interviews by Gordon Irving, 1983, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives, type-script, p. 57.
[^19] This section is based on the testimony of S. Paul Thiruthuvadoss, LDS Church Archives; the journals of Gilbert Mantano and Wayne A. Jones, partial copies in possession of the author; and the author's interview with George Groberg, 12 June 1974, Provo, Utah.
[^20] Smith Oral History, pp. 15-16.
[^21] See Elizabeth S. VanDenBerghe, "Edwin Dharmaraju: Taking the Gospel Home to India," Ensign 20 (April 1990): 60-62.
[^22] Edwin Dharmaraju, "Mission to India," 14 February 1978, p. 5; typed copy in possession of the author. Several articles regarding this short-term mission have appeared in the Church News and the Ensign. Each was based on this report. An example is "Small branch established as converts return to India," Church News, 3 January 1981, p. 13.
[^23] "Book of Mormon Selections is a compilation of different parts of the book that have been approved by the Quorum of the Twelve. . . . The selections relate the basic story of the Book of Mormon and include chapters that deal with the Atonement and other major teachings of the Church" (Kerril Sue Rollins, "The Book of Mormon in Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu," Ensign 13 [February 1983]: 78).
[^24] See ibid., pp. 78-79. See also "3 India translations complete," Church News, 14 August 1982, p. 3.
[^25] Baldwin Das and Douglas Rose, "History in North India—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," August 1987, typed report, p. 2, LDS Church Archives.
[^26] Ibid.
[^27] See Alma Heaton and Marie Heaton, Behind the Taj Mahal: Spiritual Adventures in India (Provo, Utah: n.p., 1992), p. 17 passim.
[^28] Jones, In Singapore, pp. 77, 89.
[^29] J. Talmage Jones to Marion D. Hanks, 24 November 1981, Joseph Talmage Jones, Collection 1968-1982, LDS Church Archives.
[^30] Dianna J. Greer, "Young Ambassadors 'unlock hearts' during tour of India," Church News, 24 April 1982, p. 13.
[^31] See Jones, In Singapore, p. 139.
[^32] William B. Smart, "India fills genealogy link," Church News, 9 January 1988, pp. 6, 12.
[^33] See notes 23 and 24.
[^34] See Jerry C. Garlock, comp. "A History of the Church in India" (Bangalore, India: n.p., 1995), pp. 71-76, 208-9. Garlock, a patriarch in the Church, was a senior missionary to India during 1994 and 1995. He was assigned to compile this history as part of his missionary duties. He has amassed considerable information, much of it of great value. He has not followed normal documentation procedures. There are no source notes, bibliography, or other markers to acknowledge author, copyright, rights to the information, and so on. He frequently quotes at length from published articles without attribution of author or quotation marks. When care is exercised in its use, this document is of great worth.
[^35] Kadarusman interview, 7 June 1990.
[^36] Kadarusman, Journal, by date; and Kadarusman interview, 7 June 1990.
[^37] Subandriyo interview.
