R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

INDIA 1954-1982

Church Growth in South Asia

Frequently over the decades since the early East India Mission was closed in the 1850s, General Authorities of the Church have expressed their hope that the restored gospel could be established in India and other nations of South Asia. The local political, social, cultural, and religious frameworks, however, have made open, straightforward missionary work very difficult. With the exception of Pakistan, a Muslim nation that does not fear Christian missionaries, all of the countries of South Asia have laws or immigration policies that inhibit new missionary churches from entering their borders. (Pakistan allows proselyting among Christians only.) Such anti-missionary attitudes have restricted the work of spreading the restored gospel to the 1.28 billion people who live in this geographical realm.

Unlike Singapore and Hong Kong, which are small and somewhat describable, India is large, its land mass covering slightly more than one-third the size of the United States. A populous nation, India was home to more than 900 million people in 1995. India is also ethnically and linguistically diverse. Indo-Aryans in northern India represent 72 percent of the total population; Dravidians, mostly in southern India, 25 percent; and Mongoloids and others, 3 percent. Official languages include Hindi and English, as well as fourteen other official languages: Bengali, Telugu, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, Gujarati, Malayalam, Kannada, Oriya, Punjabi, Assamese, Kashmiri, Sindhi, and Sanskrit. Hindi is spoken by 30 percent of the populous. Throughout the country, English is the most important language for higher education, government, commerce, and communication. Literacy remains a problem, with an average rate of 48 percent (62 percent for males, 34 percent for females). [^1] The Holy Bible has been translated into all of the primary languages of India—the entire Bible is available in forty-six languages, the New Testament in thirty-five, and portions of the Old and New Testaments in sixty.

The religious situation in India is more complex than in any other nation in the world, as the following figures for the distribution of religions in India indicate: Hinduism, 82 percent (78.8 percent if some tribal groups are not automatically included); Muslim, 12 percent (Muslims claim 14 percent); Sikhs, 1.92 percent (the majority lives in the Punjab); tribal religions, 1.5 percent; Buddhists, Jains, Baha'i, and Parsi combined, 1.39 percent. Christianity officially accounts for 2.61 percent of the total population, but the figure may be as high as 4 percent (Protestant, 1.91 percent; Roman Catholic, 1.76 percent; other Christian groups, 0.33 percent). Although these Protestant and Roman Catholic numbers appear small, they reflect as many as 16.2 million and 15 million adherents, respectively. The gross figures are not as useful as the statistics for each individual state. For example, in the south, where the Latter-day Saints have had the greatest success, the states of Andhra Pradesh (3.5 percent Christian), Tamil Nadu (6 percent Christian), and Kerala (20 percent Christian) have higher numbers of Christians than most of the northern Indian states. [^2] Because the LDS Church has imposed voluntary restrictions on proselyting among Muslims, and because most Hindus are so tolerant of all religious beliefs that they see little need to restrict themselves by declaring one religion true among all the possibilities, the Christians are the most probable target population for successful teaching of the restored gospel. To date these three southern states have proved most hospitable to the Mormon message—Bangalore (in Karnataka state), where the mission is headquartered, being the exception.

India is a secular state. According to the constitution, this means "equal protection for all religions and non-interference by the state in purely religious concerns." [^3] Unlike many countries, India does not have an office such as a ministry of religious affairs that deals specifically with religious matters. Several articles in the constitution of 1950 provide protection for religious individuals and organizations. Article 25 of the constitution provides "freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion" to everyone, subject to "public order, morality and health" and to other fundamental rights. However, these legal protections have not limited intolerant Hindu factions from passing discriminatory laws that deprive individuals who convert to Islam or Christianity of their normal rights. Madhya Pradesh state, for example, has passed strong laws against conversions to Christianity. [^4] In India (and in much of that part of the world), religious toleration and freedom of religion have taken on a different twist compared to what we are accustomed to in the Western world (which, incidentally, is the home of the concept of religious toleration and religious freedom). Whereas most Europeans and Americans interpret religious freedom to mean the right to practice one's religion without interference from any other individual, group, or the state and to have the right to influence others to accept, appreciate, and even affiliate with that religion (that is, convert), Indians generally do not accept these ideas. [^5] America, of course, is the home of religious pluralism, and it is not surprising that Americans would find the Indian view of religious toleration curious and almost illogical. To most Indians, however, religious freedom means at the very least the right not to be bothered by missionaries or other groups who may desire to convince them to change their beliefs or religious practices. According to Charles W. Forman, "The real question in the Indian mind is whether such a thing as conversion has a place in India. . . . In other words, evangelistic work and conversions are . . . ruled out by the principle of religious freedom, for conversion implies the rightness of one belief or the wrongness of another, and so makes for intolerance." He goes on to write:

This is indeed a form of tolerance, but it is a tolerance which makes room for all religions only on the basis of a prior agreement that God cannot be known in a final sense through any of them [that is, through any existing religious system]. The one thing which it will not allow is that God should ever make His very heart and essence manifest to man. If that were ever admitted as possible, the whole basis of this kind of tolerance would be destroyed. Here, then, is an interpretation of tolerance which is predicated on the impossibility of the Christian claim that God in relation to man is revealed in His very essence in Jesus Christ. It is predicated on the illegitimacy of any attempts at conversion, for conversion implies that the essential truth for man is to be found in one place and not in another. [^6]

Such thinking has framed most government policies regarding Christian missionary work in India. The Hindu majority, for all its assertions of belief in toleration, is actually an unrelenting majority with little or no respect for the beliefs, practices, or opinions of others. [^7] Into this setting the Church has found its way in the latter part of the twentieth century.

The difficult cultural and religious setting notwithstanding, by the mid-1990s significant progress had been made in India. The India Bangalore Mission was created in January 1993, and a foothold has been established in Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and Nepal. Every step forward has been carefully considered. Every move has been made with the best interests of the new or potential members at heart and the legal situation in mind. More than in any other part of Asia, the efforts of individuals, but mostly of older couple missionaries working almost alone, have accounted for the advances of the Church. As Indians, Nepalese, Sri Lankans (Sinhalese and Tamils), and Pakistanis have heard about the Church and asked to be taught, these courageous couples have shared the principles of the gospel and even baptized the inquirers when they have sought that blessing in their lives. Just as the labors and sufferings of the early missionaries to this realm were the most heroic of that era, the labors and sufferings—but more frequently the joys and satisfactions—of the missionaries of our time have been of heroic proportions.

PIONEER EFFORTS IN SOUTH INDIA

The longest established community of Latter-day Saints in South Asia is the 250-plus members who live in and around the southern India city of Coimbatore. Most of these converts were brought into the Church as a result of the dedication and faith of S. Paul Thiruthuvadoss. Brother Paul, as he was known, was born into a Christian family, but he was not satisfied with the denominations he found and joined during the earlier years of his life. In 1954, when he was on the verge of turning to Hinduism, he found an LDS tract inside a used book. Impressed with its contents, he immediately wrote to Church headquarters in Salt Lake City for more information. During the following months and years, the Missionary Department sent Paul the standard works and many tracts, lessons, and books. In 1957 he requested baptism. At about the same time he started preaching the restored gospel as he understood it and even founded a Sunday School. [^8]

Although he was visited by Elder Richard L. Evans of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1962, it was not until 1964, when Jay A. Quealey Jr., president of the Southern Far East Mission (which included India within its bounds), visited Paul for three days that matters started moving at a quicker pace. In December 1964 President Quealey returned again, this time with Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, who was responsible for all Church activity in Asia. Together with their wives, they spent two full days with Brother Paul and his people. They visited Paul's home and met his wife, his four children, and his aged father and mother. They visited a school that Paul built "with his own hands on a piece of ground he bought from his savings." Years later President Hinckley, as a member of the First Presidency, wrote: "It was a simple rough building; but studying there were some four hundred poor children, each being brought out of the darkness of illiteracy into the light of learning. What this act of love has meant and will mean in their lives is beyond calculation." [^9] And they traveled into the countryside, to the villages "where the dust is thick and people are miserably poor." [^10] Elder Hinckley described their meeting with Paul's rural friends:

As we came into a little opening where there were a few trees, Paul's associates were playing the organ [probably a harmonium, a small reed instrument that is played while sitting on the floor or ground] and singing and beating a drum. . . . The people began to gather. Some two or three hundred gathered and sat on the ground. They had taken two cots and put rough blankets on them and we sat on these.

A hymn was sung which we did not know. It was sung as the Indians sing with their particular type of musical arrangement. President Quealey then offered prayer and Brother Paul interpreted his prayer. I was then called on to speak and I did so for a few minutes with Paul interpreting. Paul then spoke to them in the Tamil language. . . . Some of the old men seated on the ground in front nodded their heads in approval. The congregation was very reverent.

These were surely the poor of the earth. They appeared to have little or nothing. As we met with them, I thought of Jesus speaking to the multitudes. [^11]

At the hotel Elder Hinckley spoke at length with Brother Paul regarding the doctrines of the Church. He and his companions also prayed for inspiration regarding how to proceed with the Church in India. "The task of working among the poor of India is so great," wrote Brother Hinckley, "that I do not know whether we should start. We certainly need the inspiration of the Lord in whatever action we take here."

The immediate question was whether or not to baptize Paul and his associates. Elder Hinckley in due time decided to recommend that two full-time missionaries be sent to India to baptize Paul and others and to teach the doctrines and order of the Church. [^12]

Fewer than two months passed before Elder Hinckley's recommendations were to become reality. On February 5, 1965, President Quealey, along with Elders John Aki Jr. and Gilbert Mantano, arrived in India from Hong Kong. These elders were the first to serve in India in the contemporary era. Two days later President Quealey baptized Paul and his ninety-six-year-old father, Elder Mantano baptized Paul's wife, and Elder Aki baptized a schoolteacher named Stanley Ponraj. A few days later Paul was also ordained a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood, and his father and Stanley were later ordained deacons.

The events of the baptism were a minor miracle. A reservoir had been selected in which to perform the ordinance, but when the group arrived there they found it dry. Because the area was suffering from a drought, all along the way President Quealey had been silently praying that there would be enough water to perform the ordinance. Not far from the dry reservoir they found a young boy who said he knew of some water. He took them to a small stream that was dammed to create a pool of water large enough for the task. Before President Quealey could baptize Brother Paul, an irate farmer started yelling at the group. Paul talked to him and explained the nature of their presence. The farmer calmed down and explained his anger, telling Paul that he had attempted to harness his oxen to pull the stocks and drain the water onto his fields, but one of the animals had bolted and he had been trying to chase it down when he saw the group preparing for the baptism. Had he been able to harness his animals and pull the stocks, the baptisms could not have taken place that day.

The elders remained in India for six months. For the first month they did little else but study the language. They found the Tamil language very difficult, but with Paul's help and the tutoring of a professor from a local college, they were able to learn enough to be effective. When they rationally surveyed conditions, they soon concluded that they were in a difficult situation. They had expected to teach and baptize the teachers at Paul's school, but for various reasons they had all left. It was the elders' expectation to baptize perhaps a hundred people and establish a branch. But that was not to be. They rode their bicycles fifteen or twenty miles to the villages where Paul had taken Elder Hinckley and found the people "were pagans who have never heard the name Jesus Christ." Mantano went on to say that the villagers "are the lowest of all castes and they are only looking for the material aspects of the Church, although they are good people." [^13] Events since then have proved this assessment to be a bit harsh, but building the Church in and around Coimbatore has been a struggle. Trying to use their time well, the elders visited with prospective members in Madukkarai (a subsection of Coimbatore where Paul lived), Summedu, Ettimadai, Chavadi Purdur, and other villages near Coimbatore. They ultimately baptized six other Indians. Most of their contacts were with extremely poor farmers, most of whom were illiterate. When the elders departed for home, Brother Paul was on his own as leader of the tiny band of Latter-day Saints.

Elder Mantano's reference to caste was significant. The caste system, although illegal since 1950, continues to dominate the social and economic fabric of India. People of all castes are theoretically protected and equal in the eyes of the law, but people are born into highly complex social and economic circumstances. Almost all occupations are determined by family tradition. Another aspect of caste, one of great importance to Indians, is the refusal of one caste to eat with another, thus maintaining ritual purity. This has serious implications for breaking the bread and the passing of the sacrament. Some members had difficulty making themselves take the sacrament from a low-caste elder. Only the Christian love of fellow members can overcome these kinds of traditions. When a person chooses to leave his native Hinduism Members and friends from Chavadi Purdur and Ettimadai villages, along with missionaries and BYU student interns, gather in front of the Chavadi Purdur Branch meetinghouse following Sundary services. Most local members are field workers. Matthew (next to missionary sister at left of photo) and his father (below man with brass pot) have been the stalwarts of the branch. Matthew now works for the Church Educational System in India. (Courtesy Tricia Donaldson) and become a Christian, he is choosing to leave his entire social and economic order as well as his religion. G. S. Gill further describes this challenge: "Hindu converts pay a high price for membership. Most often they lose their friends, family, inheritance, incentives and government reservations in education. The Christian converts tend to keep dual membership because of incentives such as subsidized education, marriage possibilities, and burial privileges given by their former church." [^14]

Since the introduction of Protestant Christianity into India in the late eighteenth century, many, if not most, conversions to Christianity have been as mass movements. Few individuals have been able to survive such a move alone, but when the entire caste, extended family, or village converts, they are somewhat protected from the various kinds of wrath and reprisals that such a decision carries.

Even in Christian villages, such as those where LDS members reside near Coimbatore, much diplomacy and care must be exercised by local Church leaders to see that normal village relations continue and smooth interpersonal relationships go on. When a regular member of the community is suddenly elevated to the position of branch president, he is no longer a common person. He must meet with the village panchayat (council of elders), occasionally attend meetings with leaders of the other churches, and so on. Life in Indian villages consists of people interacting with people on the most basic human level. Friendships last a lifetime because most people never move from their natal villages.

Several missionaries and mission presidents have commented over the years since Paul came into the Church that "thousands" could be baptized in India. In most such instances a local preacher has approached a Church representative with the offer to join and bring "his people" or "his congregation" into the Church. [^15] Such offers have been consistently refused because the burden on each person is to learn of Christ and develop faith in him, gain a testimony, repent, and be baptized. Mass movements, as they are called, portend too many problems and the almost certain fact that many or most of the "converts" will not truly be converted. Most mass movements into various Christian denominations have been by low-caste people or untouchables. Typically these people have been illiterate and extremely poor. Often they have expected some means of support or gifts from the church at Christmas or on other holy days. Generally they have lacked the leadership skills necessary to operate the LDS Church, particularly in its early stages. Since about 1980, Church leaders in India have followed a general policy of teaching people who are literate, generally in English as well as in local languages, and who are capable of building the Church and not being dependent upon it for support and sustenance. These facts notwithstanding, some members have noted the difficulty of living the gospel in the modern cities of India, where the literate who show leadership potential more frequently live. They have wondered if the meek of the earth may not be found most frequently among the simple, honest souls of the villages.

The dependent status of women in India also plays an important role in the development of the Church. Regarding the question of women's freedom to act independently in religious matters, Indian member Raj Kumar stresses that "it's socially impossible in India, because in Asia, and especially in India, the women are subdued by the menfolk. Before marriage they are under the strict law of their fathers and older brothers, the male members of the family. After marriage they are under the strict law of their husbands. And they don't treat them very kindly. . . . So they don't dare to take that step [join the Church] unless the whole family is involved." [^16]

In other parts of the world it is common for women, single and married, to join the Church without family support. In India men join the Church alone, and if they are married their wives may follow at that time or afterward; but women in the Church as part-member families are much less common.

A new phase of closer contact, support, and supervision began in March 1970, when President G. Carlos Smith of the Southeast Asia Mission visited Paul and brought the Church in India under more constant care. Eighteen more Indian converts were baptized. [^17] At the same time, President Smith ordained Paul an elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood and made Stanley a priest so they could conduct worship services in the village where the new converts had been baptized. Smith also encouraged Paul to register the Church as an official corporation within India. Paul found the task difficult but managed to register under the Societies Registration Act XI of 1860 on November 2, 1971. This made it possible for the Church to own property and to act as a corporate entity. Eleven years later, Church attorneys decided this early registration was insufficient for all of India, but for a time it served its purpose. In the same year, 1971, President Smith flew Paul to Singapore to observe the workings of the Church in fully functioning branches.

During the next eight years, mission presidents G. Carlos Smith, Miller F. Shurtleff, and Soren F. Cox made two or three trips to India each year. They often supervised baptisms, and eventually four groups were organized with a combined membership of 220 by 1978. Three of the groups had humble chapels [^18] that were built with funds from the Southeast Asia or Singapore Missions. There were five local elders and thirteen Aaronic Priesthood holders, and the groups were gradually growing. Probably the greatest weaknesses within the Church in Coimbatore were the poverty and illiteracy of most of the members and the fact that Paul was forced to be a circuit rider, much like a nineteenth-century Protestant minister. In an effort to correct the latter problem, two pairs of elders were sent to Coimbatore during 1973 and again in 1974. These young men, George Groberg and Arne Hallam, and then Arne Hallam and Wayne A. Jones, worked under very restricted circumstances but were able to help the fledgling groups find their way and gain stability. Their work might have been easier if the members had not been situated in four different places, making it impossible to create one strong branch of the Church. All LDS worship services were conducted in Tamil. [^19]

By 1979 there were more than two hundred baptized members of the Church in the Coimbatore area. Surprised members elsewhere have sometimes wondered how so many illiterate, low-caste farmers came into the Church. The answer is that it happened naturally, under the prayerful and watchful care of the mission presidents of that time. The following account, which comes from the oral history of mission president G. Carlos Smith, illuminates the situation:

I THOUGHT THAT THROUGH ALL NIGHT

G. Carlos Smith

When [we] got there [Coimbatore], it was on a Friday afternoon. [Myself, Sister Smith, and an American member named Dale Haws, who was working on a rice project] spent that afternoon with Brother Paul, and I asked him many questions. He speaks good English and he has a . . . degree in accounting. . . . He was most anxious for me to come and meet the people he'd been teaching the gospel to in this village about five miles from his home. I said, "Paul, I'd be very happy to meet them." He said, "They're ready for baptism, I've taught them a long time and they know as much about the Church as I do and they want to be baptized." I stayed awake most of the night worrying about it. What do you do when you baptize these people? What kind of situation do you put them in? The Lord has told us we're to teach everybody, they're all entitled to the gospel and if they ask for baptism, you can't deny them. So these thoughts were going through my mind. . . . Brother Haws took me out to Paul's home. This was a little humble home, a small concrete house. I said, '"Well, Paul, let's go out to your village and meet these people." This was Saturday. Dale drove us out on the narrow concrete road. When we got to their little lane, a dirt side road, we turned off and went up through the trees and across a dry stream. When we got up almost to the village, Paul said, "Stop your car here. The people are waiting for you." So we stopped the car and we got out.

Then we saw these people, a group of people dressed in their finest, which wasn't very good. They were poor Indian farmers. They were coming down the road to meet us and one man had a little instrument about eighteen inches long, two inches thick, and about six inches wide and he'd squeeze it, and it would make one sound, "oh oh oh oh." That was their organ and they were singing. They were singing to that music, "oh oh oh." They'd come to meet us. Paul had built them up. He was the representative of the Church there and he'd built them all up. . . . We followed the procession on up to one of the little adobe houses with a thatched roof. They'd built a bowery out over the front of a house, and they swept the floor. There are dirt floors in all the houses but they had swept it right clean with cow dung. When you want to clean anything real clean, you use cow dung in India. The natives do. They had two grass mats on the dirt floor, and a little bench at one end with a little bouquet of flowers and a bunch of bananas. That was a banana offering to me and Sister Smith. Then we sat on the bench and Brother Haws sat up there with us and the rest of them sat on the ground. I talked to the people. . . . They told Paul they wanted to be baptized. So I said, "All right, I'll interview you." One at a time I had them come up to me, and I asked them questions through Paul and got their answers. There was a wonderful spirit there, a fine feeling, so I said to Brother Haws, "Dale, I feel that we should baptize these people." He said, "Well, I have no objection." I said, "Where can we baptize them, Paul?" There was a reservoir five miles away. . . . [T]hey rounded up a couple of taxis. . . . We hauled the people out to this reservoir. The water was extremely low but we walked down in a place deep enough and then we got the people together. I talked to them again, explained their obligations and so on. Then I said, "Now Paul, you're going to baptize these people." "Me?" he said. I said, "Yes. Do you know the baptismal prayer?" He said, "Yes." I had him repeat it to me so I knew he knew what he was saying. I said, "Now you're a priest in the Church, you have the authority to baptize." So I asked him to go down there in the water and baptize these people, and he did. I would read their names off and Dale and I were the witnesses. They'd go down in the water; Paul would baptize them and then they'd come out. Every time someone would come in (Paul was standing about up to his waist in the water), he'd brush the water vigorously with his hands. I said, "What are you doing, Paul?" He said, "There are snakes coming up and bothering me." He was chasing them away! As I recall there were eighteen people. The oldest was a lady in her sixties or seventies. The youngest was Paul's daughter who was twelve. He baptized these people, then brought them out on the bank again, where they changed their clothes—just held sheets up and changed their clothes, and put on their dry clothing. Then we talked to them again. I talked to them, and I had Brother Haws talk to them. Then he and I confirmed them members of the Church and then we got them in cabs and took them back to their village. By then it was dark. We went back to Dale's home and had dinner. I went to bed, but I didn't go to sleep. I started thinking this thing through again. I thought, "What have you done? Here you've baptized eighteen people. Where are you going to hold church? Who's going to be the leader? Who is going to help them or are you just going to baptize them and they'll flounder?" So, I thought that through all night. [^20]

THE EDWINS ESTABLISH THE CHURCH IN HYDERABAD

But the young twigs of the Church in Coimbatore were not the only fresh growth in India. In December 1977 Edwin and Elsie Dharmaraju, [^21] who had recently been converted to the Church in Western Samoa, returned to their native India for the wedding of their daughter, Lata. While they were there, they spoke freely with their relatives concerning the restored gospel. It was fortunate that most of their family members were already Christians. The response to their newfound religion was warm and positive.

After the Edwins returned to Samoa—they traveled by way of Salt Lake City—they received letters from India asking for more information about the Church. There followed a series of discussions (which included a number of General Authorities) concerning who could go to India to teach the gospel. The International Mission presidency was then responsible for India, the Singapore Mission having been temporarily closed. The Brethren decided that the Edwins were the logical choice for that mission. On December 9, 1978, Brother and Sister Edwin departed for India having been set apart as short-term missionaries to teach the gospel, baptize and confirm, ordain men to the Aaronic Priesthood, and organize groups of the Church. They had previously sent almost five-hundred pounds of Church materials (books, tracts, sacrament trays and cups, Church tapes, and so on) that had been generously donated by Regional Representative Ralph G. Rodgers and other leaders of the Church in Samoa.

When the Edwins reached Hyderabad, family members gathered to hear the gospel message. They preached the gospel intensely and soon appointed December 27 as the day for baptisms. Brother Edwin baptized and confirmed eighteen people that day, including his father, mother, and a number of brothers and sisters. The next day the Edwins traveled to Vijayawada, a six-hour train ride away, and baptized four more members of Brother Edwin's family and organized a group of the Church. In all, twenty-two people were brought into the Church, and four men were ordained to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood. Brother Edwin described another important part of their mission:

From Hyderabad we went to see my wife's parents, who live in a place called Bheemunipatnam, which is about 16 hours by train. Sister Edwin's father, [the] Reverend P. Sreenivasam, [was engaged] since the last 14 months, in the translation of the Book of Mormon into the local language of Hyderabad State called "Telugu." This language is spoken by nearly 50 million. Reverend Sreenivasam is an ordained Baptist minister.

Reverend Sreenivasam showed us more than 500 foolscap [13'' x 16''] neatly handwritten sheets of the translation. We were taken aback by the amount of work he has already accomplished. He is now 82 years of age. He has been translating the Book of Mormon at the rate of a little more than a page per day. [^22]

The Reverend Sreenivasam persisted in his translation project and completed the Book of Mormon in Telugu. Brother and Sister Edwin then typed the seven-hundred-page manuscript and carried it to President Spencer W. Kimball in March 1981. After review at the Translation Department in Salt Lake City, and typesetting at Osmania University Press in Hyderabad, India, Telugu Selections of the Book of Mormon [^23] was published in Salt Lake City in 1982. [^24]

Near the end of his report, Brother Edwin wrote that whatever he and his wife had accomplished on their mission was "just a minute droplet in the ocean." He was speaking of India's vast population then of nearly seven hundred million people and the many nations and kindreds and languages that coexist there. But they had created a beginning in Hyderabad, a beginning that was to grow in later years.

Before his release in June 1978 as president of the Singapore Mission, Soren F. Cox noted only six groups of the Church in India. There were no branches. The new converts in Hyderabad were only a group. In September 1980 the little units in Coimbatore were organized into branches. But by this time the Church in India was still hardly more than a glimmer of promise.

OTHER BEGINNINGS—THE PACE QUICKENS

Northern India, which encompasses the area from Pakistan on the west to Bangladesh in the east and from Kashmir in the north to the Deccan Plateau in the south, is as large as Western Europe and has a population as great as Latin America. The beginnings of the Church in northern India, particularly in and near Delhi, were similar in one aspect to what happened in Coimbatore and Hyderabad: a short time after the small group of people were baptized, they were left almost alone.

According to the account of Baldwin Das and Douglas Rose, "in 1968, Brother Charles Radford, an employee in the Office of the Defense Attache at the American Embassy [in New Delhi], befriended, taught, and baptized an Indian colleague in the Embassy, Brother Baldwin Das. Brother Das' family followed him into the Church, and they, in turn, introduced the gospel to the family of Mr. Roshan Juriel. The Juriels were also baptized by Brother Radford, and for the first time, the Church in North India had a permanent Indian presence." [^25]

But Das and Rose went on to explain that "for several years, from 1969-1981, the Das and Juriel families survived on periodic meetings with Americans when they were present in Delhi, occasional visits from the mission presidents headquartered in Singapore [incidentally, the distance from Singapore to Delhi is almost as great as that from New York to San Francisco], Church ambassador David Kennedy, who helped establish the Genealogical Society of Utah (GSU) here, and [area] authorities." [^26] Throughout those years mission presidents in Singapore and leaders in Salt Lake City struggled with the problems of caring for members of the Church in South Asia and establishing legitimate missionary work in the subcontinent. But as is true everywhere in the world, the Brethren refused to deviate from the principle of abiding by the laws of each country into which the Church enters. They were looking for a legitimate, legal means of expanding pastoral care in India.

For two years, from July 1978 until July 1980, India and South Asia were assigned to the International Mission in Salt Lake City. During that brief period, two couples were sent to Panjim, Goa, as representatives of the Church. They were not missionaries in the normal LDS sense. They were to make friends, answer questions, nurture members, minister as necessary, even baptize, but only when sought out by interested individuals or families. The first Church representatives were Tagg B. and Maria Hundrup, who went to Goa in 1978. They were hosted and watched over by Church member Bonnie Chowgule, who, with her husband, Ramesh, a wealthy Indian of considerable local prominence, lived there. Then in early 1980 Alma and Marie Heaton replaced the Hundrups. Their responsibility was to create a positive impression for the Church and to share their skills in recreation and dancing. Mingling of the genders through social dance has not found general acceptance in India, but Alma got almost everyone—even the Roman Catholic nuns from the convent next door—into dancing or acting. The Heatons also followed the pattern established by the Hundrups of riding the circuit (by airliner) from Goa to Delhi, to Coimbatore, to Hyderabad, to Bombay, and back to Goa to perform what they called "home teaching." This was important because it was the first effort the Church had made to minister to most of the clusters of Saints throughout the country. [^27] Elders Hundrup and Heaton served successively as district president for India. Church activities were also important. Many friends met with the Hundrups, Heatons, and Chowgules for Sunday services, and a few people were baptized, most notably Michael Anthony, who later served a mission and has served in the building of the Church in Bangalore and the Church Educational System.

In July 1980 the First Presidency again assigned this vast area to the Singapore Mission, and President J. Talmage Jones began making several lengthy trips there each year. In February 1981 he wrote, "We have many dreams of what may be done in India—of course, we need about twenty couples." Then in April of that year President Jones noted a new possibility for getting representatives of the Church into India to build the members and support further growth. "We have 'discovered,'" he reported, "that it may be possible to have citizens of Commonwealth nations come to India without visas. Our visits to immigration offices have resulted in positive answers and we now have submitted the proposition to Salt Lake City, that we receive [British], Australian, New Zealand and Canadian couples and later elders." [^28] In consultations with legal counselors, President Jones gained assurance that representatives of the Church could direct meetings, instruct and guide local Church members (couples who were sent to India were encouraged to put as much responsibility on local members as was possible), and even teach and baptize Indians who expressed an interest. But they could not proselyte, that is, seek out new investigators through tracting or other overt means. Indian citizens, on the other hand, were free to propagate their religion and teach whomever they wished. Young Indian elders and sister missionaries were clearly the answer to building the numbers in the Church, but for some reason, perhaps the belief that they were not experienced enough to serve in India without expatriate companions of greater experience in the Church, local missionaries were not called to serve in India until 1986. (However, at least fourteen Indians were called to missions outside India, beginning with Sister Maureen Das from Delhi, who served in the Philippines in 1972 and 1973.) Finances had been a serious worry, but Jones was told that Church representatives could receive contributions and the Church could own property and construct buildings. [^29]

Jones's recommendations regarding British Commonwealth representatives were quickly accepted by Elder Marion D. Hanks, Executive Administrator over South and Southeast Asia, and Church leaders in Salt Lake City. Before the end of 1981, Horace and Edna Hayes from England had been sent to New Delhi to minister to the Das and Juriel families and other members, and additional couples, mostly from Commonwealth nations, had been called to Hyderabad, Goa, Bombay, and Bangalore. Others followed, and between 1978 and 1993, when the India Bangalore Mission was created, at least 120 couples served in India as representatives of the Church. American couples were allowed only six-month BYU performing groups such as the Young Ambassadors have done much to build friendships for the university and the Church. India's prime minister Indira Gandhi, received the group in January 1982. Elder Horace Hayes (next to Mrs. Gandhi) arranged the visit. Author Lanny Britsch introduces artistic director Randy Booth and the young performers. (Photo by R.N. Khanna) visas, thus requiring expensive, time-consuming travel outside of India to renew visas. Young missionaries from Commonwealth countries were not called to India until the late 1980s because they were under the same proselyting restrictions as were the older couples.

The year 1982 brought several events and developments that furthered the growth of the Church in India: a tour by the BYU performance group the Young Ambassadors, incorporation of the Church as a legal entity, establishment of microfilming projects by the Genealogical Society of Utah, and the publication of the Book of Mormon in Hindi and selections in Telugu and Tamil. Actually, the 1982 tour of the Young Ambassadors was not the first to South Asia, nor the last. From December 26, 1979, to January 16, 1980, they toured India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka under the direction of Janie Thompson. In January and February 1982, Randy Boothe directed their performances in India and Sri Lanka. And in January and February 1986, under the direction of Mark Huffman, they again visited India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka. They made many friends for BYU, the Church, and the United States. On each tour the Young Ambassadors performed before packed halls of delighted viewers. "A cleansing sanity ran through the entire program," wrote Krishna Chaitanya of the Times of India in January 1980. "The numbers expressed a communion in delight, and a yearning for good fellowship with people all over the world. To these kids, a family of man does not at all seem an ideal difficult to realize, and their spontaneity and joy could infect old and disillusioned hearts too." In April 1982, as the cultural adviser for the group, I made the point that "through their love, smiles and example, the Young Ambassadors unlocked many hearts. The friends made and impressions left as a result of this tour will no doubt be of great value in establishing the restored gospel in that part of the world." [^30] Highlights of the tours for the students included an audience with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1982, and visits with Mother Theresa, Nobel Peace Prize winner, in 1980 and 1986.

Raj Kumar joined the Church following the Young Ambassadors tour of India in 1982. He subsequently served a full-time mission in California and returned to India as director of the Church's family history microfilming project. He now lives in Toronto, Canada, where he serves as bishop in his home ward. (Photo by author)

S. Paul Thiruthuvadoss had registered the Church in South India, but he had done so using his own name. Representatives of Kirton and McConkie, Church attorneys, advised incorporating the Church in Delhi. This would provide appropriate legal status for the holding of property and so on. Using local attorneys to assure proper procedure, Lee Ford Hunter took charge of most of the application procedures. Many months passed before the application was acted on, a normal occurrence when dealing with Indian bureaucracy. The registration was completed on January 25, 1982. The process created "The Indian Society of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." Attorney Larry R. White guided the group through the final steps. Elder Hanks, President Jones, the Hayeses, the Dases, and others took part in the signing or participated in the first meeting of the new society. [^31]

The Genealogical Society of Utah made arrangements in 1982 to begin microfilming Hindu pilgrimage records and Roman Catholic church records. The Hindu records contain only names of births and deaths; the Catholic records include baptismal records, marriages, and death and burial records. Two microfilming cameras have been kept busy to the present. A variety of people have managed the operation, including couple missionaries and local Indians such as Raj Kumar, who was converted to the Church as a result of the Young Ambassadors' visit in 1982. Thousands of rolls of film, one thousand feet in length each, have been deposited in the Family History Archives in Salt Lake City. Copies have of course been given to the owners of the source documents.

INDIA FILLS GENEALOGY LINK

William B. Smart

Outside, a teeming mass of humanity filled the evil-smelling alleys and the broad promenades along the Ganges. Hawkers, fakirs, beggars, and pilgrims mingled with sacred cows and temple monkeys in an unending, noisy stream along the river.

But inside the monk-like cell was quiet and concentration. Sri Prasad Dixit leaned intently over the thick bundle of pages. "Had you gone to your father and brought the proper information, you would have saved us a great deal of trouble," he reproached as he flipped through the pages.

"But here. This name. Here is your father, recorded 40 years ago when he came to immerse the ashes of a son." Dixit's aged father, sitting quietly by, nodded confirmation.

More pages. Then a smile of triumph. "And here is your grandfather. He came here 70 years ago. Here is his father. And his father. And his father."

Five generations, each recorded in turn as faithful Hindus came to Hardwar to cast ashes of loved ones into the Ganges.

"I felt a shiver as he read those names of my ancestors," Raj Kumar declared later. "It was the spirit of Elijah."

The Dixits, father and son, are pandas, keepers of some of the oldest and most unique genealogical records in existence. It's a record the Utah Genealogical Society is undertaking to preserve on microfilm.

Hardwar, regarded by Hindus as the most holy place in India, lies just where the Ganges spills out of the foothills after its tumultuous passage down from the Himalayas. Here begin the vast Gangetic plains that stretch a thousand miles to Calcutta and the Bay of Bengal.

Hindus revere Hardwar as the "Door of Gods," the gateway to paradise, as well as the gateway to the Himalayas. They worship the Ganges as the "holy mother" who is the cleanser of all sins. . . .

To experience Hardwar is better to understand such fervor. With its many shrines and countless pilgrims and holy men, it comes close to the core of Hinduism and its 465 million adherents.

In the ancient temple of S`iva . . . worshipers, young and old, dip fingers in the fountain, anoint their foreheads, and cast marigold blossoms on the water.

Sacred cows wander past the temples and along the river. Monkeys clamber over the temple walls. Pitiable men, women, children, maimed, leprous, blind, rattle their begging cups. Fakirs with pythons coiling around their shoulders compete for coins. Stalls sell marigold blossoms or food offerings for worship. Long lines of hungry people queue up for food handouts.

Holy men, hair hanging in waist-long ropes, bathe in the Ganges morning and evening and emerge to smear bodies with cow-dung ashes.

"It's for beauty of the mind, beauty of the soul, and beauty of the skin," one of them explains.

Ghats for the burning of bodies loom above the river bank. At river's edge, small family groups cluster to cast into the holy waters the charred bones raked from the ashes.

A white-robed priest chants verses from the Veda. A son of the dead washes himself thoroughly. He and other family members sprinkle blossoms, then water from the river on the scraf-wrapped bone fragments. Reverently, the son places the bundle in the river. It sinks. The blossoms float downstream.

For yards out from the bank, the river bed is white with bone shards. . . .

At sunset, a great throng fills the amphitheater above the river for evening prayers. Over a loudspeaker comes a call. The crowd chants in response. Bells clang. Everyone stands. From 10,000 throats, in unison, comes a song:

"Oh mother Ganges, you are immortal. You make us happy. All Hindus worship you. You give eternal life, you cure their sickness. You give prosperity and happiness. Thank you."

. . . For thousands of years the pilgrims have come. For at least 1,000 years, pandas like the Dixits have recorded their passage.

Three thousand pandas operate at Hardwar today. Each represents a specific village or district of India. In most cases, the office passes from father to son; in the case of the Dixits, that has gone on for 15 generations.

Existing records go back some 500 years. None are found before that time because a conquering Mogul emperor, steeped in Islam, ordered the records destroyed.

The Dixits possess 32 such books reaching back 300 years. Many pandas have more and older books.

The system seems disorganized, but the way it works is astonishing. A pilgrim hits town, coming from any of hundreds of places in India or abroad. He asks around for the panda representing his particular area. Somehow he is directed to the right place, as was Raj Kumar.

Once having found his particular panda and identified his family name, the pilgrim finds a mind that works like a computer. With amazing intergenerational memory, the panda pulls the right book out of his safe, thumbs through the pages, and produces the names.

These are the records the Utah Genealogical Society has been microfilming the past six years. Two operators under direction of [Raj] Kumar photograph some 8,000 pages a month, each page containing around 50 names.

So far [by 1988], records of about 40 pandas have been processed—something like 24 million names. Projecting these figures, one can figure there are 1.8 billion names yet to process on the records held by the remaining 2,960 pandas.

And that's only in Hardwar. There are at least three other pilgrimage destinations in India where pandas keep similar records. [^32]

In addition to the Young Ambassador tour, the creation of the Indian Society of the Church, and the establishment of genealogical microfilming projects, the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon and other Church written materials were important in the development of the Church in India. The publication of Book of Mormon selections in Telugu has been noted earlier. In the same year, 1982, the entire Book of Mormon was published in Hindi, India's official language. (By 1995 the number of Hindi speakers had grown to 200,600,000; Telugu speakers to 69,623,000; and Tamil speakers to 58,547,000.) Most Latter-day Saints in India speak Telugu and Tamil. Fortunately, Selections from the Book of Mormon was also published in Tamil.

The Hindi translation project began in Fiji in 1975 under the direction of mission president Eb Davis. Many members of the Church in Fiji were of Indian ancestry, and many of the older people were fluent in Hindi but not in English. President Davis hired Vijendra Sharma, a nonmember linguist in Fiji, to do the initial translation. As is true with all contemporary scripture projects, the final product was published only after careful evaluation and revision by committees of specialists—ecclesiastical and professional.

The Tamil Selections from the Book of Mormon was done primarily under the hand of Daniel K. Shantakumar, a member originally from Coimbatore. He started the project in 1979; it was reviewed in 1980 and printed in Sri Lanka in 1982. At this writing (1995), completely new versions of the Book of Mormon are under way in Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu. Local Indian committees have been organized under the direction of the Asia Area Presidency. The Hindi version needed to be redone because it contains many usages that are peculiar to Fiji. The version in Telugu that was done by the Reverend P. Sreenivasam contains some interpretations that more closely approximate Baptist theology than LDS theology. [^33] A variety of lesson materials, including Gospel Principles and a number of tracts, have been translated and printed in these languages as well as in Urdu, Bengali, and Kannada. Since 1989, approval has been given by the Translation Department to translate the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price into Hindi, Telugu, and Tamil, but those projects have been temporarily delayed until complete versions of the Book of Mormon in Telugu and Hindi are completed (they are under way) and the Hindi version of the Book of Mormon is revised (not yet under way). [^34]

Written language materials are one thing, but spoken languages are another. During the foundation stages in India, leaders have consistently urged that English be used in Church services as well as in teaching prospective members. The economy of this policy is reasonable, but its application has been a problem. When an English-speaking man joins the Church, the first thing he desires to do is teach the gospel to his wife, to his parents, and to his close friends. Often these people have not understood English. And naturally the member has enthusiastically taught, through translation, those whom he or she loves. For this reason there is much simultaneous translating taking place in LDS church services in India. And the need for written materials in the languages of India continues to grow. It's a process that cannot be stopped.

NOTES

This law still stands in spite of the strongly held opinion of many respected Indian jurists who believe the matter should be tested again. Among the strongest complaints against the decision is the observation that the decision contradicts Article 19, which guarantees freedom of speech. See Brojendra Nath Banerjee, Religious Conversions in India (New Delhi: Harneam Publications, 1982), pp. 247-53.

In his oral history (1983) Elder Marion D. Hanks commented: "We could have baptized any number of people in India. We refused to do that." Elder Hanks explained that he had met several men who were intelligent, educated, and converted, but he did not allow their baptisms because the Church could not support them with the buildings, teachers, and missionaries that were necessary to get things going right (p. 57).

---
Notas:
[^1] See Jerry C. Garlock, comp. "A History of the Church in India" (Bangalore, India: n.p., 1995), pp. 91-95.
[^2] See ibid., p. 97.
[^3] Ibid., p. 198. Garlock includes here a twelve-page recounting by Sheffield of his efforts to improve the visa situation. See also Vilo P. Gill, Journal, 30 October 1993; in her possession.
[^4] As quoted in Garlock, "Church in India," p. 53; see also "Y professor called to new mission," Daily Universe (BYU newspaper), 11 November 1992, p. 1.
[^5] See Vilo P. Gill, Journal, 4 February 1993.
[^6] John K. Carmack, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 30 November 1995; notes in author's possession. See Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Asia Area: Welcome mat is out in several countries," Church News, 19 June 1993, p. 3.
[^7] See Gurcharan S. Gill, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 24 October 1995; tape recording.
[^8] See "Nepal," in Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook 1992 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office), pp. 241-42.
[^9] See Johnstone, Operation World, p. 405.
[^10] Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 238-39; Gurcharan S. Gill, spoken and written texts of homecoming talk, 10 September 1995, Provo, Utah; copy in author's possession.
[^11] Gurcharan S. Gill interview.
[^12] David Shuler, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 31 October 1995.
[^13] See Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 205-8.
[^14] See Vilo P. Gill, Journal, 7 November 1995.
[^15] See Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 218-20.
[^16] John K. Carmack interview.
[^17] Gurcharan S. Gill interview.
[^18] Douglas L. Vermillion, "There are people the Lord loves in Sri Lanka," draft article submitted to the Ensign, 24 January 1995. For this segment, I have drawn heavily on this draft, upon its published result, "Gospel Splendor in Sri Lanka," Ensign 25 (August 1995): 78-79; and Sunil Arsecularatne and Douglas L. Vermillion, "Pioneering Growth of the Church in Sri Lanka," August 1993, unpublished manuscript in author's possession.
[^19] Stanley C. and Margaret C. Kimball, "First Branch of the Church Established in Sri Lanka (Ceylon)." This undated item was found in the Joseph Talmage Jones Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^20] As quoted in Arsecularatne and Vermillion, "Pioneering Growth," p. 2.
[^21] As quoted in Joseph Walker, "Sri Lanka native is branch president in own country," Church News, 1 November 1980, p. 7.
[^22] Warren R. and Becky Jones, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 1 November 1995; tape recording in author's possession.
[^23] See "Loving the Lord in Lahore," Church News, 7 April 1985, p. 16.
[^24] Lee Wohlgemuth, "Correction: There's another branch meeting in Pakistan," Church News, 19 May 1985, p. 14.
[^25] See John K. Carmack interview.
[^26] See ibid.
[^27] See Warren R. and Becky Jones interview.
[^28] Carl D. Warren to Warren R. Jones, 12 September 1995; in possession of the author.
[^29] J. Talmage Jones to Marion D. Hanks, 24 November 1981, Joseph Talmage Jones, Collection 1968-1982, LDS Church Archives.
[^30] Dianna J. Greer, "Young Ambassadors 'unlock hearts' during tour of India," Church News, 24 April 1982, p. 13.
[^31] See Jones, In Singapore, p. 139.
[^32] William B. Smart, "India fills genealogy link," Church News, 9 January 1988, pp. 6, 12.
[^33] See notes 23 and 24.
[^34] See Jerry C. Garlock, comp. "A History of the Church in India" (Bangalore, India: n.p., 1995), pp. 71-76, 208-9. Garlock, a patriarch in the Church, was a senior missionary to India during 1994 and 1995. He was assigned to compile this history as part of his missionary duties. He has amassed considerable information, much of it of great value. He has not followed normal documentation procedures. There are no source notes, bibliography, or other markers to acknowledge author, copyright, rights to the information, and so on. He frequently quotes at length from published articles without attribution of author or quotation marks. When care is exercised in its use, this document is of great worth.
