R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

SOUTH ASIA 1982-1996

Church Growth in India Since 1982, and Church Beginnings in Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan

RECENT PROGRESS IN INDIA

Once missionary couples started arriving in India, the Church there began to make significant progress. The Deseret News 1983 Church Almanac lists Church membership in India as totaling 198 in 1981. This figure was probably a bit low. Two years later the figure increased to 332. And by 1987 the number of members in India was seven hundred. New groups and branches were established in Erode and Rajahmundry in 1983 and in Bangalore in 1984.

Establishing Headquarters in Bangalore

The founding of the Church in Bangalore is instructive. When J. Talmage Jones first visited India in 1980, his impression was that he should establish a mission headquarters in Delhi, near the seat of government. But before his release in 1982, he felt that Bangalore was the better choice. Bangalore offered several advantages: a comfortable climate, smaller population (4.11 million versus 8.38 million in Delhi in 1991), considerable modernity (the city is called the "Silicon Valley" of India), and proximity to the Michael Anthony and his wife, Christine, have contributed much to the growth of the Church in India. He was among the earlier converts. (Courtesy Michael Morris) greatest number of Indian Latter-day Saints. But in early 1982 only one Mormon was in Bangalore, a young man named Michael Anthony.

Michael had been educated in an English-speaking school through the financial contributions of a Salt Lake City lawyer named Delvin Pond. During most of his early years, Michael did not know who his benefactor was, but Pond eventually supplied copies of the Ensign magazine, the Bible, and the Book of Mormon. Years passed and Michael gained a testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that the Book of Mormon is true. A letter from Alma and Marie Heaton in Goa brought him in contact with the Church in India. He was baptized by Elder Heaton on May 1, 1980, in the Arabian Sea at Panaji (Panjim), Goa. But he returned to his home in Bangalore and didn't have much contact with the Church until President Jones looked him up in January 1982.

At the same time, President Jones decided that Bangalore was a good future site for a mission headquarters. All that was lacking was members of the Church and mission leaders, apartments for missionaries and a mission president, and officers and offices from which to administer the affairs of the Church. Anthony and Jones took the first step and found an apartment for a missionary couple. Those assigned to live there were Richard and Eunice Metcalf from Australia. With young Michael Anthony they held the first sacrament meeting in Bangalore. President Jones called Elder Metcalf as district president for all of India, a move that made Bangalore the administrative center for the country. The Metcalfs were put in charge of Church records and finances for the sub-continent. They were the first of thirteen couples to serve in Bangalore between 1982 and 1992.

In September 1982 Michael was sent by the Church to serve a mission in Utah. He served well, but before his normal release date he was sent back to India because his mother was critically ill. He arrived home too late to see her alive, but he attended her funeral. He had three months remaining in his mission and wanted to complete what he had started. He lived with a missionary couple in Bangalore, but he served without a companion. Although Elder Anthony talked with many people about the gospel, few adults would listen. Eventually he turned to children and youths and led them in what he called "social work" projects—pulling weeds, clearing stones, and so on. He also taught them the Articles of Faith and gospel-related songs such as "I Am a Child of God." The children learned and loved the gospel as he taught it. As a result of this service, twenty young people eventually joined the Church, and by 1995 two had served missions, four held leadership positions (Newton Samuel, for example, was president of Bangalore First Branch), and only one had become inactive. Michael's mission did not end with his official release, however. He continued as a member missionary. In addition to bringing youth into the Church, Michael also taught and baptized ten or twelve friends he had known from school and soccer games. One of them, Christina May, became his bride in 1986. [^1] In 1995 Michael was serving as country director for the Church Educational System in India.

For Bangalore to make sense as the center of the Church in India, it needed a strong branch. In August 1984 President W.F. Lionel Walters from the Singapore Mission visited India and organized the Bangalore Branch. Elder Jack Humphreys, who was already serving as district president, was called as the first branch president. Michael Anthony was called as a counselor, Anthony Krishnan (a longtime friend of Michael) was called as clerk, and Ebenezer Solomon became executive secretary. Branch presidents were called from among the couple missionaries until 1986, when Brother Anthony was sustained as branch president. He selected Ebenezer Solomon as his counselor and Nixon Samuel (one of his young converts) as clerk. [^2]

A competent financial and management team was needed in Bangalore. In 1983 Elder Metcalf contacted a local accounting firm to have a financial audit of the Church in India. The person assigned was Ebenezer Solomon, a young accountant who was nearing completion of his experiential training. He spent a good deal of time with the Metcalfs and, later, the Johnsons. In 1984 yet another couple worked with Ebenezer, and they asked him if he had any interest in learning about the gospel. He said he was interested; the time was right. He was baptized in June 1984.

Because he had served so well and faithfully as an accountant and auditor, the Church hired him as financial secretary in June 1985. He held this professional position for only a year when he accepted a mission call, which he filled from August 1986 until October 1988. His parents and brother joined the Church while he was serving elsewhere in India. Brother Solomon was again employed by the Church as an accountant following his mission. His responsibilities have steadily increased. In 1995 he was serving as country manager of temporal affairs for India, having responsibility for all financial, facilities, and materials management for the Church.

In 1985 Area President William R. Bradford formed the North India District with headquarters in Delhi. Douglas Rose, who worked for the U.S. State Department, was the first district president. Three years later, in 1988, the Hyderabad District was created, bringing the number of districts to three.

Expanding the Missionary Force

Young Indian Saints, both elders and sisters, received mission calls steadily from the early 1980s onward. Most of the assignments were to the Philippines and the United States. An unfortunate result for the growth of the Church in India was that most of these missionaries—by count, 26 of 28—remained in the lands of their missions. About 1985 Church leaders in Singapore and Hong Kong decided to call Indian missionaries only to India. Between 1985 and 1992, the last year India was part of the Singapore Mission, thirty-five Indian elders served full-time missions in their home country. Considering the vastness of the subcontinent, there was plenty of room for assignments away from home. The results of this decision have been positive in several ways: native-born Indians know the languages, cultures, beliefs, problems, means of persuasion, and ways of discussion better than foreign missionaries do. They know how society works and how people interact. But most important is the legal right of Indians to proselyte the gospel among their own people.

But there were still never more than a few pairs of missionaries to teach more than four-fifths of a billion people. Between 1987 and 1991 membership grew from approximately seven hundred to close to nine hundred, an increase of fewer than fifty people per year. But the growth was real, and the couple missionaries continued to provide the foundation of gospel knowledge and experience in the branches. But if the couples were from America or other non-Commonwealth countries, they were granted only "tourist" visas and had to leave the country every six months. Usually they flew to Singapore, a costly and time-consuming undertaking. They did this despite their universal obedience to the non-proselyting regulations of the immigration authorities. In order to get the Church growing at a faster pace, leaders in Singapore and the Asia Area Presidency in Hong Kong felt the need to gain long-term visas for young elders to come into the country in significant numbers.

These efforts were undertaken in early 1988 by William Sheffield, Church attorney with Kirton and McConkie in Hong Kong. Sheffield had assisted Prime Minister Indira Gandhi with legal counsel during the 1970s and as a result knew her son, Rajiv, who was serving as prime minister following her assassination on October 31, 1984. Mr. Gandhi expressed willingness to assist with the Church's visa problem, but before he was able to bring influence on the Home Ministry, problems arose in the south Indian city of Erode that caused him to delay and then decline to do much to help. A missionary couple in Erode ordered a baptismal font, but because of disagreements with its builder, the missionary, a former lawyer, brought a lawsuit against him. Both sides took their cases before a judge. Unfortunately, the builder of the font also organized a campaign against the Church, encouraging citizens to write the prime minister posing the rhetorical question, "Why are Mormon missionaries allowed in the country?" He accused the missionaries of being CIA agents and created a major campaign against the Church. Finally, the mission president removed the missionaries from the area, but the damage had been done. This took place while William Sheffield was attempting to influence Prime Minister Gandhi. In February 1989 Gandhi informed Sheffield through the Indian Home Minister that "while the Church's missionaries were welcome 'as tourists,' they could not expect anything other than tourist visas." [^3] In November 1989 Brother Sheffield left his employment with Kirton and McConkie, and at the same time Rajiv Gandhi was defeated in a national election. Sheffield feared that his best chances for obtaining change in the visa situation were ended with Gandhi's defeat, and he continued to worry about the visa problem. He determined to meet with Gandhi again, but before this could be accomplished the former prime minister was assassinated near Madras on May 21, 1991.

Since that time the Area Presidency and Church legal representatives have continued to nurture relationships with the prime minister's office, members of his government, and other individuals with important roles to carry out in government. For a few months, beginning in December 1995, missionaries were not allowed to renew their visas and were forced to leave the country permanently. Through successful negotiations, however, twenty-two two-year visas were approved by midyear in 1996. Among missionary couples, only the husband is counted as a missionary, the wives being numbered as dependents. Unfortunately, the twenty-two visas have not been easily forthcoming since the agreement was made. Gaining legal entry by our missionaries remains a problem.

The India Bangalore Mission

By 1992 the Brethren were satisfied that the time was right to move ahead with a mission in India. On November 7, 1992, the First Presidency announced the call of Gurcharan Singh Gill, native Indian and professor of mathematics at BYU, to serve as the first president of the new India Bangalore Mission. Brother Gill was uniquely qualified for his calling. Worldwide there were a fair number of Latter-day Saints of Indian ancestry, but few who had been stake presidents and held other responsible positions in the Church as he had.

G.S. Gill was born in northern India. He was raised on a farm, he recalled, "with chores of milking buffaloes; drying buffalo chips for fuel; extracting mustard for soap, lotion, and lamp fuel; grinding grain for the cattle and flour for the family; ploughing and watering the fields; and harvesting, threshing corn, hay, barley, sugar cane, and wheat." His people were Sikhs, and from them he gained much of his moral and spiritual character. Gill's father, although an uneducated man, insisted that his children obtain all the education they could. At age nineteen young Gill migrated to Bangalore was selected by President J. Talmage Jones in 1982 to be the future mission headquarters. Although it has been well situated in relation to member populations, it has been inconvenient for church-state relationships in New Delhi. This is the mission office in Bangalore. (Courtesy G.S. and Vilo Gill) the United States to study at Fresno State College, in California. Shortly before leaving India, he had lost to death an infant brother and a married sister. Being troubled by the question of their eternal fate, he began searching among the religions for answers. An LDS classmate named Shauna Atwood invited Gill to a stake conference meeting in Fresno.

In that session the stake president "explained the gospel plan from A to Z, the pre-existence, the plan of Jesus Christ, the justice of God, and the purpose of the temple and vicarious work for the dead. Ultimately, he said that those who died before the age of accountability do not need baptism." Gill's response to this good news was life changing. He later wrote: "I sat in my seat, awestruck at the very simple explanation of all things I had been haunted with since my sister and brother had passed away. I was glued to my chair, my bench, the whole time he was speaking, because within about 30 to 35 minutes, he had answered nearly every question that was raised in my mind before I came to the United States of America. The spirit of the Lord bore witness to me that the things that I was taught that day were true. I felt peace come to me, a heavy weight was lifted from my back and I was comforted." [^4]

Gill had the feeling that this talk had been prepared just for him. He studied the gospel for eight months, during which he encountered ridicule from his Indian friends. Following his baptism, he transferred to BYU, where he graduated in 1958. While there he met and married Vilo Pratt, his Sunday School teacher. They are the parents of seven children. Shortly after the Gills arrived in India, Elder Monte J. Brough, president of the Asia Area, spoke to a fireside group in Bangalore and told those gathered that President Gill had been prepared by the Lord for his present calling. [^5]

The Gills arrived in India on January 26, 1993, and the new mission was officially under way. Obviously, much had been accomplished before that time. The Church had been well established in the city of Bangalore in the previous decade, a residence had been procured for the mission president and his wife weeks before their arrival (Elder Tai Kwok Yuen had flown from Hong Kong to approve appropriate housing), and offices had been rented for various administrative purposes. But the missionary force was small and India was large. During the first year the number of young elders was increased from sixteen to forty-eight. By the end of 1994 the missionary force had grown to sixty-five young elders from outside India (at least fifteen of whom had Indian ancestry), fifteen Indian elders, five Indian sisters, and ten senior couples, including the first Indian couple, Luther and Mary Augustus Ravuri. The number of baptisms increased to 147 in 1993 and 269 in 1994. President Gill opened new cities—Calcutta and Cochin—or reopened former missionary areas such as Bombay (now called Mumbai). There were nine branches in early 1993 and twenty-one by mid-1995. He also divided the Hyderabad District and created the Rajahmundry District, bringing the number of districts to five. By mid-1995 there were 1,650 members of the Church in India and Nepal.

Missionaries to India have endured a higher than average number of physical problems while serving, but they have loved the local people with the same intensity that is typical throughout the nations of the earth. (Courtesy Michael Morris)

THE OPENING OF MISSIONARY WORK IN NEPAL

Through all of these efforts the various mission presidents carried on with many missionaries who entered India on six-month tourist visas. The attitude of the Indian government was friendly as long as the foreign elders maintained a low profile. But leaving the country three times during a two-year mission was expensive, especially flying to Singapore or Malaysia. In an effort to save money and time, President Gill investigated using Kathmandu, Nepal, as a destination for visa renewals. He concluded that the savings would merit making this procedural change. In fact, living costs in India were so inexpensive that the full support cost of foreign missionaries, including flying them to Nepal for visa renewals, was only U.S. $280 per month.

Not much had been done in Nepal by the Church before that time. BYU's Young Ambassadors had performed there in 1980 and 1986, and other visitors from the Church had sojourned there. The most significant visit had come in late February 1993, when Elders John K. Carmack and Tai Kwok Yuen of the Asia Area Presidency made an exploratory trip. They met with a few local Latter-day Saints and organized a group of the Church with Madhav Kumar Rimal as leader. [^6] In early 1994 the mission rented an apartment in Kathmandu for missionaries to stay in while they were waiting two or three weeks for their visa applications to be processed. But because the elders were losing important work time, time when they could be teaching the gospel in Nepal, President Gill recommended to Church authorities that Nepal be assigned to the India Bangalore Mission. Furthermore, Gill asked that a missionary couple be assigned in Kathmandu to establish missionary work there and to supervise and care for the elders while they were in transit. [^7]

President Gill's request was approved, and on June 2, 1994, Robert W. and Linda Houghton arrived in Kathmandu. Veterans in this part of the world, the Houghtons had previously served as couple missionaries in India (1986-1988), and Brother Houghton had also served as president of the Singapore Mission from 1988 to 1991. The Houghtons immediately rented a large home that would accommodate a number of sojourners. As they sought out the small group of Nepalese members of the Church, they found no interest among most of the supposed Mormons, but one or two families, the Rimals and Ram C. Baral, did want to be actively involved in the Church.

Because of Nepalese politics and religious laws, attempts to enter Nepal at an earlier date would have proven futile. Nepal (about the size of Wisconsin) is the world's only Hindu monarchy. Eighty-nine percent of the people are Hindu; 7 percent are Buddhist; and 3.5 percent are Muslim. In the 1990s Nepal was among the poorest and least-developed countries in the world. [^8] Before 1951 Nepal was diplomatically closed to the outside world. In 1960 there were as few as twenty-five Nepalese Christians; by 1985 that number had grown to twenty-five thousand. Only since 1990 has the government allowed any significant degree of religious freedom, yet laws remain on the books making proselyting and conversion illegal. Current legal practice is vague regarding religious liberty, but estimates are that as many as fifty thousand of Nepal's population of 20.5 million are now Christian. Until this decade Christians have been persecuted and jailed for their beliefs. [^9]

About six weeks into their mission, the Houghtons were joined in Kathmandu by Church members Dirk and Claudia Richards and their six children. Dirk was employed by the U.S. State Department. They added strength and numbers to the fledgling operation. Nepal officially became part of the India Bangalore Mission on August 25, and on October 25 the Kathmandu Branch was organized by President Gill with Dirk Richards as the first branch president. Richards's first counselor was Panna Lal Khadhi, who was the first Nepalese to be baptized in Nepal. The second counselor was Dhan Kumar Gurung. Interest in the Church increased, and by the end of 1994 some twenty-five members and investigators attended Church services each week. On December 1 two young elders, Joshua C. Chiles and David L. Pitcher, were transferred to Kathmandu, the first regular missionaries to be sent there as full-time missionaries. They were joined by two other elders in early 1995. By the time of President Gill's release in July 1995, he reported membership in Nepal of near fifty, a leased branch building, a leased residence for the missionaries, and an apartment for the couple. He was proud of the "strong branch there." [^10]

The home-centered Church was an experiment directed by Elder Neal A. Maxwell to determine whether the Church could be established using homes for meetinghouses rather than building facilities for branches and wards. When it was implemented in India in 1992, there were initial increases in average sacrament meeting attendance among the fifty-one groups that were organized. Several families were assigned to meet together each Sunday except fast Sunday, when the entire branch would meet together. But by the time President Gill arrived, the initial excitement generated by the new program had worn off. He found that Indians, as with people everywhere, like to be together. They want to feel mutual support. Wherever there is persecution, members need to be together to sustain one another. Youth particularly needed the strength that comes from being integrated into a larger group. Two other problems worked against the success of the home-centered Church: first, the great number of distractions, such as noise, neighbors, nonmembers in the home, lack of sanitation, bugs, and animals such as pets and livestock; and second, and far more important, the lack of knowledge of the restored gospel among new members of the Church. There was too much residue from previous church experience. Gill found instances in which teachers were preaching Lutheran doctrine rather than LDS doctrine. Missionary work, too, was difficult with the home church. According to President Gill, "it is very, very difficult to bring an investigator to a home where there are not enough places to sit and have a sacrament meeting. . . . It is difficult to feel the Spirit in those kinds of circumstances." [^11] So President Gill, having been charged by Elder Maxwell to build leadership and steer the Church in the right direction, stopped home groups in Bangalore in July 1993; and before long he did away with the home-centered Church all over the country. This change was not an easy thing to do, because all the branches, with the exception of those in Bangalore, were all meeting in the homes of the couple missionaries. Thus it was necessary to find larger and better meeting places all over the country. This was a daunting task, but suitable quarters were found.

Supervision of the Seminary and Institute Programs

One of the first assignments Vilo Gill received from President Monte J. Brough of the Asia Area was to guide the seminary and institute programs. On her initial tour of the mission, Sister Gill distributed teaching materials and under the direction of local priesthood leaders made assignments to teachers. Seminary classes had been held in several places, most consistently among the expatriate members in Delhi, since the early 1980s. But the goal now was to bring every young person of high school or college age into the program.

In August 1993 Murray and Donna Carver, couple missionaries, arrived in Bangalore with the assignment to direct the activities of the Church Educational System in India. During the next several months, they traveled widely, sometimes with the Gills, and did much to further the CES program. Unfortunately, Elder Carver suffered a massive heart attack on January 19, 1994, and passed away within minutes.

With the Carvers gone, the mission carried on its CES activities as well as possible until David Shuler, a veteran seminary and institute instructor whose in-country experience in India as an anthropology graduate student had begun in 1986, was assigned to serve as the first full-time CES director in India. Before assuming his post in June 1994, Shuler had supervised the field study and internships of more than twenty BYU anthropology students in various parts of India. The students had focused their work and studies on Bonnie Chowgule's orphanage in Goa and among the members of the Church in the villages near Coimbatore, where they concentrated on improving literacy and teaching English. By hiring an in-country director and providing a budget and full support for lesson and library materials, audiovisual equipment, and other needs, CES leaders were able to move the Church education program in India to a higher level. Working full-time, Shuler helped advance the program throughout the country. He placed special emphasis on institute classes because such a large percentage of new converts in India are single people between the ages of eighteen and thirty. Shuler encountered some problems with older married members who wanted to attend. It was concluded, however, to focus on the young people, married and single, who were between the ages of eighteen and thirty, because there remains such a strong tendency in India for young people to say little and participate less when their elders are present. [^12]

Brother Shuler's assignment was for six months. Before he left India he selected and trained Michael Anthony to succeed him as CES country director. Michael selected Daniel Matthew from Chavadi Purdur village near Coimbatore as his assistant. By mid-1995 seventeen seminary and institute classes had been organized in seven Indian cities, in addition to one institute class in Nepal. [^13]

Life in India and Progress in the Church

Problems of many kinds exist in India and within the Church in India. Poverty is the most serious problem. Within the Church, with the exception of the mission office, only a few members own automobiles and small motorcycles, although such ownership places a person in the lower part of the middle class. Many of the members have not been well schooled in the arts of social interaction and the ways of mediating disagreements. Some express petty jealousies and engage in backbiting, faultfinding, and coveting. The latter is a significant problem. "Some people join the Church with the expectation of getting something from the Church," a member of the Area Presidency reportedly said. [^14] Money is so scarce that some members have misappropriated Church funds. Church leaders frequently find themselves the target of criticisms and unkind accusations. President and Sister Gill devoted much of their time to the resolution of these kinds of problems. Their objective was to teach Christlike living, love, and mutual support and sustaining of one another.

Transportation and communications are another major problem. Traffic in Indian cities is usually extremely heavy, slow, inconvenient, and polluted. As inexpensive as it is by American standards, it is costly and very time-consuming for families to travel to Church meetings—sometimes changing buses two or three times—and to do home and visiting teaching. In most cases it is nearly impossible to do more than one visit per evening. Telephones are a rarity among Church members, making communications a difficult matter.

Other important but resolvable problems include (1) arranging burial places for Indian Latter-day Saints, (2) obtaining permission from the state and local governments to have a Church representative in each city authorized to perform weddings, and (3) maintaining good health. Concerning the latter, missionaries as well as local members have found themselves infected with malaria, typhoid, tuberculosis, or some kind of virus, bacteria, or parasite. As is true with all Indians, the missionaries have had to learn to boil their drinking water, soak their vegetables in disinfectant solutions, and take numerous other precautions.

Successes have also been satisfying during the first years of the mission. Obviously, the steady growth of Church members, branches, and districts has been encouraging. The Church has also been happy to be involved in providing relief to many who suffered in a devastating earthquake that killed between twenty and thirty thousand people and obliterated forty villages on September 30, 1993. On October 26 Elder Carmack traveled to New Delhi and presented to Mr. Ramu, the prime minister's personal secretary, $25,000 for the Prime Minister's Earthquake Relief Fund. The Church also contributed 160,000 pounds of clothing and other goods valued at $200,000. Another positive measure was the Church's contribution of money and equipment to Pathway, an educational and therapeutic institution in Madras for physically and mentally disabled children. It had been in operation since 1975, but through the support of William Sheffield, the Church, and a number of Indian benefactors, new facilities were built and dedicated on July 23, 1994. The founder and director of the organization, Dr. A.D.S.N. Prasad, was baptized a member of the Church the day before. Area President John K. Carmack was one of the distinguished guests at the dedication services.

On August 13, 1994, Ralph and Margaret Andersen and Raymond and Joan Rhead arrived in Madras to serve as the first Church-service missionaries in India. They were sent under the direction of Isaac Ferguson, director of Humanitarian Services for the Church (now LDS Charities). Their assignments related to assisting with vocational education in connection with the YMCA. Their first project was to upgrade the carpentry program at the YMCA Kottavakkam Boys Town. They soon became involved with a number of projects—a business education computer lab, guidance counseling, a placement center, and so on. They also gave talks to a number of civic and other organizations and participated in one or two international conferences. Elder Rhead, who had taught physical education and recreation at Weber State University in Utah, worked with schools, Pathway, and a Catholic school for the deaf and the blind. He was busily involved in teaching, coaching, and offering workshops on various sports. [^15] Elder Rhead also helped the Church make many friends in Cochin when he directed a three-day basketball coaching workshop. The event was such a success that civic and other community leaders heralded the positive effects. Three local newspapers and two national newspapers, The Hindu and Times of India, published positive articles on the event.

Many foreign observers have noted the spirituality of the Indian people. This natural virtue is also evident within the membership of the Church. A missionary who served in Singapore, Malaysia, and India found the Indian people to be more spiritual than the people he encountered in the other countries where he served. This inclination is evident in the number of Indian members of the Church who have sought patriarchal blessings. A number of patriarchs have served as couple missionaries in India, and all of them have given many blessings. Elder Jerry C. Garlock gave more than one hundred blessings while serving during 1994 and 1995.

When Elder Neal A. Maxwell was in New Delhi in June 1992, "prophecies were given (conditional upon member sharing [the term used by Elder Maxwell to mean fellowshipping and teaching friends about the gospel]) that Delhi would have a [Latter-day Saint] temple and great expansion of the work." [^16] With fewer than a thousand members in India at that time, the need for growth not only in total numbers but also in numbers of members who have attended the temple was clearly evident. Since then the Saints of India have made a start; they are beginning to go to the temple in spite of the great cost of traveling to Manila or Hong Kong, the In June 1995, Sister Vilo Gill and President G.S. Gill (fourrth from left on back row), along with Elder Tai's wife, Hui Hua, and Elder Tai Kwok Yuen, Area President for the Asia Area, met with young Indian Latter-day Saints in the first all-India youth conference. (Courtesy G.S. and Vilo Gill) closest temple sites. President Gill had a goal to help more members become worthy of attending the temple. When asked if this goal was being achieved, he said: "Yes, it is. We had thirty-seven people go to the temple, and fifteen families were sealed together with their parents and children. . . . That has really been a spark. Now the people know what being married forever means, what we have that other people don't have, how our temple marriages are so sacred and different than their marriages from the other churches, and so forth. . . . Those people have come back and really stirred the members into doing family history work, genealogy work, and beginning to pay tithes so they can go to the temple someday. It has really spurred a lot of enthusiasm." [^17]

All but two of India's branch and district presidents were endowed in the temple by mid-1995. Clearly, the work of the Lord is moving forward in a solid, permanent manner in the great subcontinent of India.

THE CHURCH IN SRI LANKA

"One day in 1977," writes Douglas L. Vermillion, "President [Spencer W.] Kimball phoned his cousin Stanley C. Kimball in St. George, Utah, and said, 'Stan, the Lord wants you in Sri Lanka.' Stanley asked where that was and seemed to hesitate a bit. President Kimball said, 'Stan, there are people the Lord loves in Sri Lanka.' After a pause, Stanley answered, 'Then I'll go.' And so Stanley and Margaret Kimball accepted the call to initiate missionary work in Sri Lanka in 1977." [^18]

A few Latter-day Saints had resided in Sri Lanka before that date, and two missionaries, Elders Chauncey W. West and Benjamin Franklin Dewey, had even spent several weeks there in 1853. But it was President Kimball's drive to take the restored gospel to all the world that prompted this move in 1977.

Sri Lanka seems to hang like an emerald pendant from the southern tip of the Indian subcontinent. Hot and humid, the tropical beauty of the island competes with Hawaii and other paradises to capture the eye of tourists and residents alike. Sri Lanka's population was 18.3 million in 1995, and its 24,800 square miles of land is almost twice the size of Taiwan (which, incidentally, has 20 million inhabitants). Like India, Nepal has considerable religious variety—69 percent Buddhist, 15.5 percent Hindu, 7.6 percent Muslim, and 7.5 percent Christian.

Unfortunately, during the years the Church has been in Sri Lanka, a bloody civil war between the Tamil people (who live mostly in the northeast and constitute 18 percent of the population) and the native Sinhalese (74 percent of the population) has disturbed this normally tranquil country. The main issue has been the nature of the minority status of the Tamils and whether they should have an independent state. India has been accused of supporting the Tamil autonomous groups, and relations between Sri Lanka and India have been strained. In recent years passage between India and Sri Lanka has been difficult if not impossible for LDS missionaries and leaders. For this reason, even though it would appear that Sri Lanka should be part of the India Bangalore Mission, it is not. It remains part of the Singapore Mission. This war, with its terrorist acts, has restricted LDS missionary efforts in the capital city of Colombo and has made Church work there precarious at times.

Among the very earliest investigators were Reginald A. and Easvary Rasiah. He is of Tamil ancestry, and his wife is Sinhalese. Concerning the problems surrounding their baptisms, the Kimballs wrote: "Satan was working. . .; by the baptismal date of August 21, 1977, trouble had started between the Sinhalese and Tamil people. There was much looting, arson and killings. A curfew was slapped on the entire country by the prime minister from 5 P.M. August 20, to 6 A.M. August 22, and continued for ten days thereafter. On August 23, Brother Rasiah called early in the morning to say that the lives of him and his family were in danger and needed help. The Kimballs took them into their home and the Wilsons [a Canadian LDS family] took the four children and two grandchildren. After about ten days, conditions were brought under control, leaving thousands of Tamil people in refugee camps without homes or employment." [^19]

In spite of the turmoil, five members of the Rasiah family were baptized on August 28, 1977. On the same day, the Colombo Branch was organized with Elder Kimball as branch president. His first counselor was R. Bruce Wilson, who was attached to the Canadian High Commission. And Brother Rasiah also soon became a counselor. Two others, a young man named Sunil Arsecularatne and a sister named Gertrude Hettiarchchi, were baptized in the next two months. Only a year after his baptism, Brother Rasiah was called as president of the Colombo Branch. Brother Arsecularatne stands out as one of the pioneers: three times over the years he has served as president of the Colombo Branch.

During its first three years in Sri Lanka, the Church moved forward on several fronts. Elder David M. Kennedy, Special Ambassador for the First Presidency, arranged to have the Genealogical Society of Utah microfilm the vital records of Sri Lanka. This created the opportunity for a series of Church members to obtain long-term visas. While Harold Glenn and Mary Deane Clark served as Church representatives, they were instrumental in gaining, on March 2, 1979, official recognition for "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Ceylon) Ltd." from the Sri Lankan government.

During this time, Sri Lanka was dedicated for the preaching of the gospel. Sunil Arsecularatne described the dedication of Sri Lanka this way: "In 1979 Apostle James E. Faust visited Sri Lanka and dedicated the country for the preaching of the gospel. The dedication was held at Vihara Maha Devi Park (also known as Victoria Park) in Colombo and was attended by about 20 members. After Elder Faust completed his dedicatory prayer, he said, 'If the Prophet were present today he would have hugged the priesthood brethren present. Therefore, on behalf of the Prophet I would like to do the same.' So he hugged each of the brethren present. I was fortunate and blessed to be one of those present that day and to be one of the recipients of that warm embrace. It was indeed a great spiritual experience for all of those present on this important occasion." [^20]

At the beginning of 1980 the Young Ambassadors made the first of three visits to Sri Lanka. They also performed there in 1982 and 1986. "We have made good strides recently," Brother Rasiah commented. "The BYU Young Ambassadors came to Colombo and made a very good impression on people. People now know what you are talking about when you say you are a Mormon." [^21]

During this early period the Church hired Mr. Alloy Perera, a nonmember Sri Lankan, to translate the Gospel Principles manual and the pamphlet Joseph Smith's Testimony into Sinhala. He also translated Selections from the Book of Mormon.

In February 1982 the Church, in conjunction with the Rotary Club, initiated a program for teaching English as a second language. During the period of the program, fifteen different sisters served in Colombo. Sri Lanka received single sisters, Indian missionaries, and couples to teach and strengthen the work. But six members of the branch also served missions in other countries. Upon returning home and marrying, they and their spouses have become firm contributors to the Church.

Church growth in Sri Lanka has been quite slow, fewer than ten new converts per year. And as is true everywhere, some have fallen away. Couple missionaries and young elders have never had long-term visas and have never had the right to do open proselyting. As is true elsewhere in South Asia, missionary work has been done only when investigators have come to the missionaries and asked to be taught the gospel. During some of the worst years of the civil war, it has been difficult to continue with regular Sunday services and other meetings. Conditions became so dangerous that couple missionaries were pulled out from 1988 to 1992. And after that they were removed from the country at least once because of bombs and other violence. [^22] In 1995, however, couple missionaries, as well as young elders from the Singapore Mission, were serving in Colombo. At that date there were 125 members of the Church in the one branch. They were enjoying a new meeting place that had been procured in August 1995.

BEGINNINGS IN PAKISTAN

In the 1850s two LDS missionaries, Amos Milton Musser and Truman Leonard, taught the gospel in Karachi, Pakistan, and Leonard carried the gospel to Hyderabad, a hundred miles away (Hyderabad, Pakistan, is not to be confused with Hyderabad, India.) At that time the area now known as Pakistan was part of the province of Sind, which was ruled as part of British India. Elder Musser established a small branch and even constructed a little chapel, surely one of the first LDS chapels to be constructed on the continent of Asia. Musser and Leonard planted gospel seeds that bore fruit almost fifty years later, in 1903 (a story that has been told in chapter 2).

We have no clear record of how many Latter-day Saints since that time have resided as expatriates in Pakistan while serving in governments, international companies, or development agencies, but the number is probably many. Occasionally in the 1970s a reference appeared in the mission records that referred to members in Pakistan. The picture became somewhat clearer in the mid-1980s when groups in Lahore and Islamabad reported their activities to Church headquarters. Max and Barbara Williams reported holding sacrament and other meetings in their home in Lahore with "between 20 and 30 people" gathered. Pakistani Christians who were investigating the Church were among that number. [^23] At the same time, Lee Wohlgemuth, who was employed by the U.S. State Department, wrote:

"There is a branch of the Church in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. We have three families who meet regularly every Sabbath (Friday), in the home of our branch president, Russell Backus, an irrigation engineer with USAID.

"We average over 20 people at our branch meetings, and sometimes, though not often, interested Pakistanis have attended our meetings." [^24]

During the 1980s mission presidents and Area Presidency members periodically visited Pakistan to sense whether the time was right to begin doing missionary work there. By 1992 the Church was ready to move carefully into this Muslim nation.

The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is almost twice the size of California, with a population of 133 million. It came into being on August 14, 1947, when it and India gained their independence from British rule. Pakistan's sole reason for being was to create a homeland for the Muslims of the Indian empire. Heavily Muslim (96.7 percent of the total population), with only small Hindu (1.5 percent) and Christian (1.7 percent) communities, Pakistan has been influenced in recent years by extremist and fundamentalist forces that are determined to further Islamize the country by implementing the shari'a laws for any offenses against Islam. Minority groups, including Christians, have received rising levels of persecution since 1988. Although Pakistan has no caste system, Christians clearly belong to the lowest social and economic level. Christians who come from a Muslim background have especially come under constant threat, and some have even been martyred for their new beliefs. For these reasons the LDS Church has moved forward with extreme caution in Pakistan.

When Elders Monte J. Brough and John K. Carmack of the Asia Area Presidency visited Pakistan in November 1991, they observed that expatriate members in Karachi (a city of six million people), especially the Warren Anderson and James Hernandez families, were organized into a branch of eleven members and held regular Church services. In Islamabad, Pakistan's capital city of 204,000 people, a larger branch was organized which was made up of at least four American families and a number of Pakistani converts and investigators (about fifty people were regularly in attendance at Sabbath meetings). The number of Pakistani investigators indicated that the time might be right to begin missionary work with full-time missionaries. [^25]

In February 1992 Elder Carmack was back in Pakistan. On this trip he met with the branches and branch leaders in Karachi and Islamabad. He participated in a wonderful fireside with the families of Robert and JuLynne Simmons, Roy and Janice Martin, Ken and Joan Leahman, and Doug Bradshaw. These people were the ballast of the Church in Pakistan at that time. He also met with an attorney, Mr. Kahn, of the firm Kahn and Piracha, to discuss the legal status of the Church and limitations on religious activity. Elder Carmack was satisfied that legal matters could be worked out.

In June 1992 Elder and Sister Quaid Hansen arrived in Islamabad to commence full-time missionary service. They were the first full-time missionaries to serve since Elder Cooper formed the Karachi branch in 1903.

Later that month, on June 15, 16, and 17, the Pakistan Saints were blessed to receive a visit from two members of the Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Neal A. Maxwell and Elder Russell M. Nelson. They were accompanied by their wives, by President and Sister Warren Jones of the Singapore Mission, and by Elder Carmack. Pakistan was the last stop on a multination Asian tour by Elders Maxwell and Nelson. They maintained a tight and exhausting schedule in order to speak to the Saints, hold personal interviews, and survey the needs of the Church.

Among the many important things Elders Maxwell and Nelson accomplished was to meet with the new missionary couple and the Islamabad branch presidency to clarify issues relating to missionary procedures and baptisms. [^26] The Area Presidency and President Jones had already agreed on a checklist to be followed before teaching any new contacts, but the importance of these rules was reemphasized by the Lord's chosen servants. The number-one rule was to teach the gospel to Christians only. A regimen of procedures was to be followed to gain assurance that all investigators were in fact Christians. There was to be no overt proselyting. Interested parties would be taught the gospel, but no one would be sought out by knocking on doors or street contacting. [^27] These constraining rules notwithstanding, the Hansens had wonderful success from the beginning. They served in Islamabad for two months and had four baptisms. Then they moved to Lahore (a city of three million people), where they had sixteen baptisms in November 1992, and still more followed. Church meetings were held in their rented home. By the end of the year, about seventy-five persons were attending sacrament meetings there.

The work has continued to expand. In August 1995 registration of the Church as "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Pakistan" was completed. This did not mean the Church was recognized, for no Christian religion is recognized in Pakistan, but it did mean it could own property and carry on normal financial procedures. It also made the Church a more naturalized citizen of Pakistan, giving it and its members more recognized status.

The branches grew in number as more members joined the Church. The Pakistan District of the Church was organized with L. Niels Martin as the first president. Martin, who was very active in getting to know all of the members well, was a United Nations reclamation project worker. Other couples were called to Pakistan as missionaries, and in 1994 local Pakistani elders were called to labor in their own country. These elders were flown to Singapore, the mission headquarters for Pakistan, for a Missionary Training Center experience and actual on-the-street training with experienced missionaries. By mid-1994 couples were serving in Karachi, Islamabad, Lahore, and Faisalabad (the latter a city of 1.1 million people and the most recently opened city). More recently, Taxila, an ancient historical center near Islamabad, has been opened to missionary work. In 1995 there were more than four hundred members of the Church in Pakistan.

When the India Bangalore Mission was announced, it was anticipated that Sri Lanka and Pakistan would become part of that mission. However, because of his national origins as an Indian, President Gill was unable to obtain visas to either of these countries. Animosities between India and Pakistan run extremely deep. Disputes continue regarding control of Kashmir, water rights to the Indus River, and several borders. Since independence from British control in 1947, there have been three wars with India. Current internal strife caused the mission president, Carl D. Warren, to remove missionaries from Karachi. Before President Gill even tried to make a trip to Pakistan, members there asked President Jones in Singapore not to let Gill come because they feared for his life and theirs. To even be associated with an Indian Christian could bring negative reprisals to Pakistani members. Pakistan was quickly assigned back to the Singapore Mission.

There are many challenges for the young Church in Pakistan, but those who have worked closely with the people there find them full of love for the restored gospel and eagerness to learn about the Church and how it should be organized and led. President Warren wrote that the Church was "making cautious progress. Our primary task in Pakistan . . . is to 'Perfect the Saints,' to put down deep roots and keep the growth in balance with the strength of these roots." [^28]

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign 4 (October 1974): 2-14.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, "'The Uttermost Parts of the Earth,'" Ensign 9 (July 1979): 2-9.
[^3] "President Hinckley Visits Asian Saints, Dedicates Hong Kong Temple," Ensign 26 (August 1996): 74-75. For further information on President Hinckley's May-June 1996 trip to Asia, see Church News, 1 June and 8 June 1996, and Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996).
[^4] As quoted in Garlock, "Church in India," p. 53; see also "Y professor called to new mission," Daily Universe (BYU newspaper), 11 November 1992, p. 1.
[^5] See Vilo P. Gill, Journal, 4 February 1993.
[^6] John K. Carmack, interview by the author, Salt Lake City, Utah, 30 November 1995; notes in author's possession. See Sheridan R. Sheffield, "Asia Area: Welcome mat is out in several countries," Church News, 19 June 1993, p. 3.
[^7] See Gurcharan S. Gill, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 24 October 1995; tape recording.
[^8] See "Nepal," in Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook 1992 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office), pp. 241-42.
[^9] See Johnstone, Operation World, p. 405.
[^10] Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 238-39; Gurcharan S. Gill, spoken and written texts of homecoming talk, 10 September 1995, Provo, Utah; copy in author's possession.
[^11] Gurcharan S. Gill interview.
[^12] David Shuler, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 31 October 1995.
[^13] See Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 205-8.
[^14] See Vilo P. Gill, Journal, 7 November 1995.
[^15] See Garlock, "Church in India," pp. 218-20.
[^16] John K. Carmack interview.
[^17] Gurcharan S. Gill interview.
[^18] Douglas L. Vermillion, "There are people the Lord loves in Sri Lanka," draft article submitted to the Ensign, 24 January 1995. For this segment, I have drawn heavily on this draft, upon its published result, "Gospel Splendor in Sri Lanka," Ensign 25 (August 1995): 78-79; and Sunil Arsecularatne and Douglas L. Vermillion, "Pioneering Growth of the Church in Sri Lanka," August 1993, unpublished manuscript in author's possession.
[^19] Stanley C. and Margaret C. Kimball, "First Branch of the Church Established in Sri Lanka (Ceylon)." This undated item was found in the Joseph Talmage Jones Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^20] As quoted in Arsecularatne and Vermillion, "Pioneering Growth," p. 2.
[^21] As quoted in Joseph Walker, "Sri Lanka native is branch president in own country," Church News, 1 November 1980, p. 7.
[^22] Warren R. and Becky Jones, interview by the author, Provo, Utah, 1 November 1995; tape recording in author's possession.
[^23] See "Loving the Lord in Lahore," Church News, 7 April 1985, p. 16.
[^24] Lee Wohlgemuth, "Correction: There's another branch meeting in Pakistan," Church News, 19 May 1985, p. 14.
[^25] See John K. Carmack interview.
[^26] See ibid.
[^27] See Warren R. and Becky Jones interview.
[^28] Carl D. Warren to Warren R. Jones, 12 September 1995; in possession of the author.
