R. Lanier Britsch, From the East: The History of the Latter-day Saints in Asia, 1851-1996 ( 1998)

THE FUTURE IS BRIGHT

Go Forward with Faith

In a way, the conclusion of any history book is but an introduction to the next. The Church is growing and changing so rapidly in Asia that only a few years will pass before a new edition or an entirely new book will be required to tell the entire story. Updating and new editions are especially needed for books like this one, which includes a journalistic effort to be current. How rapidly events have transpired and how great the changes have been in the development of the Church in Asia are illustrated well in my own writing. In 1979 I wrote:

Since President Spencer W. Kimball delivered his monumental address to the Regional Representatives in April 1974, [^1] the Church has entered a new era of missionary fervor. The Saints have "lengthened their stride" and "quickened their pace." Numbers of missionaries and new converts have increased. In March 1979, President Kimball again encouraged the Latter-day Saints to pray that the gospel might be taken to the nations and peoples in which the doors are not open to our missionaries. He emphasized the need to pray for entry into China and the need to study the Mandarin language. [^2]

President Kimball's urge to open China is not surprising. With its 958 million people (1979), China is the most populous country in the world. Approximately one- fourth of the world's people speak Chinese. China is an ancient land with a magnificent history and a well-developed culture. As a rule the Chinese people are intelligent and able.

For more than a millennium Christian missionaries have considered China the "grand prize." But for various reasons, China has resisted Christianity. Historical circumstances, political intrigue, religious and philosophical disagreements, and cultural differences between missionaries and the Chinese people have thwarted the success of earlier Christian missionary groups.

Other great Asian nations are also within President Kimball's worldwide missionary vision. Although approximately 250 Indians near Coimbatore, India, are baptized Latter-day Saints, most of India's 675 million people are yet to be introduced to the restored gospel. The peoples of Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka (Ceylon), Burma, Malaysia, Laos, Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet, Vietnam, and Mongolia too lie beyond the bounds of concentrated LDS missionary work. The small number of LDS missionaries in Indonesia is inconsequential in comparison with the 145 million people in that far-flung island nation. Obviously the major part of the Lord's children wait for messengers who can communicate the restored gospel to them.

When I read my own words, written eighteen years ago, I was struck by several points. First, that our beloved prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, has been gone from us for so long; and second, that the excitement he engendered within the Church to spread the gospel to the entire world has not faltered but increased under the leadership of President Ezra Taft Benson, President Howard W. Hunter, and President Gordon B. Hinckley. The approximately thirty thousand missionaries of President Kimball's time has expanded to more than fifty thousand in late 1996—and no limits are in sight for this growing army of the Lord.

Further, the desire of the Church to take the gospel to the Chinese people and others who have not yet received missionaries remains as sincere and as hopeful as ever. Some realities relating to China have changed dramatically since 1979. The population is well over 1.2 billion. The doors were opened to the outside world at about the time when I wrote the above passage, and the economy has grown tremendously. The decision for Hong Kong to revert to China in 1997 was not made until 1984.

From the standpoint of the Church, 1979 was the beginning of many wonderful relationships resulting from BYU performing arts groups, the David M. Kennedy Center's China Teachers Program, visits to the Polynesian Cultural Center by Chinese political leaders, and other people-to-people types of programs that flowered during the 1980s and 1990s. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has no missionaries in China and will not have missionaries there until they are allowed to enter legally, but the Church has made thousands of good friends at all levels of society and throughout the country. Such relationships are valuable for their own sake.

In the years since 1979, India's population has grown from 675 million to more than 900 million, and Church membership there has grown from about 250 to close to 2,000. A small beginning, but an important one that will in time bear choice fruit.

In the quote above I listed a number of other nations in which the Church was either not established or was still in its infancy. These included Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Burma, Malaysia, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, and Mongolia. By 1996, missionaries or non-proselyting representatives of the Church were working in Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Mongolia, seven of the twelve countries listed. During the eighteen years since 1979, the Church dedicated Burma and temporarily had a branch organized in Rangoon. Local political conditions have made missionary work there impossible. Bangladesh remains a difficult problem because of the poverty of the nation and the predominantly Muslim population and government. Unlike Pakistan, where our missionaries are allowed to teach Christians, Bangladesh has a Christian presence so small as to be negligible. Bhutan offers different problems. It is mostly Buddhist and has made missionary work difficult for all outsiders.

But we should not be confining ourselves to the years since 1979. Following the preamble periods in India in the 1850s and Japan from 1901 to 1924, the main work of spreading the gospel in Asia began with LDS servicemen in Japan in 1945. Since then the Church has grown and prospered in Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the Philippines, Thailand, and Indonesia. The handful of Latter-day Saints in Asia in 1945 has grown to more than 600,000, and there are five temples, one hundred stakes, 1,690 wards and branches, thirty-five missions, hundreds of chapels, well-developed CES programs, and many other evidences of the permanence and continuing growth of the Church in this significant part of the world.

President Gordon B. Hinckley referred to the undeveloped state of the Church in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Philippines when he first visited Asia in 1960. At that time I was on my mission in Hawaii and met Elder Hinckley when he came through on that first trip. I remember wondering what was happening in Japan and elsewhere in Asia and what he would find out there. Being an unschooled youth and not having much vision of the future, I had no idea that he would one day be President of the Church. Nor could I imagine the wonderful growth of the Church in Asia in future years. From time to time, returning missionaries from Japan stopped by the mission office and shared their experiences with us. My main impression was that they were pioneers, that they had gone to the ends of the earth, and that their fledgling successes were happening in strange lands and among strange people.

In May 1996, while returning from an assignment in the People's Republic of China, I participated in the dedication of the Hong Kong Temple. So much had happened in Asia since my first introduction to it while in Hawaii in 1960 and my first visit there in 1968; and I was struck by the reality that I was sitting in a temple in Hong Kong. While I watched such events from the sidelines, gained an education, and specialized in the history and religions of Asia, the Lord was guiding and directing one of his servants as he led the Church's efforts in that vast part of the earth. While I had been gathering information about Asian Church history, President Gordon B. Hinckley had been making it. His mark is upon the Church in Asia.

President Hinckley could not have more fittingly punctuated his relationship with the Saints in Asia than through his trip to Asia in May 1996. Taking advantage of his assignment to dedicate the Hong Kong Temple on May 26 and 27 during "a busy 18-day visit to seven countries and one territory in Asia, President Hinckley toured 13 cities, met with a number of government officials, answered numerous questions from reporters, [and] delivered 21 addresses to more than 75,000 people." Included in his itinerary was a visit to Shenzhen, China, making him the first President of the Church to visit China while in office; a visit to Cambodia, where he dedicated that land for the preaching of the gospel; and a visit to Vietnam, where in Hanoi he added an "addendum" to the dedicatory prayer he uttered in Saigon in 1966. Members of the Church in every country gathered in great numbers to hear him and his associates among the Brethren speak words of inspiration and encouragement. In Seoul he said, "In 1960 it was a different country. There was great poverty among the people. There was great suffering among the people.

"Now there is prosperity. There is peace. But I don't know that there is more faith than there was back then. I have had many wonderful, faithful, holy experiences in this land." [^3]

"In Manila," Church News editor Gerry Avant reported, "President Hinckley spoke to more than 35,000 people, who crowded into the Amoranto Sports Complex for a fireside May 30. Twenty thousand had been expected. . . . Initially, hundreds were turned away from the doors. However, officials of the facility were so touched by the members' tears of disappointment that they relented and allowed them to enter." Upon hearing that the facility was full long before the scheduled meeting time, President Hinckley, his wife, Marjorie, and his associates went to the sports facility early. The gathering was probably the largest indoor congregation that a President of the Church had addressed in person.

President Hinckley spoke as true prophets always speak. He bore witness to the truth of the gospel and the divinity of Jesus Christ. And he gave counsel, counsel that might have been given in Los Angeles or Chicago or Provo. He was speaking to worldwide members of a worldwide Church. "We believe in being honest. We believe in rising above the morals of the world. You cannot be immoral. You cannot use filthy language. You cannot profane the name of God. We believe in being true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and if there is anything lovely, of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." And President Hinckley blessed the congregation, promising, "I bless you if you will walk in faith and live the gospel, you will have food on your table, clothes on your back, a roof over your head, and the blessings of heaven." In the Philippines this was a wonderful promise and a great blessing.

After ministering in Manila, meeting with the Saints in a large congregation in Cebu, and in a relatively small meeting with missionaries—saying he regarded them as "companions in this work"—he headed home. But his plane had to refuel on the Micronesian island of Saipan. During that brief stop he met with ten missionaries and sixty local members. President Hinckley never stopped. Neither does the spread of the restored gospel. Day by day the Lord's chosen sons and daughters are being gathered "from the East."

NOTES

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "When the World Will Be Converted," Ensign 4 (October 1974): 2-14.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, "'The Uttermost Parts of the Earth,'" Ensign 9 (July 1979): 2-9.
[^3] "President Hinckley Visits Asian Saints, Dedicates Hong Kong Temple," Ensign 26 (August 1996): 74-75. For further information on President Hinckley's May-June 1996 trip to Asia, see Church News, 1 June and 8 June 1996, and Sheri L. Dew, Go Forward with Faith: The Biography of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996).
