No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF FAITH

The Faith of a Mustard Seed

Developing the power of faith is one of the most important phases of our experience in mortal life. In order to do the things that are best for us, we must believe we are capable.

Faith can motivate us, give us a positive approach to living, give us the desire to improve ourselves. It's interesting to observe that where one person is defeated by a handicap, another is stimulated; where one complains about hardship, another fights against it; where one is paralyzed by disaster, another rises to the challenge. Faith and attitude make the difference.

Faith in the future can cause positive things to happen in our lives. Faith in ourselves will help us develop the right kind of self-image to keep our habits, lives, and souls headed in the proper direction. Without faith in God, life will burden the heart, the mind, and even the soul.

Certainly, faith is affected by our experiences. There is usually a time in life when our "faith line" hits bottom. That's when we must decide either to continue the decline or to force an upturn. The challenge usually comes during early adulthood when we come face-to-face with the demands of life and the need for certain material goods and when we become more aware of the weaknesses and strengths of those around us. All of these experiences can build or destroy our faith.

Faith is probably the greatest undeveloped resource in the world. We all have more of it than we may suppose. It's a force that comes from within. It's the power of belief and of conviction.

The Savior spoke of the transcendent power manifest through the exercise of faith. "If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed," he said, "ye might say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you." (Luke 17:6.)

Our challenge is to gain, to increase, to perfect our faith, so that we might have power to uproot sycamine trees, to move mountains, to work miracles, indeed, to realize the worthy goals and objectives we've set for ourselves. The apostle Matthew promised, as recorded in the New Testament, that "all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." (Matthew 21:22.) That promise is available to all of us if we anchor our lives on the rock of faith.
