No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Believing Takes Us Home

Recently a film critic for a major metropolitan newspaper criticized a movie for its many "artistic and technical failures." He had little trouble pointing out the technical failures, because there was a standard by which to judge them—exposure, editing, lighting, and so forth. But while it was simple for the critic to point out the technical failures of the film, it was, to the same degree, difficult for him to explain why it failed as art.

Why did so learned an observer have such trouble? Because art concerns itself not only with what we know but also with what we believe, and not only with what we believe about art but also with what we believe about the world and ourselves.

So it is with our lives. Much of what we do is founded on our knowledge of the world—on what we presume to be facts. We get gas for the car, because we see from the gauge that the tank is nearly empty. Most of the time the evidence is accurate, and our knowledge is sound. But sometimes we are mistaken—sometimes the gauge says there is gas, but the car runs out anyway.

When the evidence does not square with the facts, we might do well to remember that there are other forms of knowledge, other sources of information, other ways to be guided. We might remember a mother's intuition, the grace of a gospel message, or the instinct we have felt to do the right thing in the face of wrong persuasions.

How many times has a mother told her child, "I don't know how I know, but I know"? How many times has a child marveled that, against all possibility of coincidence or discovery, a father or mother has been inspired to know the truth—and, more than merely to know it, to act upon it? How many times have we sensed what to do, believed beyond our ignorance, acted in the right way when we had little physical evidence to guide us?

In such instances, what we believe, what we feel, and what a still, small, heavenly voice whispers to us, are more essential and more useful than what we know. Indeed, it is what we cannot know that makes belief so important. When the evidences fail—when the facts are inadequate to inspire our knowledge—it is believing that takes us home.
