No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Power to Be Personal

Most religious music deals with our relationship with the Lord. "I waited for the Lord," we sing. "He inclined unto me. He heard my complaint." While we may sing of these things, do we really believe they are so? Does the Lord, in fact, hear our complaints—both our significant and our sometimes petty human problems? Can the being who created the universe be bothered with the pitiful lament of a lonely soul on a tiny world on the edge of this galaxy?

The answer is yes. But it is easy to feel insignificant before the Lord, even though he has assured us that is not how he feels toward us. The Lord said, "Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not." (Jeremiah 33:3.) It does not diminish the divinity of God to believe that he can incline toward the least of his creations. Quite the contrary—God hears and empathizes with us not in spite of his greatness but because of it, because his is a godly greatness founded on eternal principles of infinite love.

True it is that he has all power. But let us not equate that power with the puffed up pomposity and arrogance that too often accompany earthly power. He does not wield the scepter of power to enlarge his own importance and satisfy his own vanity, as we so often do. He uses his power and knowledge only to bless us; his chief concerns are those he created in his own image—you and me and all mankind.

Yet, he also gives us our agency. God's omniscient knowledge and all-seeing eye are not used to pry into our lives and to control us like puppets on a string. His knowledge and infinite wisdom are brought to bear only on our behalf and only when we're willing to accept them. He sends his Holy Spirit to enlighten our minds, to "show [us] great and mighty things," as the prophet Jeremiah wrote. God uses his knowledge wisely to govern the universe in ways that will best bless his children. He patiently listens to our complaints and gently succors us in our sorrows. It is because God is so powerful, so wise, and so good that he can number the very hairs of our head and, as Jesus said, take note of the lilies of the field and a fallen sparrow. He has the capacity, the organizational abilities, the resources, and, most of all, the fatherly concern for his children to make such individual attention possible.

To know the true nature of God and our relationship with him is the basis of our comfort and happiness here and our glory and exaltation hereafter. Little wonder, then, that we sing hosannas to his name. As we face the challenges of today and the ultimate judgment halls of tomorrow, we should not—we need not—fear, for we have more than a friend at the court. We are sons and daughters of the King himself.
