No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Courage for the Long Haul

The world is full of people who meant to be more than they are, but something happened along the way. They say things just didn't work out or there were too many distractions. They will admit it was harder than they thought or life knocked them to their knees. Excuses abound, but what one rarely hears is, "I didn't have the courage."

We think of courage for the battlefield, courage in the face of a terminal illness. We think of courage for the explorer who is breaking trails into new territory. Courage is one of the most important qualities of daily life, for, in reality, with each sunrise there isn't one of us who isn't breaking trails into new territory. Tomorrow is darkness. We do not know what it will bring.

Perhaps that is why it is so much easier to cling timidly to the familiar, to our own little well-worn grooves, rather than to stretch beyond them. It is easier to walk, sheeplike, along the trails tried by others, rather than turn along our own path. Safety may seem more appealing than real success.

Sidney Smith wrote: "A great deal of talent is lost in the world for want of a little courage. Every day sends to their graves men whom timidity prevented from making a first effort; who, if they could have been induced to begin, would in all probability have gone great lengths in the career of fame. The fact is that to do anything in the world worth doing, we must not stand back shivering and thinking of the cold and danger but jump in and scramble through as well as we can. It will not do to be perpetually calculating risks and adjusting nice chances; . . . at present a man waits, and doubts, and consults his brother, and his particular friends, till one day he finds he is sixty years old and that he has lost so much time in consulting cousins and friends that he has no more time to follow their advice."

The Lord did not place us here to be timid, frightened creatures. He did not mean for us to cling to our place, mere shadows of ourselves. Thus, he made us a promise to give us the courage we would need to cross into our own promised lands.

The Lord told Joshua to be strong and of a good courage. He gave him the reason why he could: "For the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." (Joshua 1:9.) So, also, is the promise for us. With such a companion, who need ever fear?
