No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Believing in Jesus Christ

On a stormy night, when a wild wind whipped branches off trees and pushed dark clouds across the sky, a frightened little girl cried from her bed for her parents.

And, of course, they came—to comfort her and tell her everything would be all right. "Don't be afraid. It's only the wind."

But the little girl was still afraid. She knew it was the wind, and it was the wind that frightened her. "What is the wind?" she cried.

Her father began to explain to her, only to realize that he couldn't. The explanations he knew were about atmospheric conditions, none of which she understood, and she remained frightened.

The wind became more violent, rattling the windows, slamming the garden gate. As the young girl continued to seek comfort, her mother pointed out that the wind not only slams the gate and pulls branches off trees but also "holds your kite in the sky. Would you like to go kite flying tomorrow?"

As the girl continued clinging to her father, not easily persuaded, her mother spoke of the ducks on the pond and the balloon vendor in the park where they would go to fly the kite. Slowly, image by beautiful image, the child followed her mother away from her fear and fell asleep.

Many things in life are difficult to understand. Sometimes the world is too complex to comprehend, and the explanations more confounding than comforting. We are finite creatures, our understanding bounded in the beginning by birth and in the end by death, which is why the infinite eludes us. We are more certain of the effects than the causes, which is why we can count the broken branches but not explain the wind.

Such limitation and ignorance are at once our burden and our blessing. Because we do not understand, we are frightened. And because we are frightened, we are led to Christ and the comfort of a heavenly home. "Except ye be converted," Jesus said, "and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 18:3.) What we do not know is a necessary part of our conversion; what frightens us also returns us to Christ.

In Jesus, we become children again, children who may not yet understand but who are capable of believing in a world whose wind not only slams the gate on a dark night but also pushes the kite against a bright sky.
