No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Conquest of Scarecrows

In America's rural past, farmers used scarecrows in their fields. Timid birds, seeing the cross-sticks attired with an old coat and perhaps a hat, were frightened from an easy meal.

To be sure, the inanimate mannequins were lifeless, crude, and harmless—except to the birds, whose fears brought the scarecrows to life, endowed them with malicious intentions, and gave them power.

And man's own fears are scarecrows that guard the human harvest he might reap.

Without exception, each of us is acquainted with fear—the object and the intensity may vary, but the emotion is the same.

It is fear that stands between us and the realization of our aspirations and ambitions. We lose the possibility of new and self-fulfilling employment because fear ties us to the security of our old job. We shun vocational training and educational opportunities because we fear possible academic failure. The enrichment of new-fledged friends is lost for lack of social courage.

In much that we do—in our work, our studies, our play—we stick to the harbor, afraid of the depths, intimidated by the scarecrows from within, while other, more venturous souls strike for deep water and learn that only fear itself is to be feared, that once fear is conquered, all else may be conquered.

It is true: he who fears will never taste success, while he who conquers fears will never face total defeat. Thus, success is not granted to those who know no fear but to those who overcome their fear, to those wise individuals who dare approach whatever scarecrows haunt the conscious field of self, who disregard the dreaded phantom and even perch upon its spectral head.

In more tangible terms, overcoming our fears is a risky business but one that leads to outward success and inward peace of mind. In fact, it usually turns out that the most fearful of all things is fear itself, even more fearful than that which is feared. We dread going to the dentist, only to learn that the anxiety of anticipation is much worse than the actual visit. We are afraid of old age but then discover that the fear of age is a malady that affects only the young. Even the fear of death is diminished as death approaches.

Using valor and unwavering belief in divine love and protection, let us strike down the scarecrows that haunt us. Stand face to face with fear. With courage and with faith, attack the hideous face of fear.
