No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

More Alike Than Different

New Zealand is a green land that lay empty long after other lands had been settled. It waited for its first human voice after civilizations elsewhere had come and gone, after Christ had walked upon the earth. It was a pristine jewel where the only sounds were wild wind and wilder water.

Those who found their way here, guided by wind, current, and stars, came for a place to start anew. They included the Maori, who loved the land, traders looking for fortunes, adventurers who sought freedom, and idealists who wished to build utopia. People came from many lands, bringing the color and flavor of their own cultures. They all came because this was the last frontier, the last place to hope. A. R. D. Fairburn wrote:

They shouted at the floating leaf, laughed with joy at the promise of life, Hope becoming belief, The crag splitting the sky, slowly towering out of the sea, taking color and shape, and the land swelling beyond.

How much the impulse that shaped our two countries, the United States and New Zealand, is alike. It is easy for us to feel kinship with one another. We speak with a common heritage.

But in a world that is shrinking, we must extend this understanding to those who are not like us, who are not tied together by the thread of adventure that carved out new frontiers.

Mankind is more alike than different. We are reminded that no matter what seems to divide us from peoples of other lands, the rifts are superficial. We all have hands that toil and pray and clap for joy. We have faces lined with the cares and joys of ten thousand days. We are born and cry and dream and question. We share, love, marry, have children. We work, and we die. We are alike. Underneath all the superficialities, we are inexorably alike.

That means we cannot dismiss another's burden or walk by, indifferent. We cannot let life revolve around only ourselves or our family or community. Instead, we have to clasp hands and know the thoughts of men and women in other lands. We have to give up selfishness and convenience to reach out and solve our mutual problems.

Because we are alike: We must not exploit, but nurture each other. We must not seek differences, but seek solutions. We must not turn our backs, but open our arms.

The poet Carl Sandburg wrote:

There is only one man in the world and his name is All Men. There is only one woman in the world and her name is All Women. There is only one child in the world and the child's name is All Children. E Pluribus Unum

On the great seal of the United States and on our coins is our national slogan: "E Pluribus Unum," which, translated, means "from many, one." Our various histories, heritages, cultural and ethnic diversities intertwine in this land to create the unique character that is an American. How does this happen? How do so many backgrounds blend into so strong a national union?

Some have suggested that the attraction of America is strictly economic. The poor and outcast flee to these shores only for material gain and America's riches. But if wealth were the only magnet, then greed for the goods of this world would immediately divide Americans into thousands of factions as they hungrily and selfishly gather the gold they came for.

Others suggest that America's free business and political climate attracts foreigners. Surely, the blessed freedom of America's Constitution is a treasure beyond price to all who are privileged to live under it. But political and economic freedom alone would also divide Americans, not bind them together. Many from foreign shores have forsaken their own advantage and position to contribute to the common good of America. What, then, is the power that pulls us together?

Sydney Harris suggested that America is not so much a nation as it is an idea. The idea is that "the people are in charge of their rulers and not the other way around." These rights of free agency are God-given to every people, for, as Thomas Jefferson wrote in the Declaration of Independence, "All men are created equal." This belief in equality has stimulated a unifying spirit in America that goes beyond and below our differences of nationality, wealth, creed, or color.

Although we have not yet totally achieved the ideal of equality for all people, it has ever been before us as a beacon, reminding us that we are all brothers and sisters in the family of God.

This enlightened view of responsibility for each other and equality before God is the secret of America's greatness. In the earliest years of our republic, French philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville observed that goodness was the glue holding this diverse nation together. He wrote, "America is great because she is good. And if America ever ceases to be good, America will cease to be great."

Then, as now, of course, Americans were not perfect. There were those, and are those, who would take unfair advantage of this spirit of brotherhood to advance their own selfish interests. But in the main our national treasure of good will to all people, of individual human rights, has been sustained and replenished in war, in peace, in prosperity, and in depression, through hard times and good times.

And so long as we feel love and concern for each other and a reverence for the God and Father of us all, this great nation shall stand strong, and we will continue to be so many voices who sing America's song.
