No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Lives That Touch

More than a century and a half ago, on the American frontier, a young widow stood inside a rough-cut log cabin. She was heartsick. She had been led to believe that the widower she had just married was a man of some means. Now she found herself in conditions of abject poverty. She wanted to run from that sad place; but her eye caught sight of a small boy huddled in a corner in the cabin—very much in need of a mother. The woman, Sarah Bush Johnston, said, "I will stay for the sake of the boy." She stayed and touched his life. Later, that same boy, grown to manhood, touched the lives of millions. He removed the blight of slavery from this land of the free. He helped save America from self-destruction in a civil war—for the small boy was Abraham Lincoln. He would later say of this loving woman, who joined her life with his, "All that I am and all that I ever hope to be, I owe to my angel mother."

"No man is an Island, entire of it self," wrote John Donne; "every man is a piece of the Continent." Each of us touches other lives for good or for ill. None of us lives life in isolation. We are born bone of bone and flesh of flesh of our parents. We are immediately and thereafter dependent upon others for food, clothing, shelter, protection, knowledge, and love. None of us could survive singly, and few of us try. We have all been affected by teachers, neighbors, friends, or acquaintances.

That has always been the case. And today's communication and transportation facilities have made us even more aware of our interdependence. Individuals, families, cities, countries, and nations: we are all intertwined with one another on this planet. The actions of each of us create rippling waves that could quickly spread beyond the horizon of our consciousness and create effects we may never see.

All of us touch other lives every day and leave them better or worse for that contact. Our touch may be as brief as a passing smile or as permanent and profound as the relationship between a parent and a child. But none of us passes through this world without affecting others and being affected by them. The influence we have on others will be the most important and permanent effect we will have in the world.

So let us resolve today to be more aware of the debt we owe to those who have touched our lives. And let us remember that the only way we can begin to repay our debt to them is to go forth and lift the lives of others.
