No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

To Be a Christian

When separated from the complex theologies, the religious jargon, and sectarian interpretations, Christianity is at once the most sublime and the simplest morality. The doctrines, as taught by Jesus, are within the comprehension of anyone. The central creed of Christianity is simply to do good—to do good whenever, wherever, and to whomever we can. That is to be a Christian.

It is to believe that feeding the hungry is more important than religious ritual and repetition. It is to match deeds to thoughts, placing human service above lip service, making our home, our office, our neighborhood the production lab for Christian ideals.

To be a Christian is to live with gratitude, with empathy, with gentleness and faith; to seek refinement rather than extravagance; to be worthy before popular; to prefer intrinsic beauty over faddish style.

We will find the Christian wherever there is human need: mowing the lawn of an injured neighbor, standing watch over the sickbed of children, offering a loan to lighten the load of a worthy friend. We will discover his outstretched arms about the huddled shoulders of the mother who has lost an infant to crib death, of the new divorcee who is afraid of the world and of the future, of the boy who sat out the whole game on the bench.

The Christian is made up of the charity that gives without looking back, the humility that kneels when no one is looking, and the faith that believes when the evidence casts doubt.

The Commandments, the parables, and the Beatitudes are written not only in the Christian's Bible and hymnbook but also upon the fleshy tablets of his heart, where they are used for reference. For the true Christian is a person not only of theory but also of application. The first rule of negotiation in business dealings is the Golden Rule. Law is used to gain justice, not money. Peace is made at home as well as at sporting events. And marriage is based on the Christian ideals of equality and mutual respect.

The true Christian is a follower in word and deed of him who became the servant of all: majesty in homespun clothing, manhood tempered by tears, royalty beneath a crown of thorns. Like the silent candle that glows on through the night—quietly, graciously, freely shedding its light—the Christian lives on, grateful for the life that now is and for the promise of that which is to come.
