No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Sharing Life

"Share all of life's joy and be rarely alone, / For exile is empty, a harp without tone." These words by John Colman remind us that we are at our best and happiest when we are with someone else, particularly those we love. In the biblical account of the earth's beginnings, the Lord created the first human being and then pronounced a basic truth: "It is not good that the man should be alone," and he gave Adam, Eve. (Genesis 2:18.)

What was true then is true today. It is not psychologically healthy nor productive nor desirable to live our lives in loneliness. Has not each of us at one time or another seen some beautiful sight or experienced some exciting event and immediately wished our loved ones could enjoy it with us? This desire to blend our lives with others' is as natural to a human being as taking the next breath. We were born to share, to love, to cooperate, to help one another.

As our world continues to get more complicated, more automated, and more technical, there is a danger that we may lose the personal and the human touch that makes our daily activities worth doing. By sharing ourselves with others whom we can help and encourage, we counteract the dehumanizing aspects of a highly technical world. Giving our time, our energies, our attention to others is the most precious gift we can offer. Emerson said, "The only gift is a portion of thyself."

Giving of ourselves, sharing our lives and experiences, is the only way we can build bonds of love to withstand the powerful forces that are isolating people, cultures, and nations today.

Giving financial aid or technological assistance can help improve the lives of others, but sharing ourselves multiplies the effectiveness of our charity.

Caring for and sharing with our brothers and sisters in the human family will help bring peace to this world and prepare us to be worthy of the heavenly world to come.

James Russell Lowell described, from the Lord's perspective, the difference between giving and sharing in these famous lines from The Vision of Sir Launfal:

Not what we give, but what we share— For the gift without the giver is bare. Who gives himself with his alms serves three— Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me. The One and the Ninety-Nine

The Savior gave a telling parable when he asked, "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?" (Luke 15:4.) Most of us probably wonder about the wisdom of chasing after the one and ignoring the ninety-nine. What happens to the unprotected flock while the shepherd searches?

Yet this simple story tells us as much about the Lord as does a lifetime of experience. Stephen R. Covey said, "Going after the one 'lost sheep' results not in neglecting the 99 but in effectively reaching them."

Why? Think back to the last time someone in your company was critical of another. Recall a moment when a colleague seemed warm and caring to his fellow worker, then turned on him as he moved out of earshot. Did you ever feel as safe in that person's company again, as willing to expose your vulnerabilities? When someone is critical of another, a doubt creeps upon us. We wonder if, when we are gone, he will be critical of us, too, focusing on frailties we know too well but hope others can't see. Such is the point of the parable. Caring for the one shores up trust in the others and gives them confidence in the shepherd, even when he is gone.

That's the way of the Lord. He who knows us best loves us most, even when we feel wayward and worthless, even when we feel undeserving. And who among us never feels like the one left out from a world that seems confidently passing us by?

An important executive confided to a friend that he wondered if his work was worthwhile, if all the time and effort he gave his job counted for anything. If the seemingly confident and powerful feel that way, what about the rest of us? It is so easy to question our worth, our lovability. Self-worth and confidence ebb and flow like a restless wave.

That is why we need the Lord. That is why we can understand more fully the attraction of the Lord's dwelling, why we would rather be a doorkeeper there than enthroned anywhere else. It is because there we feel fully loved, the self-doubts that shadow our lives banished by the light of God.

And so again, the lesson of the parable, whether we dwell with the ninety and nine or are the one, we are assured that when we feel most lost, when we feel tossed about by a buffeting world, the Lord will drop all to come for us.

And we can test the Lord's own principle by using it. "Think about the one," says Covey, "talk to the one, regard the one, serve the one. If you are sincere and constant, you will dis-cover that gradually your influence with the many will be magnified."
