No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS WITH THE SAVIOR

"What Think Ye of Christ?"

As another year begins, we experience the annual ritual of examining our priorities and objectives. We often feel the need for more meaning and direction in our lives. There's a desire to increase our spirituality and religious commitment, to bring Christ more into the center of our lives.

Our conscience reminds us of the Savior's powerful teachings—of his admonition to love and serve our fellowmen, not as others do but with a love that far transcends conventional love. If we love only those who love us, he said, what do we do more than others do? He said we must love even those who don't love us and go far beyond. In fact, he told us to acquire the kind of love that he had. That, he emphasized, is the distinguishing Christian personality: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.)

He constantly urged people to believe in him, to trust in God. He also emphasized over and over again that great things can be accomplished with faith. In Matthew 9:29 we read, "According to your faith be it unto you." In Mark 11:24 we're told that faith can move mountains: "Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them." The Lord also made it clear to us that "all things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23.)

As another new year unfolds, let us practice the principles of love and faith and obedience that the Master taught. Let us ponder his life and respond to his call for action. Let us realize that it's impossible to be indifferent to him, or even neutral. Let us realize that as we lose our lives for his sake, we will find our own true life. We'll discover new depths of happiness and fulfillment that we never knew existed. We'll be forced to admit that he came into the world that we might have life more abundantly.

Ultimately, the choice is ours of whether or not to make Christ a part of our lives. "What think ye of Christ?" was the question put to a group of Pharisees nearly two thousand years ago. (Matthew 22:42.) It was the most vital, the most far-reaching query in an unsettled and distracted world. It is equally important today.
