No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

His Yoke Is Easy

To enjoy the gift of freedom, the gift of free agency God has given us, we must learn to understand this simple gift of life.

Much has been said and done in this world regarding man's philosophies and theories about our politics and religions; but, after twenty centuries of trial and error, of war and contention, we return again to the wisest, most practical, and simplest system of all. We turn to the gospel of Jesus Christ—to the simplicity of the Sermon on the Mount, to the beauty of the Beatitudes, to the freedom of righteousness. In a very simple way, without money or worldly power, he showed us the path to happiness and eternal life. In his few words and in the sublime gentleness of his life, he offered us a better, clearer, and more intelligent system for individual happiness and social prosperity. While others talked of governments and laws, of money and influence, Jesus spoke the simple language of the heart. He spoke of loving one's neighbor, of taking care of widows and orphans, of visiting the sick, the elderly, and the imprisoned. He said it is hate that makes life difficult and greed that makes the day hard; he taught of the need to be beautiful within—to have a loving heart, to forgive those who have wronged us, to practice virtue and patience.

To this divine philosophy of life, he added this brief postscript: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me. . . . For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:29-30.)

And so it is. Accepting and living the gospel of Jesus Christ is easy—easy if we are Christians in the sense that he wanted us to be; easy if we seek internal refinement over external fashion and wealth; easy if worthiness is more important to us than fame; and easy if we love without condition or reward.

Taking upon ourselves his yoke, or accepting his gospel, may not change the whole world, but it will change our hearts: not that there be no suffering but that suffering might be endured; not that there be no tears but that our tears be mixed with the tears of those who share our hurt or joy; not that there be no mortal death but that the promise of eternal life might live within us.

And thus we take upon us his name and live a life of gentle meekness and charity. It is then we learn of the gift to be simple, the gift to be free. It is then we learn to our joy that his promise is true and his yoke is easy.
