No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Message of Christ

There are many things the Savior taught us about life and living that are as appropriate today as they were when he walked the shores of Galilee. When Christ described the good life for mankind, his description was of something deeper than the mere pursuit of pleasure and material things. Of greater value, he said, are humility, justice, mercy, compassion, and service—all based on love of God and love of fellowman.

He was acutely aware of the role of money in the lives of the people he taught. He was not opposed to private ownership of property or to the normal process of making a living. But he did warn us of the danger of letting our loyalty and energy be devoted too strongly to money, property, and wealth. He saw danger in the obsession of money—not only because of what it might do to us but also because of what it would do to our relations with others. He reminded us that the number one objective in our lives should be the pursuit of God's will, not for his sake but for ours.

The Savior was a teacher and preacher who knew our physical needs well. He knew that a diseased and suffering body can weaken a healthy spirit and, conversely, that a sick spirit can weaken a healthy body.

He taught us about faith, the mainspring of religious action. He spoke of faith, demonstrated faith, and shared his faith.

Jesus made it clear in his teachings that we live in an orderly universe—one of cause and effect, one where we are responsible for our own actions, a world where we reap what we sow.

As we ponder the life of Christ, we may be inclined to ask, "What meaning is there for me in the teachings of Jesus? What claims do they have upon my life? How are they going to affect my future? Do they have any bearing on my profession, on how I use my time, on the kind of person I am?"

The answers to all such questions are found only in practice, only if we allow room for Christ in our hearts. And if we do, it will bring a sense of wholeness and harmony into our lives. It will provide us with a fundamental core that will unify and integrate our spiritual, intellectual, social, and working lives.

Yes, when we understand the message of Christ, we will also discover depths of happiness and fulfillment we never knew possible.
