No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Greatest Example

If a picture can be worth a thousand words, an example can be worth more than an entire textbook to a teacher. Every effective teacher knows and uses the power of comparisons, analogies, and examples to explain lessons. Example is the best way to teach some principles, particularly in the vital area of human interaction and relationships. What does it mean to be kind, to be forgiving, to be steadfast, honest, true, to be a good neighbor? These and other lessons of life can best be learned by seeing them in action.

Such were the teaching methods used by the world's master teacher. Jesus constantly called his disciples' attention to the world about them and drew profound principles from everyday events. To illustrate how one should love his neighbor, Jesus told the story of the Good Samaritan and counseled his followers to do as the Good Samaritan had done. To define charity, he referred to a widow placing her small savings on the temple altar for the poor. Her donation, he pointed out, was much more than that of the rich men with their bags of gold. He observed children, with their pure faith and trust, and told us to become like them.

But more powerful than his pointing out others' examples was the example of the life of Christ himself. When he spoke of forsaking worldly things to build the kingdom of God, he had done it. When he taught the need to search out the lost lamb and bring it back to the fold, there stood the outcasts of society he had restored and redeemed. When he told them to care for their future, they saw him weep over the sins of Jerusalem.

Had they been at Gethsemane, they would have seen Jesus willingly shoulder the sins of the world, and perhaps they would have caught a glimpse of the depth of his love for mankind. "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." (John 15:13.) And at Golgotha, Jesus illustrated supreme compassion when he prayed for his tormentors, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

Because Jesus personified the highest principles of human potential, his teachings and example have changed the destinies of men and nations. His light continues to inspire us to make our own lives better and be examples to those around us. "Let your light so shine before men," he said, "that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:16.)
