No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

"Love Thy Neighbour"

The greatest commandment given us by the Savior is to love God with all our heart, soul, and mind. (See Matthew 22:37.) "And the second," he said, "is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:39.) It was a message the apostles emphasized repeatedly.

The kind of love referred to by the Lord when he said, "Love one another; as I have loved you" is not dependent on certain prerequisites. (John 13:34.) It's not a reward for good behavior, nor should it be selective.

We are urged to go beyond that point—to love those who injure and wrong us, to be decent whether others are decent or not, to exercise good-will whether others do or not. We're told not to let our conduct depend on how others treat us but to keep an independent personality and stick to our own principles of character regardless of how others act. If we do, we will soon find that love and the Golden Rule will cover every situation—something that a list of rules for conduct, however long, could never do.

The point is that we should love all other persons, whether they merit it or not, whether they reciprocate our love, whether they have earned it, or whether we are rewarded for it. Interestingly, the person who is most difficult to love often needs love the most. And it's not enough for us simply to feel love in our hearts. We have to express it in our actions.

Loving others requires us to feel good about ourselves. Did he not say, "Love thy neighbour as thyself"? One of the great discoveries of modern psychology is that our attitudes toward ourselves are just as complicated as our attitudes toward others, and just as important. With this in mind, we might interpret God's commandment to mean, Thou shalt love thyself properly, and then thou wilt love thy neighbor. Love for ourselves is the foundation of a brotherly society and individual peace of mind.

Love can't be confined to any particular part of our lives. It's a light that shines from within. It's an inner attitude that is all-embracing. It has to be the central and dominant element in the life of those who would do the will of God.
