No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Love Unstated

A little girl went on a trip with her parents to an expensive resort. She got new clothes and swimming equipment for the vacation; they splurged on wonderful meals. But finally, one day, the little girl was banging on the wall with her foot, next to her mother. When her mother could stand it no more, she asked, "Why are you doing that?"

"I just want you to look at me," the child replied in a moment of utter honesty.

How much of the present misery and confusion of this world could be eliminated if we realized that what we need is not more things, not more gadgets that whirr at us and demand fixing, not more entertainments or more places to go. What we need and need desperately is for someone to look at us and really see us, someone to regard us and love us.

In some mysterious way we don't even completely understand, love is tangible. Someone doesn't have to tell us he or she loves us in so many words. We cannot, in fact, tell the smallest part of what we feel. But our intent is read in every action and glance, in tone and gesture, in the very atmosphere we carry.

The infant who cannot even understand the language knows his mother loves him. He feels her quiet movements bringing peace into the fearful, hungry world of first life. She, in turn, does not need to be taught to love. There are no Ph.D.'s in life's highest art. She hears the intent inside the cries, strains at every level to read them.

But if we know when we are loved, we don't always recognize when someone is crying out to us because he or she needs love. The pouting teenager, the screaming child who disobeys his parent, the withdrawn adult who seeks relief in self-destruction—all of these may be cries for love.

Sin itself is often the result of unmet need. So let us regard each other with wiser eyes. Those who seem perverse, rebellious, difficult may be those who yearn for love. Their souls are crying out in tones unformed—"look at me."

It is a clamoring, noisy world. If we are to feed each other, we need to set aside some time to focus on each other. "I just want you to look at me," said the young child. She speaks for us all.
