No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Greatest of These Is Love

Nowhere in sacred literature is the need for love in our lives expressed more beautifully than in the apostle Paul's letter to the Corinthians. (1 Corinthians 13.) He called it charity. Today, we usually call it love.

And so, in reverent paraphrase, we express the need for this basic human value: for the greatest of these is love.

Though we pay our church donations and attend all our religious services, and have not love—it is nothing.

Though we conform to church ritual, and proselyte as missionaries, and bear titles of ecclesiastical power or authority, but do it without love—we are as the empty shells that line the seashore, having the semblance of life but not the spirit.

Though we bequeath our money to great universities and charitable causes; and though magnificent buildings bear our names, monuments our visage, and newspapers our photograph—in the absence of love, we are none the better.

And even if we develop the technology to speed ourselves to the far reaches of the universe, or to peer at the smallest microbe, or to have the knowledge to cure ourselves of all disease and poverty—if love is lacking, it profits us little.

Love is patient and wise—patient with the gentle forbearance that waits on others before itself and wise with the gentle wisdom of old eyes that, having looked on time, know that the simple act of being kind is greater than all the wisdom of the wise.

Love is not boastful nor self-interested but understands that no one has achieved success without the help and sacrifice of others.

Where love is, there also are faith, hope, and endurance. Without love, the richest man is made poor; with love, the poorest man is made rich.

When war is nothing more than a rusting relic of a frightful past; when the gallows and ghettos have crumbled into dust; when the last terrorist, the last tyrant, the last murderer and rapist have crept silently to rest—love will remain, and will rule, because love knows no death.

Fame dies, honors perish, and the worldly hope men set their hearts upon turns to ashes. But love lives on—through decades, through centuries, through eons—for the greatest of these is love.
