No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

"Love One Another"

Simple, yet profound; brief, but far-reaching; old, yet ever new—the three words spoken twenty centuries ago by the gentle carpenter from Galilee: "Love one another." (John 13:34.) It is a plain and precious commandment, running like a thread of gold through the long history of mankind, as unchanging and relevant as time itself.

Love one another: because the greatest cause of the world's sorrow is the lack of love.

Love one another: because that person who cannot love is like half a pair of scissors—functionless, missing the essential portion of personality that is divinely human.

Love one another: because those who love do not fear hate; because those who love begin to live; because to love and be beloved are the eternal building blocks of human happiness.

To love one another is to understand one another. It is to realize that regardless of language, customs, mores, or race, all people are basically the same. It is to surmise that our neighbors have the same hurts, frustrations, and intelligence as ourselves.

Imagine a world, a nation, a community, or a family where love rules: a world without war. Imagine nations without border guards: nations spending their resources on food, medicines, education instead of on missiles and bombs.

Think of that community or town where "the greatest good for the greatest number" is the maxim: a place where hatred, bigotry, and prejudice are forgotten terms of a forgotten past.

And picture a family in which love is the motivating force: no child abuse, no neglect, no fighting over inheritance or family possessions; but, in their place, parents who are honored and respected by children, children who demonstrate open affection for each other, grandparents who are revered and attended.

Love is a verb, a word of action—not just something to talk about or feel, but something to do. When we begin to wash each other's feet, when we can safely forget to deadbolt our homes at night, when we no longer have a need for military weapons—then we can say that we love one another.

And so, a revolution is needed—a courageous, boisterous revolution with waving banners and battle hymns, a revolution to overcome intolerance and vengeance, a revolution to triumph over the infectious hatred that cripples our planet—a revolution of the heart. And let this be its motto, its standard, its bill of rights—that we love one another.
