No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Our Savior's Love

We can take great comfort and encouragement in the fact that the primary attribute of God is love. He loves each one of us specifically, individually, and respectively. Yet, living as one of billions on a small globe swimming in a sea of space, we can easily feel inconsequential. Who are we that God should take notice of us? In a world where events seem sometimes random, often frustrating or hostile, it is easy to feel overlooked. Why should our days be numbered before the Lord?

But they are. God does notice us. In the great awesomeness that is the universe, there is a personal concern. As Neal A. Maxwell said: "We are living on a small planet which is part of a very modest solar system, which, in turn, is located at the outer edge of the awesome Milky Way galaxy. If we were sufficiently distant from the stunning Milky Way, it would be seen as but another bright dot among countless other bright dots in space, all of which could cause us to conclude, comparatively, 'that man is nothing.' (Moses 1:10.)

"Yet we are rescued by such reassuring realities as that God knows and loves each of us—personally and perfectly. Hence, there is incredible intimacy in the vastness of it all."

God is perfect in his love. It is not too hard for him who set the worlds in motion, whose understanding pierces the intricacies of physics, mathematics, and astronomy, to have a knowledge that centers on each individual. He can call each of us by name, knows our burdens and joys, is familiar with our past and future.

Remember when he blessed the little children? It was not a blanket blessing, with a wave of his hand on the multitude. He took them to him one by one.

When he looked out upon a multitude, he said, "Have ye any that are sick among you? Bring them hither. Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous, or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them, for I have compassion upon you; my bowels are filled with mercy." (3 Nephi 17:7.) And he did heal them, one by one, not as a faceless mob.

What does that mean for us in this time? It means we are not alone in this dangerous mortal journey. It means the Lord does not look on humanity with a kind of general good-will. He looks upon each of us individually with a love whose fullness and intensity we can scarcely comprehend.

Though the whirlwind may blow and the fires rage, though the pain and anguish of life may sometimes threaten to consume our very lives, ultimately we are safe because the Lord loves us. Ultimately, the vast universe is an intimate place, because our Creator makes it so.
