No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

On Love

Democracy has a value in our personal lives as well as in our national existence. There needs also to be democracy in our love of others. What seems to be love is often not love at all. In fact, in the name of love, one may do things that hurt or harm another.

Psychiatrist M. Scott Peck reported what one timid young man said: "My mother loved me so much she wouldn't let me take the school bus to school until my senior year in high school. Even then I had to beg her to let me go. I guess she was afraid that I would get hurt, so she drove me to and from school every day, which was very hard on her. She really loved me."

The story reminds us that love is not just a feeling and not even just a series of actions. Love has much to do with the conscious or unconscious purpose in the mind of the lover.

Often, what we call love is the desire to control. We sacrifice for others and become ego-rewarded when they become dependent upon us. These are the people who assume responsibility for everybody else's problems. They may shield their children or their spouse from consequences. They may diminish children by doing for them what they should do for themselves. They may go about seeking to change those closest to them according to a personal formula. The message they are giving, without knowing it, can be painful. In subtle ways, the acts we think we do for love may not have a loving effect at all.

We are reminded that we need to love those we love not just with our hearts but with our heads as well. We need to be judicious and wise. We need to consider them not just as they relate to us but in their own context. How does the world look to them? What are their hopes and dreams? What affirms them?

This means that it is as important to know when to hold back as when to give. It means that we must fiercely guard the agency of those whom we love. We must think of them not just in the way they may satisfy our needs but help them to satisfy their own. We must regard them with the deepest respect.

The Lord has set the pattern. His love for us allows us to be what we are. It would be easier for us sometimes if he did not respect us so much. But his love is not controlling. We suffer the consequences of our own actions. We are not allowed the luxury of childish ways with childish restrictions. His intent, like the intent of those who truly love, is to celebrate the person, celebrate the one you love. And when we can learn to love as he does, there is much to celebrate.
