No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Trust in the Lord

A story in the Old Testament tells of the time when the children of Israel were going into fierce battle against the Midianites. There were thirty-two thousand Israelites against an unnumbered host of enemy. The odds looked pretty good for the Israelites. Then the Lord did an unusual thing. He commanded Gideon, the Israelite leader, to reduce the size of the army to only three hundred. What those three hundred must have thought as they watched thousands of their compatriots returning home! What anxieties must have filled their minds the night before they were to meet a host rushing at them with swords!

The Lord's purpose was straightforward in this. He wanted Israel to know with assurance who was winning the battle for them. It wasn't their numbers, their strength, or their prowess. It was the Lord.

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart," says Proverbs, "and lean not unto thine own understanding." (Proverbs 3:5.)

And it is not an easy lesson. Our agendas are not his agendas; our timetables are not his. Our thoughts are caught in the here and now. Our perspective is limited.

We seek to push our lives along by the power of our own will. But the Lord asks instead that his will, not ours, be done.

Though it sometimes seems nearly impossible, the message is to trust in the Lord. Trust that he hears our prayers and will move our lives along according to a plan designed to make us ultimately most happy. Trust that we don't need to keep all of our problems in our own uncertain hands but can pass them to him with assurance that they will be tended and finally solved.

Trust to the degree that we thrust out the doubt and fear that gnaw at our souls, diminish our dreams, and neutralize our efforts.

Trust in him. And we have every reason to trust. It is the very Creator of the universe, whose power is unlimited and unmatched, who deigns to call us his own, who asks us to trust, whose devotion to us is undeviating, who hears even the unspoken yearnings of our souls.

He asks us to trust him, because only when we do, can we live with joy and personal power. Only through trust in God can we move beyond being a "mere bundle of wavering thoughts and fluctuating sensations" to stand on the sure ground of faith and hope and joy in the present and the future.
