No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Faith, Memory, and Patience

Life can be much sweeter if we fully understand the attributes of God. He is love itself, plenteous in mercy, unceasing in his care for us. The mountains rise and fall, but he does not change. Not a hair on our heads is unnoticed by him. "Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow . . . " he said.

"But I say unto you that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

"Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field . . . , how much more will he not provide for you, if ye are not of little faith?" (JST Matthew 6:28-30.)

Provide for us if we have faith. How comforting that sounds in a world that so often pummels us. In a world of light and shadow, the Lord is the one consistency. In that, we can place our faith.

But if our faith sometimes wavers, it may be because two other attributes in us are weak—patience and memory. Faith will falter until it is shored up by these.

Why memory? Because we mortals can be foolish creatures. It is easy for the present to seem eternally upon us. When we are joyous, we can hardly remember trial. The mother, having forgotten labor, gladly goes to childbirth again. And the converse is also true. When we writhe in pain, we think it eternal. We forget that it will pass. We forget that mortal life is like a tide with ebbs and flows, sometimes in the water gasping for air, sometimes on the beach in the sunshine.

Faith remembers. Faith is the bird that senses the light and sings while the dawn is still dark.

True faith has a cumulative effect. When the children of Israel stood at the Red Sea and the armies of Egypt came pounding behind them, they could not remember their other miracles in the desert and cried that they had been forgotten.

Faith knows that since God loved and blessed me yesterday, even if I don't feel him today, he still loves and blesses me.

With our remembrance, faith also demands patience, because we see so little here. We are like actors on a dark stage, standing in a spotlight. We cannot see before us. We cannot see what stands in the wings on either side. We stand in our little circle of light and wonder. And, knowing so little, we want things now. We want them on our time schedule. We are restive against God's steady hand and timelessness. But faith accepts God's time frame and comforts us about the future.

With memory and patience, faith can be made whole. No matter what life brings us, we can take advantage of that promise so often repeated in scripture: Ask and ye shall receive. (See Matthew 7:7.)
