No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Search for Peace

Throughout the scriptures the Lord is continually giving reassurance of his love, his support, and his availability to us at all times.

And when it sometimes seems that we are abandoned during the trials of life or when sorrow and disappointment, failure and weakness make us feel less than we really are, we have access to the healing salve of God's unreserved love.

In the New Testament, the Lord says, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30.)

That is the Lord's invitation to each of us. And if we accept, it will make a greater difference in our life than anything we have imagined. We will have his comforting influence, the quiet assurances he sends to us. We will give him an opportunity to restore us. The Lord is our most faithful friend. He will never abandon us if we trust him.

His invitation is also a promise of peace. In today's society, it seems that people are more hurried and restless than ever before. Some say it is the result of living in a complex world. But it's more than that. It's the continuing search for inner peace. And after years of dead-end streets, many are returning to chapels and churches to find the peace "which passeth all understanding." (Philippians 4:7.) They have learned that indifference to his influence brings only inner turmoil.

And to those who have felt an emptiness and a loss of perspective, may we suggest that they consider a return to regular weekly worship of the Lord—even as an experiment. The scriptures tell us that "whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions." (Alma 36:3.)

We must be aware of our continuing need for God and of the fact that we are totally dependent upon him. Let us give the Lord a chance to strengthen us, to enrich our lives, to improve our spiritual stamina, to make our time on earth more meaningful. And what more assuring comfort can we obtain in life than to know that we have established a personal, permanent relationship with God?
