No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Gift of Faith

In order to do the things that are best for us, we must believe we are capable of doing them. We must have faith. If we excuse ourselves from acting positively because we lack faith in our own abilities, then we are doomed to a passive, negative, and unhappy existence. Faith is the power of the subconscious, of imagining, believing, and convincing ourselves that something can be done.

Thomas Edison once said, "We don't know what electricity is. We don't know what heat is. We have a lot of hypotheses about these things, but that is all. But we do not let our ignorance about these things deprive us of their use." So it is with faith.

All of us have more faith than we sometimes suppose. Every time we plow and plant, we show faith. It is by faith that we build for the future. All of us have doubts at the beginning of a project, but we begin nevertheless.

So, where do this faith and belief come from? They come from within ourselves. Faith is the foundation of commitment. And without commitment, there can be no real progress. The person who has developed the gift of faith is willing to venture boldly into the unknown.

Faith is the key to unlock the door of success, a power that everyone has, but few use it consciously. Those who do are generally optimistic. They are prevention-oriented. Their thoughts focus on wellness, on health, and on success.

Faith is important in all we do. It permeates our existence. We need to have scientific faith, faith in our country, faith in mankind, faith in our children, and faith in eternity.

Perhaps the most important use of this vital gift is to exercise faith in ourselves and faith in God. Surely, everyone, deep in his or her own heart, has some degree of faith in God. Even professed atheists express faith at times. Many say that because they do not understand God or cannot see him, they will not accept him. Yet, they neither see nor hear nor feel many things and still believe in their existence.

Faith can be a moving principle in our lives—a principle of power, of growth, and of real freedom. It is a principle that all may acquire. And if it is not now in your possession, it can be obtained through earnest prayer to him who is the giver of all good gifts.
