No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF TRIAL

A Positive Influence

Trials, troubles, and sorrow are part of our common lot. And as one challenge ends, another seems to quickly take its place. Although God could eliminate our difficulties, he doesn't often do so, because he knows that trials are usually the best stimulus and discipline of celestial character.

What the Lord does give us is relief. When we seek his help, he gives us the strength to bear the burden: he lightens the load. He can make a fifty-pound sack feel like five pounds. And, thus, he is still able to accomplish his purposes. It's a principle best learned early in life.

Probably the worst kind of adversity is a life that's too easy, with too much security, because then we tend to drift and lose our way. There is wisdom in giving us the opportunity to rise above adversity, to try our souls through sorrow. Without adversity, there would be no test of strength, no developing of character, no growth of our personal powers. It's all part of our earthly education, just as the sufferings of the Savior were part of his.

The key to endurance is the development of a strong relationship with the Lord. It will bring stability and a quiet consistency into our lives, even in the face of tribulation. This religious commitment will consistently color our attitude toward everything that happens to us. We won't be shaken, overwhelmed, or frightened by every wind of change. Instead, our spiritual anchor will help insulate us against the buffetings of adversity.

In a positive sense, facing difficulty from time to time is healthy. It forces us to search our hearts. It brings renewed perspective and can provide valuable spiritual insights. It helps us keep our humility and preserves us from pride. It also teaches patience and promotes the deepest as well as the most exalted thought.

So, even though we may become discouraged at times from the obstacles and tests that come to us, we need to remember that the inner peace that comes from keeping God's commandments makes the yoke light. Sometimes that's a hard lesson to learn.
