No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Joy of Tribulation

When we reminisce, we usually remember the happy times. Happiness and the joy we take in living are the promontories from which we are able to appreciate the past and look to the future with hope.

But character and virtue are not shaped and perfected by pleasure alone. And although it may be hard for us in the moment of trial to admit its value, our lives are made whole not only by the life we enjoy but also by the living we suffer.

The nineteenth-century Scottish cleric Thomas Guthrie observed: "As in nature, and in the arts, so in grace: it is rough treatment that gives souls, as well as stones, their lustre. The more the diamond is cut, the brighter it sparkles; and in what seems hard dealing, God has no end in view but to perfect our graces. He sends tribulations, but tells us their purpose."

The apostle Paul told the Romans that the purpose of tribulations is that "tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope." (Romans 5:3-4.)

It is that hope which is most important and which may be most difficult in the moment of our tribulation. So it was for the pioneers who settled the valleys of Utah. Driven from their homes because of their faith, they marked the Mormon Trail to Utah with the graves of their dead. As historian Leonard Arrington remarked of that time, "Of the sixty-two babies delivered by midwife Patty Sessions in the fall and winter of 1846-1847, twenty-two died within a few months of birth."

Even the hymn "Come, Come, Ye Saints," written during the pioneer exodus across the American plains to the Intermountain West, anticipates the possibility of death rather than deliverance. But even in that moment of tribulation is hope:

And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! All is well! We then are free from toil and sorrow, too; With the just we shall dwell!

In spite of the hardships—perhaps because of them—that overland crossing has become an emblem of faith and courage that not only established civilization in the wilderness but also has inspired future generations and taught us the meaning and the truth of hope.

As it is with history, so it is with our lives: eventually, the tribulations pass away, leaving us with the goal for which we have suffered, leaving us with the promontories from which we can look back on the valleys and take joy in the distances we have come—and have yet to go. As the hymn also teaches:

But if our lives are spared again To see the Saints their rest obtain, Oh, how we'll make this chorus swell— All is well! All is well! On the Edge

In many climates in the northern hemisphere, we are on the edge of spring. It is so close that soon we'll see signs of life: sap rising within the trees; buds pushing through burnished soil; birds returning to build nests. It is a time when all that appears dead blossoms with new life.

How foolish it would be to take appearances of winter as sure evidence that there will be no spring, that all will be eternally dormant. Yet, that is often what we do to ourselves when we encounter life's darker moments. Disappointment, grief, or frustration may bear down on us with such fury that we see it as eternal, as an endless state from which there is no escape.

Perhaps that is why, of all the virtues, none is more needed than unwearying patience and steady endurance. No one is exempt from adversity. No one will pass through this existence without opening his or her doors to an unwelcome guest—heartache.

And life doesn't even offer us the graciousness of presenting our disappointments one at a time. Often they come piled upon each other until we can hardly recover. We seek for respite and find only more pressure. It is at those times that our inner resources are called upon in unparalleled ways.

Robert Louis Stevenson said, "For fourteen years I have not had a day of real health. I have wakened sick and gone to bed weary, yet I have done my work unflinchingly. I have written in bed and out of bed, . . . written in sickness, written torn by coughing, written when my head swam for weakness—and I have done it all for so long that it seems to me I have won my wager and recovered my glove. Yet the battle still goes on. . . . I was made for contest, and the Powers-That-Be have willed that my battlefield shall be the dingy, inglorious one of the bed and the medicine bottle."

The battle does go on, and the truer test of our nature will be what resources of patient endurance we can call upon in those trying hours. Sometimes, when we think we can't take it any more, it is only a matter of lasting five minutes longer. Sometimes it is only a matter of getting a truer, deeper perspective. Trial, however ferocious, is not eternal if endured well.

Despite appearances, winter has just about lost its hold for another season. Months earlier, preparations for new life were already underway beneath the frozen ground. We are on the very edge of spring.

In the winter of our discontent, when disappointments fly like snow flurries, we must remember there will be spring. We may be on the very edge of a brighter day. Now is not the time to give up, for it may be closer than we think.
