No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Overcoming the World

The eminent nineteenth-century historian Henry Adams professed himself to be an atheist. The reason, he said, was that his beloved sister had been seriously injured in a carriage accident. He said she was as fine and faithful a Christian woman as ever lived. She prayed and others prayed that her life would be spared; but, instead, she suffered a painful decline and died. Henry Adams said he could not believe in a God who either did not have the power to stop such suffering and death or had the power but chose not to use it.

Sadly, Adams's line of reasoning is shared by many others. Too often people have lost their faith because they felt the Lord could not or would not answer their justified requests.

We do not know all the reasons why some prayers seem answered in even miraculous fashion and others appear to go unheeded. Part of our confusion in these matters is simply what the Lord told the prophet Isaiah: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways." (Isaiah 55:8-9.)

Oftentimes, the Lord is acting on higher principles than we can understand or accept.

And there is another reason. We sometimes hold the Lord responsible for promises he never made. He has never promised that the way would be easy, painless, and comfortable for the righteous. Indeed, more often just the opposite is the case. The righteous have been imprisoned, persecuted, and sometimes martyred for their faith, while the wicked seemed to prosper. In wars, the casualties are not limited only to the guilty.

Even in natural disasters, which we often call "acts of God," the righteous are not always spared. Earthquakes, hurricanes, storms, and floods sweep away the faithful along with the unfaithful. Disease brings death to believers and unbelievers alike. We need to remember that the Lord has never promised that it would be otherwise.

Why, then, should we call upon God and strive to keep his commandments, if our faith cannot save us from the trials, troubles, and tragedies of the world? Because the Lord has promised us a greater blessing than merely protecting us from pain. His promise is that we can rise above whatever the world might inflict upon us. As Jesus told his disciples: "In the world ye shall have tribulation: But be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

No, God is not heedless of our suffering nor powerless to help us. But he has chosen a higher path of assistance. Instead of removing the obstacles, he often gives us the strength to overcome our trials and to grow within.

My ways are not your ways, he said, for my ways are higher than your ways. The greater promise of eternal joy exceeds any temporary relief from mortal pain.
