No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Highs and Lows of Life

Those who enjoy life know and understand that life is a process, not a destination. It's filled with peaks and valleys, highs and lows, good and bad. For some, like the apostle Paul, the struggle is often intense and dramatic. For most of us, the struggle is simply coping with the problems of daily living.

But into all of our lives come moments of difficult challenge. Times of death, divorce, serious illness, loss of a job, failure must be dealt with. Yet, we must also remember that there is enjoyment to be found in each day. Those struggling with the loss of a loved one often live in the future to avoid feeling the pain of the present. The rationale appears to make sense on a short-term basis, but living only for the future, without regard for the present, only prolongs the pain and suffering.

Our stay on earth is brief when measured in eternal terms, and so each day should be well spent. High and low times are as inevitable as the turning of the seasons and the tides. To try to keep them from our door is to shut out life itself. Rather, we should regard them for what they are—opportunities for growth. Only when we lose our perspective, our ability to cope and endure and enjoy the good things that come to us each day, do we fall behind in living. That's when our spirits begin to age.

Life is a process, and we need to stick with it. We're all human beings with the frailties of mortal life. The apostle Paul struggled in many ways. He fought to overcome and improve himself. He was troubled by the personal weaknesses he could not conquer. He had psychological burdens, believing he was the least of Christ's apostles. Yet, he endured and became one of the most powerful and effective teachers of the gospel. Through Paul, we learn that there is no such thing as instant perfection. It is not an overnight process. It, like all of our challenges, is a lifelong endeavor.

Maintaining balance in our lives will help us deal more effectively with life's ups and downs. Attaining a heightened level of spirituality will lift us back to higher elevations. And throughout the process, we must remember that we were meant to have joy. Joy is part of God's great plan and enriches the process of life that we experience each day.
