No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Living for Eternity

There is something incomprehensible, unsettling, almost maddening about this earthly existence. Here we are, surrounded by measureless oceans of space and infinite eons of time, while all about us there are signs that this mortal life is only temporary.

And yet, we continue to make little of it, refusing to consider the evidence, believing that things will always be as they are, that what we think important now will always be important: a man spends every waking hour at his chosen profession to succeed at last and then expire from exhaustion and high blood pressure; a woman focuses on fashion, ever changing her hair, makeup, and clothes in order to keep pace with the latest styles, only to discover that the deceased dress only once; another accumulates wealth and material possessions, then learns that the caravan of death allows no luggage.

The truth is that the worldly hopes men set their hearts upon are of little consequence to the eternities. Harsh words, for us, perhaps, but true words. But the lesson is not one of depression or surrender. The lesson of the eternities is to live to the point, to set priorities in life, making every moment yield its full measure of eternal value, accumulating that which does endure. All other activities are but frivolous props to the grand drama of souls along the ascending stairs of infinite time.

And these are some of the things that endure: the sweet love of husband and wife, authentic love developed over long decades of companionship and mutual service, love that not even death can dissolve; the affection of a mother for her children, unconditional love, without measure, without end; memories of home, of a faithful and dedicated father, of affectionate brothers and sisters, of a close and respectful family; and charity, acts of kindness, acts of sharing, deeds of self-denial for others' sake, offerings of time and substance for the poor and the weak.

Nothing eternal is lost in the divine scheme of the universe. All that charity, all that character, all that love can bind together is forever alive. As one writer penned:

Choose, then, the better part To live now for all eternity— Where truth and love embrace And time and space Are metered by the heart. The Balanced Life

As wayfaring strangers in this world, we find that life, like an athletic decathlon, requires a balanced effort. We must take part in many events in order to fulfill our potential. If we attempt to set records in any one event, we may fall far short in others. Only by approaching the many aspects of our lives with a sense of balance can we be truly successful.

If we spend too much, we're spendthrifts; but too little makes us stingy, and we're called misers. If we laugh too much, people think we're silly; if we don't laugh, people think we're dull. If we talk too much, we're overbearing; if we say too little, we're thought of as boring. Some of us eat too much; others, not enough. Some may sleep too much; others lack enough rest. Some ignore proper body care and conditioning; others almost worship the physical body.

Balance has application in everything we do. The ambitious executive may sacrifice marriage, family, friends, and church—the things that matter most in the long run—in order to achieve wealth, praise, and power. In this sidetracked condition, a person loses sight of the Savior's counsel, "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matthew 16:26.)

The Lord expects us to use wisdom and common sense. He counsels balance and moderation, thoughtfully applying all the truths we know, not emphasizing one at the expense of others.

We need the opportunity to play, and we benefit from hard work, but neither should overshadow our responsibilities to the family and to our spiritual development. Too much excitement at work or at play, like too much of anything, becomes addictive. It creates a situation in which the stimulus needs to be stronger and stronger in order to provide the thrills that have come to be thought of as an essential part of pleasure. Too much excitement undermines health and dulls the palate for every kind of pleasure.

Even in the practice of religion, we can be unbalanced. It's important that we do not concentrate our efforts in only one area while ignoring other equally important commitments. Prayer, scripture study, sacrifice, Christian service—all compete for portions of our time. The emphasis of one at the expense of another brings us short of the Savior's expectations.

We all struggle with problems and temptations, with excesses and deficiencies, with failures and successes. But, when life is balanced, the problems are less threatening, the temptations less attractive, the failures less painful. The balanced life provides never-ending opportunities for success, happiness, and meaningful satisfaction.
