No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

"The Impossible Dream"

In the musical drama Man of La Mancha, Don Quixote is both a serious and a comic character. He struggles in a world of fantasy and delusion to achieve virtues that are not deluded but real. And, in the process of his quest, he claims victory over doubt, derision, cynicism, and failed faith. He does it by pursuing "the impossible dream."

It is the paradox of Don Quixote that his world of fantasy is, in its way, more true than the world many of us call real. That might lead us to think the problem with our modern world is that there are too few windmills left standing, too few armored knights of the imagination to challenge and conquer. But we would be wrong in thinking so. The metaphors may have changed, but the challenges and opportunities still exist to steal courage and dignity out of the mundane experience.

We live in an age of communication. Data processing, artificial intelligence, networking, media news coverage, editorial comment—through the various "minisystems" of our communications we have linked ourselves into a "macrosystem," a larger system that has its own language, its own devices, its own view of the world. And that view may sometimes be confusing to us. Because we can now gather so much information so quickly, we have a tendency to accept information as fact, when it might yet be merely a point of view.

It was such "facts" that Don Quixote struggled against, because they were not evidences of the real world. The facts of history are forever being rewritten; the facts of litigation are always arguable; the facts of editorial viewpoint are always prejudiced.

Now, this does not diminish the importance of our communications, the good they do, the service they accomplish. Rather, it teaches us to be discerning in our view of what is real; it teaches us a point of view that both depends on communications and is capable of being reasonably suspicious of them.

Even as we speak, there are people, like Don Quixote, still jousting at the windmills of our world, refusing to accept the world as others see it, pushing the boundaries, broadening the horizons, teaching us that the world is not so small as we had believed—the possibilities are greater, the accomplishments more remarkable than we had dreamed.

In this world of possibilities, of faith, we may choose to cling to our technologies—or we may join the prophets and poets to find the truth that is encircled by the spinning arms of the windmills that await our challenge and lead us to our own impossible dreams.
