No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF LISTENING

Listen

Ours is an age of communication. Telephone wires hum with millions of voices. Satellites soar through the sky, reflecting words and pictures to the waiting radio speakers and television screens. Mailbags bulge with correspondence, and the ceaseless drone of human voices fills the air over every city.

The effective persuader is a powerful person in today's society, and communication is preached as a panacea for many of our problems. So, we are encouraged to improve our abilities to get our point across and to effectively state and support our position.

It is good to be able to articulate our views, but there is another communication skill that is equally valuable and vital to the world's well-being, one that may be lost in the babble of voices begging to be heard. That is the quiet and priceless art of listening.

The listening we are accustomed to today is often a faint shadow of the real thing. Bombarded as we are each day with hundreds of messages, we have learned to turn a semideaf ear to much of what we hear.

Effective listening, of course, is more than just being quiet. Done well it is an active and demanding mental and spiritual labor. To listen well demands our full attention not only to the words but to the inflections, expressions, body movements, the things left unsaid, and any other signals the person may be sending out.

Effective listening requires empathy, the ability to put ourselves in the position of those who are speaking to us, to feel as they feel.

Good listening demands understanding of others, their desires, their hopes, fears, and problems. We are always so quick to judge and so slow to understand.

Real listening would work miracles in this troubled world. If parents listened more to children and children, to parents; if the troubled and forlorn among us could find a sympathetic ear; if nations would stop hollering and threatening and listen to the heartfelt yearnings of each other's people—how different this world might be.

Perhaps in nothing do we need to learn to listen more than in our prayers. We cry unto the Lord, and then we cut off the communication, assuming that the prayer is over. But it may only have just begun. The ancient king of Israel, David, sang out such a prayer. He piled praise on praise and sang unto the Lord until a voice came to his heart and said, "Be still, and know that I am God." (Psalm 46:10.) That is good counsel yet.

Those who listen well will hear this comforting assurance and know that He is always there and always watching over us.
