No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Lord Also Listens

Listening has always been one of the most important aspects of mankind's communication. Even the Savior made reference to it. "He that hath ears to hear, let him listen." (Matthew 11:15.) And the apostle James counseled us to be "swift to hear, slow to speak." (James 1:19.)

But too often in conversation we find ourselves not really listening, merely waiting for another opportunity to speak. Someone said, "We have one mouth and two ears, use them accordingly."

How often do we say to others, Did I understand you correctly? Is this how you are feeling? Are these the reasons you believe as you do? Such questions asked in a sincere spirit of trying to understand can build trust and appreciation between people. And the same principles applied on an international scale can go a long way toward smoothing the friction between nations.

Effective listening involves more than the ears. William Butler Yeats wrote, "I hear it in the deep heart's core." We need to develop that kind of empathy for each other—consideration and compassion that will allow each of us to share our inner feelings and thereby help us lift each other's burdens.

How fortunate we are when we have a friend to whom we can confide our thoughts. And what a great service we perform for others when we really listen with understanding and love. Unfortunately, such listeners are rare in today's busy world. Because of that, many of us go along day after day feeling misunderstood, unappreciated, and unheard.

But we need not feel alone and isolated, for each of us is free at any time to speak our innermost thoughts and desires in prayer to the one perfect being who can hear and understand our needs. We need not wait for some great crisis to cry unto the Lord. Our everyday affairs are worthy of his consideration. We may not find our prayers answered in the way we expect or according to our timetable, but we are assured unequivocally that no humble prayer will be put on hold. Prayers are heard.

And so, we are counseled to listen—listen to others, listen to the Lord—for we are comforted in knowing that he also listens to us.
