No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Hearing Him

In war as well as in peace we often hear about the suffering Christian as if the object of religion were merely to learn to endure well. Being cast into the fire refines the character, we are told. Pain inclines us to God. These ideas are true as far as they go, but to dwell too long on them misses the point. Many of us on this mortal journey suffer far more than we need. We are choked with fear; we imagine negative events that will never happen; we tremble with occasional feelings of worthlessness, though many of these burdens could be carried away if we would just listen to the Lord.

His voice speaks peace even amidst the jumble of daily events. He calms the troubled waters. He would have us taste and then drink deep from a well of joy. Our Father, who knows us intimately, hears the silent yearnings of our souls and, because he knows the beginning from the end, does not let a single detail escape his notice. If not even a sparrow can fall without his regard, do you think your heart can break without his noticing?

He does not choose for us to suffer. In fact, the very object of suffering is to teach us to end all suffering, move far beyond it in our inclinations and our actions, until it is only a memory. The Lord would have us drink nectar, not vinegar; teach us in sunshine, not in rain. But we prolong our suffering by closing our ears and hearts against his assurances and his direction. And, what's worse, we may even embrace suffering, justifying it as good medicine for the soul.

When our souls are clamoring for relief, sometimes all we need do is go and listen. But listening is not always easy or obvious. When the Lord spoke to Elijah, "a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces . . . ; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice." (1 Kings 19:11-12.) And the Lord spoke in a quiet "still small voice."

Once, when He visited another people, His voice was heard again. "They heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center." (3 Nephi 11:3.)

Pierced to the center with sweetness and calm—that is what we can be, if we will stop amid the clamor and hear the Lord, if we will just listen to the still, small voice.
