No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

"Be Still . . ."

A class of noisy German schoolboys were disciplined by their teacher and told to add together all of the numbers from 1 to 100. The boys grabbed their slates and began frantically to scribble numbers, hoping to quickly complete the task. But one boy gazed off into space for some time before he began to write.

His was the only right answer. The teacher asked how he had done it, to which question he replied, "I thought there might be some shortcut, and I found one: 100 plus 1 is 101; 99 plus 2 is 101; 98 plus 3 is 101 and, if I continue the series all the way to 51 plus 50, I have 101 fifty times, which is 5050."

The boy was Karl Friedrich Gauss, who grew up to be the great mathematician of the nineteenth century.

It was not just his genius that solved the problem but his method. He stopped for a moment of quiet thought. Most of us are like the other schoolboys. We leap at tasks, thinking we can be efficient. But too often the end of all our effort is disappointing. On a larger scale, we often find that life doesn't have the meaning we thought it would.

What do we do if we arrive at that place in life when there is too much confusion and too little satisfaction? It's doubtful we'll get much help from modern society. We live in a time when too much comes at us too fast, when we confuse speed with direction, hurry for insight. Everywhere there is noise.

But the Lord has some wisdom for us. "Be still," he says. "Be still and know that I am God." (D&C 101:16.) Strange advice for a time of frantic hubbub, to be still.

But what happens when we are still is that we remove the noise from outside; and then, if we wait long enough, we begin the more important task of removing the noise from the inside—the cacophony in our heads. In that calm, in that quiet, a new voice emerges. It is a deeper wisdom that comes from the Lord. It is a whisper reminding us that we know more than we think—that beneath the welter of emotions, there is understanding of what is important. There is wholeness, silent knowledge, the resonance of reality.

To be still requires discipline. It means, instead of leaping at every day in a frenzy, we choose moments to sit aside from all the others. These moments are time simply to be still, to connect again with the Lord and with ourselves. Then, when we move into the field of action, we move with clarity. Our lives are more centered, and we find greater satisfaction in what life has to offer.
