No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Receiving the Gifts

Every time we see someone blow a dog whistle, we are reminded that the world is alive with sounds we do not hear. There are symphonies of sound beyond our senses. Our spectrum of hearing is limited, for we do not hear sounds too low, too high, too soft—perhaps the most beautiful sounds in the universe.

Our sight, too, is dull. Things blur beyond a limited distance. We lose texture and meaning. The colors of the feathers of a bird on the wing are subdued to a mere brown or gray. Even stars in the sky, which burn with an intensity of brightness, disappear before our sight.

How much we cannot receive through our limited senses. But, even sadder is failing to use the sense we have to receive the great gifts given to us. We might ask the Lord to save our souls from being so stooped by care that we cannot receive the gifts of this earth, the jubilant songs of love, or the chill of the first winter frost. We want hearts wide open to experience the bounties of this life.

We might plead, as did Bartimaeus, when Christ asked him what He could do for him: "Lord, that I might receive my sight." (Mark 10:51.)

The Lord gives many gifts for those who will receive them.

Receive the gift of life, with its stained glass myriad of experience—some pieces bright and colorful, others dismal and dark but necessary to the beauty of the entire picture.

Receive the breadth of his physical creation, where he lavishes us with infinite variety, with not one kind of tree but a thousand, not one kind of rose but flowers of every color.

Receive the intimacy of his caring, a love that penetrates to the level of our most personal need in a universe that, at first glance, appears vast and indifferent.

Receive his challenges for us with trust that the Lord knows what he is doing in our individual lives. What may appear as unendurable suffering may be the very thing that transforms us into a person capable of greater joy.

Those who have most praise for the Lord are those who have fully learned to receive his gifts, who understand the meaning of the gifts of Christmas. If we can trust the Lord enough to throw open our hearts to experience, we will learn that his gifts are good.
