No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF LEARNING

To Be Truly Educated

Today we reflect on the meaning of a couplet from the English poet Alexander Pope. The short rhyme talks about the necessity for a complete education and reads like this: "A little learning is a dangerous thing; Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring."

Pope refers here to the mythological fountain of knowledge and wisdom. He suggests that a small drink of learning is not only insufficient but also dangerous, that a little education is worse than none at all. He also advises us to "drink deep" from the well of knowledge, to become more than superficially educated, to become truly educated.

What is that? The truly educated man or woman is one who has schooled the whole person, not only the mind but the heart and the hand as well.

First the mind. Knowledge is mind, and mind is knowledge—and the great mind seeks knowledge in all directions. To truly educate the mind is to expand it widely along as much of the spectrum of knowledge as possible, to make it well-proportioned and balanced. The mathematician, though he or she may be a genius at numbers, is not well schooled without a corresponding foundation in the humanities. And the poet may be gifted in rhyme and meter but cannot be well-versed without an understanding of the physical world of physics, chemistry, and natural science.

And the heart? To train the whole person is to discipline the heart as well as the mind, for feelings guide the mind.Napoleon was an intellectual without a heart. He was a giant of strategy and logic but a pygmy of affection and human kindness. To discipline the heart is to develop patience, temperance, charity, and to live the Golden Rule.

And then the hand. To be truly educated, one must also train the hand, for wisdom includes the proper and efficient application of knowledge. To think and to feel are authentic earmarks of education, but to do is the sign of true culture. The man or woman who both possesses and applies knowledge—who knows how to lay concrete, to play a violin concerto, to bake an award-winning cherry pie—is genuinely educated.

So, Alexander Pope was right. A little learning is a dangerous thing, but true education, which includes educating the mind, the heart, and the hand, is a blessed thing when we drink deep from life's Pierian spring.
