No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Study Is the Best Teacher

The 1980s could be called the decade of social inspection. During this period, we have taken a closer look at the social and governmental services we provide each other. And we have demanded of such services greater efficiency, more productivity, and less cost.

Part of this trend has focused on public education. Here we have begun to suspect that modern education has become too diverse, too fragmented, to accomplish the basic objectives of literacy. Allegations have been made that public education has failed a large portion of our population, that many individuals complete public school still lacking the rudiments of learning—such basic skills as reading and writing.

To what extent these allegations may be true is subject for debate. We know that the system has resulted in the education of millions, but we also know that others have not benefited very much from it.

The call for educational reforms to alleviate diagnosed weaknesses in the system is a good and positive step forward. But perhaps the system is not totally to blame. Part of the guilt for our alleged lack of achievement lies within ourselves. Perhaps, along with educational reforms, we ought to make individual reforms—reforms in the way we perceive learning, reforms in the attitudes we generate in our children about education, reforms in our expectations about what the system can do.

Maybe it is time to readmit this basic fact that education is active, not passive, and that, regardless of the system's efficiency in teaching, the primary responsibility for learning still lies with the student.

Part of the problem might be that we expect to be educated in the same way we expect to be served at an expensive restaurant: we want our prepared meal delivered to our table on a platter by an accommodating waiter; we want it to be palatable and tasty; and, most of all, we want the whole process to be entertaining.

But what is true of dining out is not true of education. Learning requires effort and active study; learning demands self-motivation and struggle; learning is, at times, difficult, frustrating, and unentertaining. Learning has its rewards, but they usually come only after the pain and effort of study.

So, to whatever degree the school system shares in the blame, it should be altered. But this eternal principle of individual learning must never be forgotten: study is still the best teacher.
