No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Of Books and Libraries

With our affluence and abundance, we sometimes forget the value of all we have. We flip a switch, and there is light; we turn a car key, and there is motion. Decades in the development, these miracles are now ours for the asking.

We also may enter a library and choose from among the thousands, even millions, a book—a single book—easy to come by, easy to replace, inexpensive, even cheap. Do we sometimes forget or take for granted the value of our books?

But think on this, you who see only paper and print between the cardboard and glue of a book cover—how great a legacy a book, how great the sacrifice, not of paper only but of thought, of feeling, of life itself: each small collection of thin papers represents a man's, a woman's, life, a life of research, of musing, perhaps of agony.

Each book is a page from the lifelong diary of mankind—from the page that Plato wrote: of the Golden Age of Greek thought; from the page of Shakespeare's prolific pen: of human drama and tragedy; from the page of Einstein's flaming thought: of space and time and stars. And yet another page, from bygone prophets: God's word preserved for us in sacred writ.

No, these are not just books, but living men and women, embalmed forever between the hallowed covers of a book, precious lifeblood of master spirits, given a new life beyond the old to touch us with their living thought.

A well-written book can heal the sick mind, provide food for the spirit, drink for the soul. They are friends to the friendless, counselors to the ignorant, recreation and travel to the homebound, and comfort for the desolate. Books are great levelers of mankind, making the same knowledge and wisdom accessible to all.

And because of the value of books, libraries, then, are not just buildings but sacred shrines, ancestral catacombs, where rest the still-breathing creations of disembodied souls.

A library. Here preserved among the countless shelves, the priceless treasury of human thought. Here we may converse with saints and sages, with the hoary knights and kings of ages past. Here we may sit among the Athenian court to hear the last exquisite speech of Socrates, ride with the armies of Alexander the Great, search for faraway galaxies among the distant reaches of space.

In symbolic humility and gratitude, perhaps we should mentally remove our shoes, we who enter a library—for we walk on hallowed ground.
