No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Asking the Right Questions

Often in life we're concerned with giving or getting the right answer. But we must also be cognizant of the right question. While on the road to Damascus, Saul, who later became known as the apostle Paul, was asked by the Lord, "Why persecutest thou me?" That question changed his life and made him ask in turn, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:4, 6.)

What a mighty change takes place when we begin to ask the right questions.

On the other hand, how much of this world's trouble is caused from asking the wrong questions? Michael Novak, a distinguished teacher and author, commented on repeated studies of poverty. He said, "Trying to answer the question, 'what causes poverty?' is a waste of time. Once you answer a question like that you know how to make poverty. The question to ask . . . is what creates wealth, then use those answers to help the poor." That is a subtle turn of mind but a vital one for the world's future.

It has been said that a problem well defined is half solved. Likewise, a good question contains a portion of the answer already.

Years ago, citizens of a small town gathered to decide how to protect their water supply pipe. The pipe bridged a small gully, and the children loved to balance themselves and walk across it on the way to and from school. This activity would bend and break the pipe. So the stern citizens suggested wrapping it with barbed wire or running a small charge of electricity through it, or at greater expense they could build a large fence to protect it. At length, one kindly older man in the back raised his hand and said, "Why don't we just get a stronger pipe that won't break when the children walk on it?"

As it is with world problems and civic concerns, so it is with us.

How often do we look for a better cure for our illnesses when the real question is how do we give up unhealthy habits?

How often have we searched for ways to change our friends or family when the more pertinent question is how to change ourselves to be a better influence on others?

How often do we pray to the Lord to help us fulfill our desires when our prayer should be as Paul's, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?"

Certainly we need answers to today's problems, but we can't get those answers until we ask the right questions. Then we can claim the promise of the Lord, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally . . . ; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.)
