No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Eternal Challenge

It seems to be an ironic age we live in. We have harnessed the power of the sun, but we cannot clear the rain from the windows of the world. We are learning so much about outer space and so little about inner needs. We have put men on the moon and sent satellites toward the stars, but we have yet to bring peace to our own planet.

Perhaps in our pursuit of peace and justice we should adopt the principles and procedures we use in science. Albert Einstein spent a lifetime studying and pondering the nature of the universe. He distilled his findings into an elegantly simple mathematical statement: "E equals mc"; that is, energy equals mass times the velocity of light squared.

A child could learn to recite that equation in a matter of minutes. Yet tucked within that small equation are the principles that have helped unlock the energy of the atom and restructure our understanding of the universe. Einstein's laws of physics have been the basis for many of the spectacular scientific and technological advances of our century.

But it is not by babbling recitations and incantations of "E equals mc" that this progress has been made. Scientists, engineers, and technicians have taken the principles embodied in that equation and applied them to the problems they faced. And they have been successful.

In the world of manners and morals, of ethics and values, there are also simply stated but profound principles. They, too, can be easily memorized and endlessly tossed off in conversation, sermons, and preachments. And when they are, they have as little effect on us as repeating "E equals mc" has on the material world. But when these principles of human relations are applied in our lives, they change our world more profoundly than even Einstein changed the universe.

The basis of these principles is simply this: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind" and "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." As Jesus said, "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:37, 39-40.)

When we begin to understand and apply these principles in the same measure we have used the principles of science, we will begin to solve the most important problems we face: the problems of attaining peace and brotherhood.
