No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF GROWTH

Developing a Life Plan

Aristotle thought an unplanned life was not very productive, because the individual didn't know what he or she was trying to do—or why; didn't know where he or she was going—or how to get there. Aristotle had a point worthy of consideration: we need to think about the future.

We need a good plan to rid life of all the jumble and confusion. Many of us live from day to day, concentrating on the pleasure of the moment, caring little for the effort that distant goals demand. There's a natural tendency to be self-interested, but most of us don't pursue our own best interests. Instead, we follow illusions, momentary desires, mutually conflicting wants. We're directed by whim rather than purpose, and we seek pleasure rather than perfection. We're influenced too much by the world around us, a world that too often chooses short-term gratification over long-term fulfillment.

We may also find that moral errors are the consequence of shortcuts, attempts to get results in the wrong way. No result of any importance can be achieved in an instant.

The younger we are, the less likely it is that we have a plan for living. When we're young, our goals seem to be immediate ones—things to do, things to get, things to be enjoyed today.

As we grow older and more purposeful, we try to fit our various purposes together into a coherent scheme for living. We learn to plan. We learn we can't do it all at once, and we learn to be flexible in changing conditions to fit our most important goals.

Life offers many opportunities to choose, and every choice we make brings consequences. Not every plan is the right plan; and wrong ones, if adopted, will lead to an unhappy and unfulfilled life. We all want happy consequences, and we all want to succeed. But some forget that success is not a single achievement. There will always be new choices to face and new consequences to consider. Success is always possible, but it's never final. It must constantly be renewed. As a general rule of thumb, things gained quickly can be lost quickly.

Perhaps the great paradox in developing a life plan is that we never really gain control over our own mind and will until we ultimately surrender ourselves to something higher. The beginning of true self-control comes in giving ourselves to others. It is a lesson and a promise that have been taught by the masters for centuries—that only when we lose our lives for others will we find our own happiness and fulfillment. Planning for success in life always involves service to others.
