No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Opportunities for a New Year

This is the time when the year stretches ahead with delicious possibilities, every day yet untouched by grief or shadow or the ashes of broken dreams. In the first of January, anything is still possible. Resolutions may be accomplished, old habits discarded. It is a time to kindle new fires, hope, dream, renew our weariest parts.

The opportunities that will come this year will never be presented in quite the same way again. There is no time like now to cast aside fear and exhaustion and become the person we want to be.

The story is told of the artist Dante Gabriel Rossetti who one day was speaking with an elderly man in his studio. The man brought examples of his paintings and drawings and begged for Rossetti's candid opinion of them. Rossetti shook his head and reluctantly said he could see no value in them whatsoever.

Then the man drew from beneath his coat another set of sketches and spread them out before Rossetti. These, explained the man, were the work of a young student. Rossetti remarked at once that these sketches portrayed a keen and sensitive talent. He was delighted and declared without question that this young student would distinguish himself.

Then the old man said, "I was that student."

What is that gulf that lies between what we may be and what we are? Some say that the problem is in low aim. We underestimate ourselves and settle for less than we could.

Yet, probably for more of us, the reason we don't achieve what we could is a problem of attrition. We wear out. The dream that glows before us like a light upon a hill dims and flickers with time. We are distracted by events around us and cannot focus upon the distant light when we turn back again.

And when our light goes out, we comfort ourselves with faint compensation. We say we've become more realistic, we see things more clearly, we understand our limitations.

Yet, there is a deep stirring within when we see someone who is brave enough to give all. As the poet Florence Ripley Mastin wrote:

I cannot help but love the knight who goes, Unchampioned, derided by his foes And friend, to seek the white star of his dream In the black night. He only sees the gleam; And heeding neither laughter nor the sneers Of sane complacency, his course he steers Into the starless skies.

With a new year stretching ahead, may we steer a course guided by that gleam, the gleam that leads us to all that is possible.
