No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

for Healthful Living

The invigorating activities of springtime seem to be a natural reminder for us to alter and improve our physical actions. The annual renewal of nature that comes in the spring is a catalyst that encourages us to consider improving our own physical fitness. It encourages us to tailor a program of daily exercise for our own age and circumstance. We need to remember that both mind and body are expressions of life; they are parts of the whole. Bodily vigor becomes mental and moral vigor and is therefore essential to our happiness.

Scientists studying the effect of exercise on the mind have found that it brings significant improvement in learning, memory, morale, speed of recall, and intellectual capacity. It also reduces depression and anxiety.

Physical fitness is the best antidote for fatigue. Repeatedly it has been demonstrated that physical activity at the end of a trying day brings a degree of freshness and renewed energy that nothing else can equal.

For many of us, good health is appreciated only when it slips from our grasp. When it does, we quickly realize its importance, for that personal state of physical and mental well-being makes possible many of the things we enjoy in life.

The body, like any other machine, tends to "rust" with disuse. It needs exercise to keep it running smoothly. It's a fact that a fit person uses 20 percent less energy for any movement than one who is out of shape. The list goes on. Daily exercise helps relieve tension, helps improve sleep, gives us zest for life and courage to tackle problems.

The Lord, too, advocates physical as well as spiritual strength, a healthy body as well as a sound mind. The apostle said, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?" (1 Corinthians 3:16.) And we've been admonished to "retire to [our] bed early, that [we] may not be weary; arise early, that [our] bodies and [our] minds may be invigorated." (D&C 88:124.)

Every game has its rules and skills. There are rules for the game of physical well-being as well. If we learn and practice them, they'll give us added years of healthful living.
