No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Self-Mastery

The new year always brings cheerful optimism and a renewed commitment to our personal philosophies of life. It means new beginnings, and it means making resolutions to improve ourselves and our circumstances.

Some of these commitments are broken before we turn the first page of the new calendar. Others are tempered from the initial new year fervor—especially as that fervor relates to the self-discipline of appetites and physical well-being. It's just too easy to settle back into comfortable routines. We're told we need fifty consecutive days of any activity before it becomes a habit. A hundred days is better. Two hundred days assures success.

Of course, many do achieve the goals they set at the beginning of each new year. They improve their lives. Often such individuals determine their course corrections quietly and privately, without fanfare.

The options for improvement are many and varied, limited only by personal vision and resolve. Unfortunately, one of life's greatest paradoxes is that nearly everyone wants to improve his or her circumstances, but hardly anyone wants to improve himself or herself. Self-improvement, increased self-discipline, the establishment of strong values and standards in our lives—all are essential and should be lifelong pursuits.

At the root of all important goals is self-mastery. It has a positive effect on all aspects of our lives. Self-mastery produces a life that is in harmony with individual beliefs and principles—a life that displays congruent and consistent behavior.

Congruent and consistent behavior is the key to happiness and success. That means being yourself at all times, understanding and accepting your own values, and not changing your behavior every time you find yourself in a different environment. If you present different masks for different situations and people, the result is usually inner conflict. Better to display congruent behavior and avoid any disruptive inner harmony, which drains us of emotional energy and blurs our sense of direction and purpose in life.

Living a consistent life—being loyal to ourselves—is the key to success and inner peace as well as to our physical well-being. Living a consistent life begins with self-mastery, and it is a habit worth pursuing as the new year unfolds.
