No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

What Is Man?

"What is man that thou art mindful of him?" wrote the Psalmist. "For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour." (Psalm 8:5.) David's question, penned many centuries ago, seems equally relevant today. Despite our vast increase in knowledge of medicine, psychology, the world, and the universe, we are still as awestruck over man's potential as was David.

Everything we learn about the human mind and its capacities opens broad new vistas of things yet to be learned. The brain has always been a baffling subject of research and speculation. Ancient philosophers pictured it veiled in mystic secrecy. Scientists of the Industrial Revolution described the brain as a complicated clockwork mechanism or as a living loom, weaving its fabrics of thoughts and feelings.

In our day, the human brain is compared with a computer, but experts are quick to point out that even our most sophisticated computer is little more than clockwork compared to the ability of a person's mind.

The human powers of creativity are incredibly complicated. How is it possible to take twenty-six letters of an alphabet and create a Shakespearean sonnet, twelve musical tones and turn them into Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, or a palette of color into Michelangelo's scenes on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?

The depth of empathy and compassion shown in the lives of such people as Mother Teresa in India or Albert Schweitzer in Africa are uniquely human and reflect a spark of divinity in the human character.

The human mind, body, and spirit are the most wondrous creations of God. But perhaps even more intriguing than what we are is the question of what we may become. No work of all God's creations was endowed with such promise as was man. The Bible records, "God created man in his own image." (Genesis 1:27.)

Jesus spoke of our potential for perfection when he encouraged his followers, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) We are, of course, far from that perfection, but we are apparently capable of infinite improvement. That should give us inspiration for our own lives and respect for each of our brothers and sisters in the great family of God. As we help each other rise to our potential, we will begin to understand the answer to David's profound question, "What is man?"
