No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

"Climb Every Mountain"

Perhaps the greatest tragedy of life is stagnation. All else is bearable: poverty can be overcome, ill health can be endured while the mind is strong, and time erases personal hurts and misfortunes. But stagnation destroys beyond repair: it brings meaningful life to an end, makes happiness impossible, ravages thought and intelligence, sabotages creativity.

Nature herself has issued the decree and placed a curse on all inactivity: that pond where motion has ceased becomes a stagnant and salty marsh, devoid of life; that species which fails to adapt and develop with changing conditions is soon extinct.

The same law of progress is applied to human life: where motion ceases, desolation begins. Our mental, physical, and spiritual well-being are dependent upon this very principle. All withers and wastes without growth. Thus, progress is not an extravagance but a necessity, for he who stands still is going backwards.

We have forgotten the very principle of our creation and birth if we have forgotten how to grow. We were born to grow, to reach, to develop continually.

But this is philosophy, and philosophy is less painful than reality. The reality is that each of us chooses to stagnate to some degree. We may remain at our place of employment long after development, learning, and enjoyment have ceased. Words such as security, tenure, and pay scales keep us there, while words such as fulfillment, happiness, and achievement slide into our past.

We might obtain a college degree or other mark of educational attainment and then cease formal learning altogether, only to learn that it was not the reaching of the objective that gave us joy but its pursuit.

Ponder life, think on happiness, recall its place in your day-to-day activity—in business, in marriage, in the raising of children, at school—and you will discover that progress and development, challenge and struggle, have been synonymous with happiness.

To be in continual motion: learning, finding, expanding—to watch ourselves grow: minute by minute, day by day, year by year—to pursue one's potential, catching the scent of what we may become—here is the essence of a life well lived.

We can fail at what we strive for, but we must not fail to strive. Once a summit is reached, we must scan the horizon for other lofty heights to conquer, until, as the eons turn to eternity, we have climbed every mountain.
