No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Parable for Thought

We are all creatures of our God and King, and this is the right time of year to acknowledge it. It's time to give thanks for the good things of life, to resolve to become more worthy recipients, to examine priorities and objectives, to resolve problems and improve personal circumstances.

The Lord has given each of us special strengths and abilities. Many are embryonic, needing to be developed. Some we are not even aware of, because we prefer the familiar activities we know best. But God wants us to seek our hidden talents and use them, lest they wither and die from lack of use.

Recall the Savior's well-known parable, as told in Matthew: "And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one." He who had five and he who had two doubled their talents, and the Lord said, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant." (Matthew 25:15, 21.) But the one who did nothing with his talent had it taken away.

We must develop our God-given talents. We must explore and try new things. It may be in the pursuit of professional opportunity. Or we may polish our talents in religious endeavors. Or we may simply exercise our skills for our own enjoyment and fulfillment. But whatever our talents, we must develop them or lose them. A physical skill will become awkward if we don't keep it sharp. If we fail to use any muscle, that muscle will grow flabby. If we never use that foreign language with which we had a brief encounter, we will soon forget even the little we knew. If we read nothing but trivial books and listen to nothing but trivial music, we will lose interest in good books and good music.

And what is true of physical and aesthetic and intellectual talents is also true of spiritual talents such as faith, and love, and friendship. If we fail to listen for and accept the guidance of the Holy Spirit, then we will soon become quite unable to recognize the prompting when it comes. That is what happened to the scribes and pharisees. They had so long refused God's counsel that they were unable to recognize it.

And so, as we set goals for another year, let us remember the parable of the talents and apply that message to our new endeavors. As Tennyson's text for a New Year's anthem suggests, let us:

Ring out the old; ring in the new. Ring, happy bells, across the snow. The year is going; let him go. Ring out the false; ring in the true. Developing Our Potential

The potential of each human being is usually greater than the product of our lives. It is generally accepted that most of us go through our lives only partially aware of the full range of our abilities. Why? Well, it may be that we lack the courage to take risks, the courage to risk failure. Successful businessman Ted J. Balestreri once told a group of young scholars that the reason for his success was that he wasn't afraid to fail; in fact, he did fail many times.

A primary virtue of formal education is that it requires us to test ourselves in a variety of activities that may not be of our own choosing—at which time we might fail. Education is a lifelong endeavor; but, when we're on our own, we tend to confine ourselves to the things we do well and to avoid challenges we once failed or never tried.

We also need to free ourselves from the web of social pressure that makes us spend so much time asking ourselves, "What will people say?" or social situations that make us compromise our principles and beliefs because "everybody's doing it."

One of life's paradoxes is that nearly everyone wants to improve his or her circumstances, but hardly anyone wants to improve himself or herself, or at least take the risk to do so. Self-improvement, increased self-discipline, the establishment of strong values and standards in our lives are all essential and should be lifelong pursuits.

In trying to expand our abilities, we should not overlook the spiritual strength and potential that lies within us. A careful nurturing of our spiritual nature will help unfold many dormant talents.

The scriptures tell us of the need to make the Savior and the things of the Spirit our cornerstone in order to deal effectively with the inevitable stresses and trials of life. We are told, "it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that [we] must build [our] foundation . . . , a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

How plain and direct—a guaranteed, risk-free prescription for success. Yet many have "not prosper[ed], but were afflicted and smitten" because of "their boastings in their own strength." (Helaman 4:13.)

Yes, the Lord will help us in all our endeavors, both spiritual and temporal, and he will help us become more aware of the untapped resources within us if we will only call upon his holy name and make him an integral part of our lives.
