No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Personal Investment Program

Much has been written about financial investment programs. Stocks and bonds, tax shelters, money markets, and savings accounts have all been extolled as methods of adding to our financial assets and as ways to survive the hardships of economic difficulty.

There is wisdom in this advice. Developing and expanding whatever resources we have not only hedge against potential uncertainty but also adhere to the Christian precept of improvement. The parable of the talents, wherein the scripture praises those individuals who expanded on their assets through wise investment, expresses the divine principle of eternal progression.

In a very real sense, the need for a wise investment program applies as much to the resources of the soul as to material possessions. Indeed, whatever we add to ourselves—to our emotional, physical, intellectual, and spiritual assets—is safer and easier to hold onto than any monetary interest.

True, sometimes an investment in ourselves is more difficult to make than an investment of a financial nature. No doubt we have already broken some of our New Year's resolutions for self-improvement. Many of us wanted to lose weight; others resolved to finish a college degree or vocational training program; some determined to play a musical instrument; others decided to work on Christian attributes such as patience or personal charity.

Regardless of the setbacks or discouragements in our personal investment program, however, this truth is unalterable: that which we invest in ourselves pays eternal dividends, dividends that cannot be stolen, lost, or devalued. And that which we fail to invest in ourselves is wasted, forever lost in the imaginary realm of good intentions and wishful thinking.

Increasing the assets of our character adds to our immortal personality, is inseparable from us, becomes what we are, endures to the infinite reaches of existence. These investments receive interest, have received interest, and shall receive interest in the unshakable order of the universe forever.
