No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF CHANGE

Change and Permanence

Life is a rhythm of change and permanence. Change, because we measure everything in mortal minutes, and time is constantly changing. So much about us seems to be in a state of fluctuation. And then permanence. While much is always changing, we value that which doesn't. Constancy gives us security. We look for it in relationships, in philosophies, in the traditions that bind the past to the future.

Change and permanence. We are made to need and appreciate both, and the earth reflects our need: the waves, changing and unchanging; the seasons, earth yielding to cold and then to warm; change within a constant cycle, a refreshment to our souls.

But too much can be harmful. To exaggerate the pleasures either of change or of permanence in our lives can do us harm. Too much change gives us an appetite for novelty, a need for something in our lives that is never fully satisfied. The very nature of the pursuit guarantees diminishing returns and can bring such tragedies as infidelity in marriage, inconstancy in friendship, or ineffectiveness in completing daily responsibilities.

Those who become addicted to the novelty of change become slaves to the whims of the world. C.S. Lewis said that the Lord wants men to ask very simple questions: Is it righteous? Is it prudent? Is it possible? But if men ask, Is it in accordance with the general movement of our time, or is this the way that history is going? then they will neglect the relevant questions.

On the other hand, those who become too attached to permanence can stagnate, dig deep grooves for themselves beyond which they cannot see. Individually, these are they who take a rigid position and cannot move from it, who are afraid to try new things, who cannot nor dare not risk or try. These are they who considered their progression sufficient years ago and have remained petrified in place ever since. Organizations that dwell on permanence are those that say, "This is the way we've always done it" or "if it isn't broken, don't fix it," not realizing the thing that broke was their ability to change. They fear innovation, quash new ideas, penalize risk takers. Such intransigence, either in companies or individual lives, results in regression, not progression.

Change and permanence. They are two of life's great pleasures and opportunities, but we must always strive to keep them in proper balance.
