No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

From Seedlings to Sunflowers

Despite our best efforts to slow it down, time moves gently on, immutable and unstoppable. The second hand completes its circle, and a minute is gone; with full circle, the minute hand counts out an hour; and the full sweep of the hour hand brings another day to its close. On and on, each sunrise blending quietly into each sunset. Months, years, decades pass swiftly into the past, and into oblivion—so swiftly, in fact, that the present hardly seems real. The present—that fast-moving, evasive butterfly that forever eludes our nets until it is gone, until life itself is gone.

And our children—how fast they grow, how soon the time is gone. From seedlings to sunflowers, almost overnight: the little girl with pigtails bouncing across her back as she races across the lawn in search of dandelions and other priceless treasures is soon the adolescent, in search of other treasures—of boys, of close friends, and, most of all, of self. From there to womanhood is only a moment. And the little boy, with a butch haircut, in muddy, worn-out tennis shoes, is soon the teenager—still chasing, but now it's girls, and cars, and, most of all, life itself. From there to manhood is only an instant.

Childhood. So much to learn, so little time to do it. But time enough, if the present moment is captured, if the day with our children is not allowed to slip away, if we hold as tightly as we can to each second, each minute, each hour with our children.

Yesterday is gone; we cannot call it back. Tomorrow is unborn; we cannot call it into being. It is today that we have. It is only now that we can act. And it is the moment—the present—that counts with children. All can wait but the children. Let the newspaper remain unread, let others spend an extra hour at the office, leave the television off for a while—it all can wait. But the bedtime stories, the romps on the living room floor, the making of doll houses, the Little League games, the piano recitals, the fishing trips, the school plays—these, the precious days of youth that we share with our children and grandchildren, cannot wait. For almost overnight, the seedlings have turned to sunflowers.
