No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Principle of Progress

With the new year comes also renewed hope—hope that this time we can be better, do better, live better. And, gratefully, one of life's great truths is that we can. We jest about broken resolutions, but the grand purpose for our very existence is change. Inherent in the seed is the flower. Every sunrise means a sunset. Change is a part of every minute of our life, and nothing says we have to do everything the same way we did it last year. Our weaknesses do not have to be perpetual.

But to be renewed, we have to understand the principle of progress. It is faith. If we did not believe the seed would grow, we would never plant it. The violin tune that the child struggles and stumbles over eventually becomes the intricate sonata beautifully played. The runner who is breathless at a mile can finally make it through the final line of a marathon.

It is faith that brings these transformations. Faith in oneself, of course, but of a far more lasting effect is faith in the Lord's love for us. He loves us in a way that may not always be comfortable. His love is something far more stern and splendid than mere kindness. Kindness asks only that its object not suffer. Love demands far more.

As C. S. Lewis said, "We may wish, indeed, that we were of so little account to God that He left us alone to follow our natural impulses—that He would give over trying to train us into something so unlike our natural selves."

But God's love for man is greater than we have for ourselves. It might be analogous to an artist's love for his work. "We are," Lewis said, "in very truth, a Divine work of art, something that God is making, and therefore, something with which He will not be satisfied until it has a certain character."

The Lord loves us so much, then, that he not only asks our change into someone higher and better but will often instigate it for our own benefit. "And if men come unto me," said the Lord in one scripture, "I will show unto them their weakness. . . . if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

So, with enough faith, this can be a year of change. Faith in oneself, of course, to take the first step, to plant the seed. But of more worth is faith in our Heavenly Father, who wants more for us than we could know to want for ourselves.
