No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Value of Change

Change is as inevitable as the turning of the calendar. And with the new year comes the new self. As surely as the tides roll upon the shore, as surely as the seasons redecorate the landscape, we will change. The question is whether the changes will be those we select for ourselves, or those thrust upon us by default and the passage of time.

That is why we make New Year's resolutions: to make certain the changes are positive ones. But forming new habits is like winding string on a ball. One must not drop the ball, lest the good work be undone. The unwinding is sudden; the winding is a slow, steady, gradual process.

Wise individuals understand and seek change slowly and carefully. They set realistic goals, achievable goals. They also work on self-improvement each day, not only at the beginning of the year.

Positive change is not as difficult as it may seem. The secret is to generate more reasons to change than to remain as we are. Then we must exercise the new behavior over and over again as we would exercise a stiff muscle. Soon the new behavior will become a habit, securely rooted in our lives, and the temptation to resort to less desirable behavior will diminish.

We can look to the apostle Paul for inspiration. Paul struggled constantly to improve himself, to overcome his weaknesses, to build upon his strengths. Sometimes he failed, but he never gave up. He never quit trying to improve. He taught us that there is no such thing as instant perfection. He showed us that change is not an overnight process but a lifelong endeavor, marked by occasional setbacks, yet rewarded by the knowledge that we have taken charge of our own lives.

Yes, change is inevitable. It provides a chance for us to grow, to improve ourselves, to improve our families, to improve our marriages. But if we fail to change, if we fail to improve, then we fall behind in living, and our spirits begin to age.

Indeed, if we bar the door to change, we shut out life itself and deny ourselves the opportunity to choose our own goals, to follow our own stars.
