No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS OF GRATITUDE

The Hidden Power of Gratitude

The autumn season with its brilliant colors and bountiful harvests could be also thought of as the season of gratitude. It is a time when our feelings seem to run a little deeper, when our emotions are more vibrant, when the earth gives something back. It is a time to notice the bounties of life, and it intensifies as we approach our most American holiday—Thanksgiving.

Gratitude is a good feeling with a strange kind of healing power. But it slips away, if we don't look deep into ourselves and admit how much we need the power it releases—not just during a day, a month, or a season, but throughout the year.

Gratitude releases a psychodynamic energy. It makes us focus on good and draws us away from evil. This process generates optimism and self-confidence. It also draws our attention toward others and away from destructive self-centeredness. We feel impelled to repay kindness with kindness, favor with favor, trust with trust. Barriers are broken, and horizons pushed back.

Gratitude is a principle that should be pointed out to so-called unhappy people. The best way to counter anger and frustration when things go wrong is to remember all the times when things went right. That is the hidden power, the healing power we sense during the Thanksgiving season. Our challenge is to prolong it.

Perhaps this season of the year, in its own modest way, tries to remind us how much we owe to forces outside ourselves and how much all of us, regardless of status, are in the hands of the Almighty. It is a time to examine our attitudes, to make an effort to refrain from taking everything for granted. It's a good time to look at our own lives. Why were we born at this particular time in the history of the world, surrounded with physical and material blessings?

Many comprehend so dimly the truth of our relationship with God. Many do not know him as the Giver. Many do not understand his gifts, the depth of his love, the wisdom with which he deals with us individually. And so the challenge of the season is to put our feelings of gratitude in perspective. The basis of our thanksgiving should be the knowledge that God has given us all that we have and more than we realize. Throughout the year, we can show gratitude to God not only with prayers of thanks but also by living as closely as we can to the way he would have us live.
