No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Fount of Every Blessing

Centuries ago Augustine described the simple blessings of his world. He wrote, "How pleasant is the alternation of day and night. How abundant the supply of clothing furnished us by trees and animals. Who can enumerate all the blessings we enjoy?" Who indeed?

Our world has grown more complicated since his time—increased knowledge, medicines to cure our ills, machines to help our work, and other products of man's ingenuity and industry. But one thing has not changed. Our blessings still come from the Lord. He is still the source, the "fount of every blessing." The food we eat, the air we breathe, and other necessities are blessings equally as vital to our souls. Love and work and peace of mind and making progress toward some worthy goal—these are also gifts from God.

The blessings of the Lord have sometimes been described as life-giving water. Isaiah wrote, "The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought . . . : and thou shalt be like a watered garden." (Isaiah 58:11.) Jesus referred to the words of God as living waters, which, if a man drank, he would never thirst again.

If, then, the Lord is the source of every blessing, and if he is so willing to pour forth blessings as a freely flowing fountain, why then do so many of us go thirsty? Perhaps because we're not prepared to drink. Perhaps we are like hard and crusted soil, which the water doesn't penetrate.

The first settlers to the valleys of Utah found a parched and largely barren desert. There was water, but it coursed in creeks and streams from the mountains to the Great Salt Lake and there evaporated. It did not benefit the land. Not until these pioneers built a vast network of canals, ditches, and finally furrows to lead the moisture to each thirsty seed, not until then did this blessing of water begin to make the desert bloom.

And so it is with us. We must prepare our hearts and minds to feel and recognize the blessings of the Lord. Then we can drink in the moisture of life. Then every sunrise will become a special gift and every new idea an inspiration.

When he leads us "beside the still waters" (Psalm 23:2), we will know how to drink. And having then refreshed our throats, we will lift up our voice in thanks and praise and hallelujah unto him.
