No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Praise God as the Source of Joy

For most people, God is the source of comfort and hope in times of affliction and despair, a balm for the troubled soul. And we are blessed that such a source of divine understanding and empathy exists. He can sustain us through our sorrows. But he can also sustain us through good times. It is human nature to think of the Lord more in times of need than in times when things are going well. There is even a feeling among some that God and the things of eternity are strictly solemn and serious, that smiles, happiness, and joy are things of this world in which the Lord has no part.

But if we see God only as a comfort in our afflictions, we limit his glory and grandeur and divine character. If we exclude him from the good and pleasant experiences of our lives, we limit our understanding of him and his relationship with us. For God is also the source of joy, the source of goodness, the source of beauty. All that is right in the universe is so because of him and his divine plan. As King Solomon exclaimed, "He hath made every thing beautiful in his time." (Ecclesiastes 3:11.)

Through the centuries, writers have tried to convey this message of the goodness of God. Composers and lyricists have created choruses to express their highest feelings of joy and adoration. Painters have dipped into the radiant colors of their palettes to picture the happiness and sunshine of God's good earth and his universe.

Like them, we too can offer our praise and joy for the Lord's creations. It needn't be in some grand verse or chorus. In fact, just a kind deed to someone else is cause enough to feel life's joy. Often the simple is as meaningful as the exquisite.

Certainly, we should use our best gifts, talents, and energies to show our gratitude to God, to include him in things that are good in our lives. If we have the means to create grand monuments that can serve mankind, we should do so. If we are endowed with creative gifts, they should be put to good use in serving others. But even without extraordinary talents, we can have an understanding heart and a humble spirit to reach out and lift others and, in so doing, experience the joy and goodness of life. Any good and worthy work can be a hallowed offering unto his holy name.

And so, all that is really required to partake of God's joy is a sensitive soul. All that is required to give praise and gratitude to him is love for others as well as for self.
