No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Giving Gratitude to God

On one occasion during his ministry, Jesus met ten men afflicted with the dread scourge of leprosy. They approached him, beseeching mercy. Jesus healed them, and they went their way, rejoicing; but one among them stopped, returned to the Master, and gave thanks to him. Jesus responded gently, "Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?" (Luke 17:17.)

We cannot know the thoughts behind the Savior's words; but given his emotional and spiritual maturity, it is safe to assume that he was not asking for gratitude to boost his own sense of importance or to make others feel indebted to him. Such motives were beneath the stature of the Son of God. Rather, he knew that gratitude is good for those who experience and express it. He had perhaps hoped not only to heal the afflicted lepers' bodies but also to help heal their souls with the balm of gratitude.

Sincere gratitude is perhaps the purest of virtues. Almsgiving can be tinged with self-importance. Being busy, even in good works, can sometimes cause us to be "troubled about many things" (Luke 10:41), as Jesus cautioned his friend Martha. On the other hand, meditations and private devotionals carried to extremes can turn us excessively inward.

But unadulterated gratitude is a pure and virtuous essence. A consciousness bathed in the light of gratitude and thanksgiving sees itself and the rest of the world in authentic terms. In the light of gratitude, there can be no egotistical self-sufficiency. Gratitude gives us a sense of how indebted we are to others. We did not come into this world by our own efforts, and it is likely we shall not be laid away without the aid of others. Our entire life is a litany of those who have lifted us, lent us strength, and guided us along our path. From parents and friends to fellow workers and people we do not even know—the list of those to whom we owe gratitude is far too long to compile.

And if we are indebted to our fellow human beings, how much more indebted are we to him who created us? We can never repay our debt to God. But even if we could, he does not ask for repayment, only for a grateful heart. And he suggests that gratitude is more than just saying thanks. It is best manifest in what we do for others: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren," he said, "ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.) Might we, at this holiday season, give of ourselves in the service of others. And, by so doing, we will show the sincerest form of gratitude and thanksgiving to God.
