No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Power of Gratitude

The story is told of a person who noticed that his friend was always happy. If there were gray skies, he celebrated the shapes of the clouds; if it stormed, he went out on the front porch to watch and wonder. At each day, he awakened not with anxiety or depression but with rejoicing. Finally, the one friend asked the other, "What is the secret of your happiness? You are not a wealthy man. You are not exempt from the heaviness and pain of this world, yet you are happier than most."

And the happy man answered in one word: "Gratitude."

And so, a lesson for us all: to be grateful for what we have in life. Yet, there are those who will say, "I have nothing for which to be grateful. I am sore and tired. My best dreams have turned to ashes. The world is dark and getting darker."

Maybe. But the very essence of gratitude is learning to love what is instead of endlessly wishing for something different. Gratitude touches the cold stones of reality with light. Are there problems in life? Yes, but we have power to do something about them. That's a reason to be grateful. Is the world sometimes hard and cruel? Of course. But it is also beautiful. Do we cry because life is short? Its brevity adds poignancy to every experience, and we love what we love all the more.

When we are endlessly pining for a different situation, perhaps we should stop and ask ourselves, "Have I seen the gifts I already have? Have I opened my eyes to the heavenly reflections that are already around me?"

God asked us to give thanks, even when there seems to be little for which to be grateful. The reason, perhaps, as in all the Lord gives and asks of us, is for our own happiness. An ancient proverb says, "A gift unacknowledged is a gift unreceived." It is undoubtedly for this reason that the Lord has asked that gratitude be a part of our prayers.

The Savior cleansed ten lepers one day, and all rushed away save one, who came back, fell at the feet of Christ, and gave thanks. "Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?" asked the Savior. (Luke 17:17.) Why did Jesus respond that way? Why did it matter to him? Surely their gratitude could not add anything to Christ's stature. It is because the Lord requests of us only things that add to our happiness.

Gratitude helps give us the proper perspective to be happy. Truly, a thankful heart is a rejoicing one.
