No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Power of Praise

Two hundred years ago the famous English man of letters, Samuel Johnson, said, "The applause of a single human being is of great consequence." Today it is still true that most of us respond well to a sincere word of praise.

Honest praise and appreciation have been known to affect people's lives for the better; to change a wayward child, inspire quality and cooperation from employees, and reclaim hardened criminals. Praise can lubricate the machinery of human interactions and be an inspiration to the troubled soul.

The prophet Isaiah was specifically commissioned to preach encouraging words to those who mourned, "to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." (Isaiah 61:3.) Sincere praise and appreciation can help bring out the best in those who receive it.

But it is not restricted only to those who receive it. What is not so often recognized is the effect praise can have on the person who gives it. Giving praise automatically puts us on the high road of human relations. It is hard to be cutting and critical at the same time we are looking for reasons to credit a person. When we are focusing on the praiseworthy traits of another, our own perspective is raised to a nobler plane. This power to improve is even stronger when we lift our hearts and our voices to praise our Father in heaven. Perhaps that is one reason we have been so constantly admonished to praise the Lord: not that he needs it but that we do. Sincere and constant praise to our Creator causes us to focus on his divine attributes, to consider and contemplate his godlike qualities of goodness, love, and forgiveness, which we must develop in our own lives if we are to be happy.

King David, ancient Israel's poet and singer of psalms, apparently understood this principle, for he counseled, "Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power.

"Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent greatness. . . . "

"Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord." (Psalm 150:1-2, 6.)

As we praise the Lord, not just in generalities but for specific blessings he has given us, we will find our lives richer and more joyful, our character growing closer to his, and a greater willingness to share our praise with others.
