No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A List of Thanksgiving

As Jesus went about doing good and healing people of their physical as well as spiritual infirmities, he came upon ten men afflicted with leprosy. This horrible scourge of those days was a slow, painful, disfiguring death. Accompanying the physical suffering was often psychological and spiritual torment, because some assumed that the leper had committed sins for which God was wreaking a just retribution. There was no cure. Death, it seemed, was the only hope.

So, when Jesus healed the ten lepers, he saved them from mental and spiritual as well as physical suffering. Surely, this was a day for which they would be eternally grateful. But yet, we are dumbfounded to read that of the ten who were cured, only one remembered and returned to give thanks. It is hard to comprehend such ingratitude.

Or is it? If we look at our own lives, do we see miraculous blessings we've received for which we do not appear to be grateful? It may well be that we have shown God no more gratitude than did the lepers of Samaria.

We who live in America, especially those who were born here, might consider by what providence we are here. In a world where war is often more common than peace, we live in a land that is peaceful and blessed above all other lands. For that alone we should kneel with grateful thanksgiving and acknowledge the source of such blessing.

Many of our blessings are so common that we might fail to recognize them for what they are. A useful exercise in raising our awareness of our blessings is to write a list of them, to consciously enumerate those things of greatest value in our lives.

Such a list might include the names of family, friends, and colleagues. Certainly, our health, physical abilities, and intelligence would be included. Our material blessings should be listed. And what about our freedoms? No list of thanksgiving could be complete without considering freedom.

Having written such a list, the next step is to cross it out and ask, "Where would I be without these blessings?" Now, write the list again. Feel the joy and gratitude as you add each item to your list. Make mental note of those things of greatest value. Try to feel the struggle and turmoil of living life without them.

Certainly, such a list should be the subject of our daily prayers and contemplation. Recalling our blessings in such a way can be a quick and easy way to put our goals and priorities in perspective. Gratitude for what we have gives us humility, motivation, and peace in a world of turmoil.

And offering thanks is not just an act of worship to glorify God. Gratitude and the act of expressing it also make our own lives richer and more meaningful. Perhaps that too belongs on the list as one more reason to give thanks in this season of thanksgiving.
