No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

MOMENTS WITH FAMILY

Marriage—an Important Decision

When individuals choose a companion for life, when lives and love are committed and vows are given, there is no longer a question of compatibility. It becomes a matter of adaptability and quiet inner assurance that future problems can be worked through and solved. There's no need to look back. In fact, it's a good idea not to look sideways, either, wondering if the marriage should have been to someone else, wondering if it could have been better. Usually, change brings only a different set of challenges.

Recall the Lord's counsel to husbands on marriage and intimacy. He commanded, "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22.)

In this brief verse, the Lord commands husbands—and, we add, wives—to do four things:

First, we are commanded to love our spouse, not just to like, not merely to befriend, but to love our spouse in the same spirit and with the same willingness we love our God.

Second, we are commanded to love our partner with all our heart—not 80 percent or even 90 percent but 100 percent. That means to love unconditionally all the time.

Third, we are commanded to cleave unto our spouse, to adhere closely to that person in good times and bad.

Fourth, adding much to the other three, the Lord commands us to cleave to none else—not to mother, or father, or friends, but only to our spouse.

When there are problems, challenges, or great experiences to share, who should husband and wife turn to for help, for wisdom, for sharing? To each other, because that is how love grows, strengthens, and reinforces itself.

Good marriages are those where the partners like being together, where they enjoy each other's company, where there is a union of minds as well as of hearts, and where virtue is the strong glue that bonds husband and wife together.

Of course, communication is one of the cornerstones of a solid marriage. Couples should not let things build up inside, should not end the day without having prayed together. It's difficult to pray together if problems have not been discussed and differences resolved.

Marriage may be the most vital of all the decisions we make in life. It may have the most far-reaching effects. That is as it should be, because, as we are told in the scriptures, marriage is ordained of God.
