No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Mother Builds with Eternal Bricks

Today we speak softly and gently of a mother's love, of sacred recollections, of home, of guidance. We speak this eternal truth: mothers are the fundamental architects of great men and women—not governments, not schools, not churches, but mothers.

There is no substitute. To mothers alone are entrusted the rights and responsibilities of motherhood. She is the one fountain of love that never diminishes. Regardless of our failures, in spite of our weaknesses or doubts, whatever the sin or indiscretion—a mother loves on.

A mother's love cannot be duplicated, not even by father, who shares equally in the responsibilities of parenthood. It cannot be produced in the laboratory nor legislated in Congress. It cannot be marketed in the mass media or purchased at the supermarket. A mother's love is the product of spontaneous combustion. It pours itself upon the forming personality of innocence and writes itself on the timeless pages of each eternal child. A mother builds with eternal bricks—sculpting, molding, fashioning the pliable substance called character.

We cannot—we must not—deprive our children of this irreplaceable affection. It is in being surrounded by the warmth of a mother's love that a child finds a sense of belonging. A mother's presence is the first and most enduring evidence that there is love in the world. These first impressions implanted by mother influence behavior through the course of this life and beyond. For, indeed, to a large extent, we are what our mothers make us.

To be sure, a mother cannot be in the home always, nor would that be wise. To make a slave of mother is to make unjust tyrants of us all. Personal development, recreation, and fulfillment are as much a woman's right as motherhood itself. And, certainly, there are cases where mothers are forced to leave the home to earn enough to live.

Ours is not to judge; but this we state simply: children need a mother's love—not just golden ounces or diamond-studded droplets of it, but bushels and boxes of it, rivers and oceans of it.

Thus, as the centuries turn to eons, when all but character and truth have slipped away, and time and space are measured by the heart—many a loving mother will find that the seeds planted in the obscure dust of daily life have flowered with eternal blossoms.
