No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Our Debt to Dedicated Mothers

We are indebted, this day and every day, to dedicated mothers who love and shape our world. Throughout history, the gentle touch, inspiration, and song of a mother have been a welcome relief from mankind's more harsh and bitter sounds. Her voice has been a vital influence in the ears of a listening child. No force has been more powerful for good than the gentle voice of a mother to her child.

And so, we are indebted; and, as we look to the future, we realize that children—children influenced by a caring mother—are the hope of our world. If the children grow up as people of integrity and character, our future is secure. If they do not, no philosophy or technology will save us.

History has already taught some bitter lessons from those who failed to heed this counsel. We have seen the best thoughts of the human race twisted into doctrines of hatred. We have seen civilization's best technological and scientific breakthroughs perverted and used to destroy rather than to build. We have seen medicines and drugs that could bless and benefit mankind prostituted for money. We have seen the beauties of the earth ravaged for greed. And we have seen the highest ideals of statesmanship corrupted for power.

Why? Because someone failed to remember the lessons of character he learned, or should have learned, at his mother's knee. It is and ever will be the character of the people that defines the quality of life on this earth. And it is mostly in the early years of development that one's character is set. As the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined. When the clay is new and fresh, it can be molded; when it is old and set, it is difficult to change.

How are children and youth best trained to be responsible, mature, contributing adults? There is little question that a good and loving family is the ideal setting for a child to grow, to learn, to be molded; and at the heart of the family is the mother.

It follows, then, that no one serves the community, the nation, or the world better than the caring mothers who caress the babies of the world; the mothers who rock the worried child to sleep, who wipe the fevered brow, who give so much and ask so little.

The world is better served by mothers who develop their own minds and talents that they may better serve and inspire their children, whose hearts provide a haven when there is nowhere else to turn, whose love most closely approximates the love of God for his children.

Every such mother deserves the support and protection of a faithful and loving family—husband and children. She deserves the highest consideration from society; for, without her, society would fall far short. She deserves the praise of poets, the laurels of statesmen, and the humble gratitude of all.

Eventually, it will not be the stentorian speeches, the iron boots, the thundering cannons, or the screaming missiles that will decide the future of the world. No, it will be decided by the gentle hands, the soft caress, the lilting lullaby, the whispered words of love and truth from mothers to their children.
