No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Mother's Influence

Scholars, poets, and philosophers have long believed that motherhood possesses the greatest potential influence for good or ill in human life. American clergyman Henry Ward Beecher said, "The mother's heart is the child's schoolroom." We know that children unconsciously mold themselves after their parents' manner, speech, and conduct. A mother's habits—good or bad—become a child's pattern for living. Her character is visibly repeated in them.

In many cases, mothers are probably better than fathers in giving advice because they seem to know their children better. They are more likely to know what their children really want rather than what children think they want. The French emperor Napoleon said, "The destiny of the child is always the work of the mother."

One of the most important lessons a mother can teach her children is that they can have almost anything they want, but they can't have everything they want. It applies not only to the things we buy but also to the things we do, to the way we spend our time, to the life-style we set for ourselves.

Every child—every one of us—has to make choices or decisions. And to help make those decisions, we must develop a system of values. The sooner those values are in place, the easier life will be and the more rewarding its consequences. The best way children learn values is by watching parents. We don't have to tell them what is important and what is not. They learn that by observing the decisions we make.

Mothers seem to have the God-given ability to teach their children that most problems can be solved if they think about them, that they can't do anything unless they're willing to try, and that they must accept a few failures along the way. Those are lessons that need to be reinforced over and over again.

Since every child is different and every mother is different, the lessons may take a slightly different form and, perhaps, a slightly different order of importance; but the process is underway wherever there is a loving and caring mother.

Young people don't often understand the full meaning of what they're learning from mothers because, as one writer put it, we never know the love of our parents until we become parents ourselves.

We appreciate the influence of mothers throughout the year. It is an influence that comes in ounces—tiny impressions made upon children hour by hour, day by day, year by year. It reconfirms our belief that the desire to rear children properly, the special ability to love, and the willingness to express it in the development of another human soul make motherhood the noblest responsibility in the world.
