No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

What Do We Ask of a Father?

Fathers. Just what do we ask of a father?

He's the one who has to be versatile enough to plow a field, build a house, or lead a corporation; change a diaper, soothe a hurt, or throw a ball. He's asked to be strong enough to protect a family and gentle enough to cry on.

We ask him to love us when we don't deserve it and forgive us when we don't love in return. We need him to watch only us, to see something special that others overlook, even when we're not the star of the team or the lead in the play.

We ask our fathers to provide us a feeling of safety and security in a world they know has none. We ask them to turn a positive face toward us, despite problems of their own, so that we may grow up with confidence.

We expect fathers to teach us about the consequences of our actions, to be firm enough that we believe them and not so strong that we rebel. Fathers have to watch, unflinching, while we suffer the results of our own actions and not rescue us so soon that we do not learn the hard, important lessons.

We hope Dad will inspire us to live beyond our short-term needs, that he'll help us achieve what we really need and want and not just what we want right now.

We want our fathers to live these things, not just talk about them. One woman, in speaking of her father, said, "I don't remember that he preached order, but many mornings I saw him at his desk, poring over the family budget so we could live within it. He didn't moralize about how we should treat others: I just watched him lift everyone who came into his presence. He didn't command us to be honest, but I knew I could trust his word. He did say, 'When people need help is when they need it, not some other time,' and he lived that way. I know, because I always needed him, and he was always there."

And so are our expectations of fathers. Do we ask too much? Perhaps—just as we ask too much of mothers. Yet, it is the Lord's great wisdom that in this creation we come to earth so vulnerable, so open, so innocent, that we must depend on someone who has journeyed here a few years longer and, in turn, that when we are grown, we have to stretch ourselves to hold another's hand along the way. We are bound to each other in ways we could never be were we not, at one time in our lives, so dependent and, in a later time, so responsible to those who depend on us.
