No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Sacred Trust

One of the most valued and sacred trusts the Lord has given us is to be guardians of our children. That trust includes the implicit charge of creating a home and family environment that will nurture our children and provide a safe refuge during their formative years.

Today, the home is more important than ever as the place to teach and love our children. And we must do more than just tell our children how to live: we must show them.

If we want our children to live lives of virtue, of self-control, of good report, then we must set the example. If we want to teach faith in God, we must have faith in him. The only way to teach the principle of daily prayer is to pray—together. If we want our children temperate, then we must refrain from intemperance. Indeed, if we want our children to embrace truth and understand it, to be obedient, to love others, then we must cherish those values and act accordingly.

Love is critical to that process. Children need the love of their parents, and they need to love their parents. Love is part of the sacred trust, part of the example, part of the two-way communication. We can show and share our love in many ways. It consists of doing things for and with one another, and it requires the giving of ourselves.

Contrary to those who generate myths about the decline of the American family, a recent national poll—substantiated by family therapists—shows the family unit is not only alive and well but getting stronger. Most parents surveyed said they spend more time with their families than their parents did when they themselves were children. Seven out of ten said their children have more influence on day-to-day decision making than in previous generations. Counselors reaffirm that the family unit is the backbone of an effective society.

Religious orientation is also important in strengthening the family structure. Research over the past forty years shows that religion is related to happiness in marriage and to successful family relationships. And it's more than merely worshiping together. It's also sharing a family life-style, sharing an awareness of a higher power, sharing a common faith and expectation.

Parenthood and the development of strong and cohesive families are sacred obligations. God's love and concern for children, for the sanctity of marriage, and for the importance of the family unit is found throughout the scriptures. If a satisfying, meaningful life is what we want, we would do well to follow the Lord's counsel regarding family responsibilities.
