No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Bless the Hands That Prepare

In talking about a typical mealtime at his boyhood home, author Alex Haley said there was always a blessing on the food. He said his grandfather would add, "And please bless, oh Lord, the hands that prepared this meal." As a four-year-old boy, young Alex said he could never resist opening his eyes just for a moment to look at his grandmother's wrinkled hands. To him, his grandparents were the symbol of all that was noble and good.

Much has changed in the world since those scenes from a small town in the 1930s, but much has not changed as well. It is still true that everyone enters this world because of the willingness of a mother to suffer the labor of birth. It is still true that none of us could survive alone. As tiny, helpless infants, we would soon perish were it not for the loving hands of mothers and fathers.

It is still true that the foundations of all great civilizations are strong families, that mother is a powerful influence in the life of any person.

Abraham Lincoln said, "All that I am and all that I ever hope to be, I owe to my angel mother." His sentiments have been echoed in the words and deeds of men and women throughout the history of humankind.

The Lord commanded us many centuries ago to "honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.) We owe a debt of gratitude to parents who have selflessly helped us understand that commandment, not for their own sakes but for the good of future generations.

With all the challenges families are facing today, the family unit is still a vital, living influence in our lives. A national magazine polled young college students, asking them who were the women they most admired. There was the expected list of entertainment personalities, sports heroes, notable political and business women of our day; but one group of women got six times as many votes as any other: mothers. These were young people's true heroines.

So long as such love between mothers and children exists, there is hope for the world's future.
