No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Love of Our Children

In Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice, Launcelot observes: "It is a wise father that knows his own child."

There is so much in the world and in our lives that can keep us from knowing our children as we should. We are separated from them by age, appetites, style, and perception of the world. An eighteen-month-old toddler sees the world from a low angle—investigating the bottoms of chairs, the undersides of tables—just as teenagers view life from an angle that may confuse and worry their parents.

Each age, each passage in a child's life has its point of view, its revelations, and its blindness. A two-year-old knows nothing of math or science, marketing or sales; but a two-year-old recognizes the pleasure that can be taken in bright and shiny coins, in flowers, in the physical pleasures of a beautiful world. Likewise, a teenager may lack a sense of proportion and may be totally ignorant of the impositions of mortality, but at what other passage in our lives have we known such energy, such enthusiasm, such potential?

Each stage of life awakens in us new capacities and perceptions—which is why each age is intended by God to be cherished, respected, and loved. Paul wrote to the Saints of Colosse: "Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged." (Colossians 3:21.) And yet, as parents we are sometimes more certain of our responsibility to discipline and correct our children than of our responsibility to love and congratulate them.

In his essay on parental love, the French philosopher Montaigne wrote that as our children grow and mature, so should our capacity to show our love for them. "It is very often the reverse," he wrote, "and most commonly we feel more excited over the . . . infantile tricks of our children than we do later over their grown-up actions."

One of the responsibilities of parenting is to be certain that our love grows and matures to keep pace with our children's needs. The responsibility of a parent's love is to find pleasure in the challenge of children, to find joy in the maturing association we have with our children as they become adults.

As we sing lullabies to the innocence of childhood, let us also join with our sons and daughters in anticipation of becoming adults. Growing up is like awakening to the many colors and shapes of a kaleidoscope. The pleasure of that awakening should be enjoyed by children and parents together.
