No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

A Time of Transition

Early in the second decade of life, young people enter the stage of development known as adolescence. The term itself seems clumsy, and it is indeed an awkward age. But it is such an important time. Unaccustomed physical changes affect the entire being—emotionally, intellectually, and spiritually. The old childhood dependencies are cast aside. For many, it is a time of conflict and confused feelings, a time of troublesome searching. It may take years for the transition to approach stability. But it is also a time of discovery and excitement. What greater discovery could there be than to find oneself? What greater excitement could there be than to explore the value of spiritual and moral commitments?

One thing is sure. The only safe bridge to the new world of adulthood is anchored by thoughtful and understanding adults. Our task is not to provide protection—we cannot protect children from their own growth experiences—but to create an atmosphere in the home that accelerates self-discovery and self-development, an environment where the young person has opportunities to experience himself or herself as a separate individual who feels, who cares, who trusts, who values, and who is valued.

In this kind of family relationship, young people can step forward without fear and then pull back without regret. They begin to know themselves one step at a time. They can test and clarify their values. They can acquire self-esteem and self-regard. And those feelings, once established, tend to become a way of life.

It sounds so simple, but all parents know the struggle is a painful one. The children who were so close yesterday, suddenly seem so distant, so adolescent. If only they would turn to us for help as they did during those childhood years. But they are searching for help within themselves, struggling for self-identity. And often we are allowed only a stand-by role, ready in case the search goes badly, hoping our own example is a positive one.

Each generation of adults must discover once again, as our parents discovered before us, that our young people are mirrors of ourselves, that they are stronger than ever, that they can resist temptation as we did. They are not turning away from us but are bringing new meaning and vitality to our lives.

They are, without question, our hope for the future.
