No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

Prudent Friendships

Our friendship with others is one of life's more meaningful and comforting supports. The Greek poet Euripides said, "Life has no blessing like a prudent friend." But how prudent are we in our relationships with our friends?

Interpersonal relationships are more important to us than most of us realize. When adults are asked to identify times when they are happy, most indicate that what make them most happy—or most sad—are personal relationships with others. Those relationships are usually more important than personal health, more important than employment, more important than money and material things.

We all need durable relationships in our lives. There is value in an intimate friendship, even though we may risk being hurt by making ourselves vulnerable. Close friendships make us feel wanted and needed. They also help us discover that our own problems and feelings are not unique. Friends often have similar problems—and joys—to share.

Our lives are enriched through meaningful friendships. Perhaps more than any other single factor, the quality of our human ties determines the quality of our lives. So a high priority should be the building of relationships with our family and friends through open and honest communication.

When we run short on friendship, it might be because we are not willing to devote our energies to it. We simply assume it will happen. But it doesn't. We must take an interest in other people, and that requires time, effort, and concern.

Often, we tend to be guarded about what we share. We stick close to role-defined behavior or focus on our positive attributes in order to avoid rejection. But if a relationship is to develop, we have to take the risk of being honest about our feelings.

Sometimes relationships are difficult because they're inconvenient. We may want strong relationships with others, but we find it inconvenient to invest in them.

A recent study indicates that concern for others is a prescription for reducing the stresses of life. Researchers say involvement with others and concern for their problems work wonders. On the other hand, if we're self-centered, we experience more anxiety, more depression, more hostility, and more stress.

Perhaps the simplest, yet most effective, advice ever given regarding our relationships with others came from the Savior's Sermon on the Mount. He said simply and directly, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." (Matthew 7:12.) That admonition is the epitome of prudent friendship.
