No specific author, Moment's Pause ( 1989)

The Gift of Christlike Friends

What greater gift dost thou bestow, What greater goodness can we know Than Christlike friends, whose gentle ways Strengthen our faith, enrich our days.

What more could we ask of a friend than to be Christlike, or more importantly, what more could we give?

The friendship we share with others makes an important contribution to the quality of our lives. We place high value on these relationships, for having good friends with whom we feel comfortable gives us a sense of honesty, a sense of trust, a sense of success.

Friendship is an intangible thing. It is not unlike an invisible force that we send out to encircle others and that, in turn, comes back to encircle us as well. Honest friendship is a circle of power that envelops us in our entirety—all our good points along with all our bad. It is a power that surpasses judgment. It is a bond that reaches not from person to person but from soul to soul.

In order for us to be a Christlike friend, we must adopt Christlike attributes. The Savior said, "He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.) Part of that light comes from our relationship with our fellowman: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Leviticus 19:18.)

If we would be friends, or if we would have friends, we should do as the Savior did. We should be willing to serve others even when it's inconvenient. We should listen with our hearts as well as our ears. We should give our love as freely as we give our advice.

Friendship is a power that lights our lives. It is a gift to be cherished, a part of our eternal progress, a stone in the foundation of our lives. An ancient prophet said, "It is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that [we] must build [our] foundation . . . , a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

That is true in our relationships with others as well as with ourselves. Friendship is built upon the foundation of the gospel of Christ, the center of which is love. If the foundation is love, then the building blocks are acts of service. The resulting structure is a strong, lasting lighthouse of friendship.

What greater gift dost thou bestow, What greater goodness can we know Than Christlike friends, whose gentle ways Strengthen our faith, enrich our days. Laurels for the Living

At first thought, Christ's injunction to "let the dead bury their dead," seems somewhat harsh. (Matthew 8:22.) It may appear especially insensitive at this time of year as Memorial Day bids us to remember departed relatives and friends. It was not disrespect for the dead but respect for the living, however, that prompted the Savior's words—respect for the simple truth of life that service rendered is of little value to those we love if they are dead. Postmortem love, kindness shown to those now absent, is like the rain of September that arrives too late to save the withered crops from the drought of summer.

The love we offer to the dead—the eulogies, the wreaths, the epitaphs—does little to bless their lives. We remember them—as well we should—and remember with great fondness. But how much sweeter would be the memory if we had shared those thoughts more while yet they lived. We often withhold our encouragement and affection from the living, waiting for the right moment to express our love—waiting, procrastinating, busying ourselves with the irrelevancies of life—until at last the moment is gone. The flower bouquet we had thought to carry to a friend must now be delivered as a wreath; the appreciation that might have comforted the aging parent or spouse will become part of the funeral eulogy; the undelivered expressions of love that could have been given to those we knew must now become the epitaphs on grave markers.

George William Childs kept these words as a creed to live by: "Do not keep the alabaster boxes of your love and tenderness sealed up until your friends are dead. Fill their lives with sweetness. Speak approving, cheering words while their ears can hear them, and while their hearts can be thrilled and made happier by them."

Let us remember to love the living while there is time. Perhaps someone waits in a nursing home for a visit that we have been putting off. We may owe some unpaid debt of kindness to a friend, a former teacher, a sister or brother, a parent—a debt that may remain unpaid unless we act now.

Soon the loveliest and the best that we have known will be beyond our reach, and buried with them will be the opportunity to bless them with our love.

Let our eulogies be written upon the fleshy chambers of living hearts. Let our wreaths be gentle words and caresses placed about the necks of those who can still appreciate their fragrance.

It is for the dead to bury the dead—but it is for the living to love the living.
