THE RECEPTION OF THE EXILES IN ILLINOIS.

IN what is properly a companion volume to this--"The Missouri Persecutions"--I have told how the Latter-day Saints were driven from Missouri under a threat of extermination from the executive of that State, Lilburn W. Boggs. When fleeing from Missouri, where they had suffered so much from mob violence, and from the State government officials, the Mormon exiles crossed the Mississippi into the State of Illinois, at the point near where the city of Quincy is located--in fact, at the Quincy Ferry. Their destitute condition, together with the injustice they had suffered in Missouri--the spectacle of a people in free America being driven from their homes and exiled from one of the States of the American Union because of religious beliefs--aroused the indignation and excited the sympathy of the people of Quincy and vicinity. A kind reception was given to the exiles by the people of this section of Illinois, one very similar to that given to many of the same people by the inhabitants of Clay County, when a cruel persecution had driven some twelve hundred of them from their homes in Jackson County, Missouri, five years before. [1] The Democratic Association of Quincy was especially active in the interests of the exiles. In the month of February a meeting was called by this association to inquire into the situation of the Mormon exiles. At this first meeting all that was done was to pass a resolution, to the effect that the people called Latter-day Saints were in a situation requiring the aid of the people of Quincy. A committee of eight was appointed to call a general meeting of both citizens and Mormons, and to receive a statement from the latter of their condition, with a view to relieving their necessities. The committee was instructed to get the Congregational church in which to hold the next meeting, but the directors having in charge that building would not allow it to be used for that purpose. I speak of this to show the kind of charity existing in the breasts of some pretended followers of Him who taught that charity was the crowning virtue. Failing to secure the church, the second meeting was held in the courthouse.

At this meeting the special committee appointed at the first meeting reported its labors. The committee had received statements from Sidney Rigdon and others in relation to the expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri, and suggested a series of resolutions setting forth that the exiled strangers were entitled to the sympathy and aid of the people of Quincy;

That a numerous committee, composed of individuals from every part of the town, be appointed to allay the prejudices of the misguided citizens of Quincy, and explain that it was not the design of the exiled Saints to lower the wages of the laboring classes, but to secure something to save them from starvation;

That a standing committee be appointed to relieve, so far as in their power, the wants of the destitute and homeless; and to use their utmost endeavors to procure employment for those who were able and willing to labor.

The report closed by saying:--

    We recommend to all the citizens of Quincy that in all their
    intercourse with the strangers, they use and observe a becoming
    decorum and delicacy, and be particularly careful not to indulge in
    any conversation or expression calculated to wound their feelings,
    or in any way to reflect upon those who, by every law of humanity,
    are entitled to our sympathy and commiseration.

This good work begun by the Democratic Association was continued by them, and substantial assistance was given to the suffering Saints through their exertions. At a subsequent meeting of the association the following resolutions were adopted:

    That we regard the right of conscience as natural and inalienable,
    and the most sacredly guaranteed by the Constitution of our free
    government;

    That we regard the acts of all mobs in violation of law; and those
    who compose them individually responsible, both to the laws of God
    and man, for every depredation committed upon the property, rights,
    or life of any citizen;

    That the inhabitants upon the western frontier of the State of
    Missouri, in their late persecution of the people denominated
    Mormons, have violated the sacred rights of conscience and every
    law of justice and humanity;

    That the governor of Missouri, in refusing protection to this class
    of people, when pressed upon by a heartless mob, and turning upon
    them a band of unprincipled militia, with orders encouraging their
    extermination, has brought a lasting disgrace upon the State over
    which he presides.

Thus with expressions of sympathy and material aid did the people of Quincy assist the exiles and bid them hope for better days. Nor was this kindly feeling confined to the people of Quincy and vicinity; it extended throughout the State; and especially was it exhibited by some of the leading men thereof, including Governor Carlin, Stephen A. Douglas, Dr. Isaac Galland and many others.

Footnotes

1. Missouri Persecutions, Chapter xiv.
