ORSON HYDE'S MISSION TO JERUSALEM.

THOSE who have read "The Missouri Persecutions," will remember the disaffection of Orson Hyde at Far West, and the statements he made in connection with Thomas B. Marsh against The Church, in the autumn of 1838--that time when men's hearts were failing them for fear, and death and destruction were rife; when even strong hearts grew faint and brave cheeks were blanched. Well, as stated in the account of his disaffection, like Peter of old, this modern Apostle wept bitterly for his error, returned to The Church, was forgiven; and during the conference held at Commerce in April, 1840, he was called to go on a mission to Jerusalem.

It appears that Elder Hyde in a heavenly vision saw himself on the Mount of Olives blessing the land for the return of the people of Judah, hence, that he might be obedient to the vision, he was appointed to go to that land for the purpose mentioned. In the letter of appointment, which the Prophet gave him, occurs the following passage:

    The Jewish nation have been scattered abroad among the Gentiles for
    a long period; and in our estimation the time of the commencement
    of their return to the Holy Land has already arrived. * * * It
    is highly important, in our opinion, that the present views and
    movements of the Jewish people be sought after, and laid before the
    American people for their consideration, their profit and their
    learning.

On the 15th of the same month that Elder Hyde was called, he left his family at Nauvoo and started for Jerusalem without purse or scrip. The next day he met with John E. Page, who subsequently to the conference at which Orson Hyde had been called, was appointed to go with him to the Holy Land.

They traveled through several States together, preaching as they went. In the city of Cincinnati they succeeded in raising up a large and prosperous branch of The Church; and while Elder Page remained in Cincinnati to strengthen the Saints, Elder Hyde made his way to New York.

These labors consumed the summer of 1840, and in January, 1841, the word of the Lord came to the Prophet Joseph saying that he was not well pleased with the long delays of his servants in starting on their mission to Jerusalem, and they were requested to hasten their departure. In the meantime, however, Elder Page had lost the spirit of his appointment and had no disposition to go, but Orson Hyde on the receipt of this reproof set sail at once from New York for England.

It is not our design to follow him through all his meanderings in Europe, or relate his trials or his perils in crossing the mighty seas, and passing through states in which war was raging. He succeeded in reaching the Holy City some time in October, and on the twenty-fourth of that month, 1841, early in the morning, was seated on the Mount of Olives, as he had seen himself in vision; and wrote the prayer he had to offer in behalf of the Jews and their city, which had been for so long a time trodden down of the Gentiles.

In that prayer he referred to the prophecies of God's servants in relation to the Jews and Jerusalem, and asked that all might be fulfilled. He called for the richest blessings of heaven upon the Jews; he blessed, by virtue of his Priesthood, the city, the land, and all the elements, to the end that Judah might be gathered, Jerusalem rebuilt, and become an holy city, that the Lord's name might be glorified in all the earth. At the conclusion of his prayer, he says:

    On the top of the Mount of Olives, I erected a pile of stones, as a
    witness according to ancient custom. On what was anciently called
    Mount Zion, where the temple stood, I erected another, and used the
    rod according to the prediction upon my head.

Just what he meant by saying that he had used the rod "according to prediction on his head," I have been unable to learn, except that it was a rod with which he had measured the city.

I have called the attention of my readers to this mission of Elder Hyde's to Jerusalem, because it doubtless has a greater significance than most people would be inclined to give it. The rebuilding of Jerusalem is regarded by Mormonism as of as much importance as the establishment of Zion; the gathering of the dispersed of Judah is as much a part of the great latter-day work as the reassembling of the other tribes of Israel; and the commencement of that work was made by Elder Hyde, when by the authority of his apostleship, he consecrated that land to the return of the house of Judah, to inhabit it, and rebuild their city according to the predictions of their prophets. It may be somewhat beyond the scope of this chapter to call attention to it, but surely it will be of interest to the reader to know that this apostolic mission and blessing upon the Holy Land has not been fruitless, but blessings as a result are flowing unto it, and the Jews are beginning to return to it. At the time of Apostle Hyde's visit and ceremonies on the Mount of Olives, but very few Jews were in the city or in Judea. As late as twenty years ago the consular reports show that there were not more than fifteen or twenty thousand Jews in all Jerusalem. But in a popular magazine for August, 1896, under the editorial caption--"The Plan for a Hebrew Nation"--the magazine said:

    A movement of which Americans hear very little, but which may have
    an important effect upon the history of the coming century, is
    going forward upon the shores of the Mediterranean. This is the
    return of the Jews to their ancient home in Palestine--the Zionite
    movement it is called. For hundreds of years there has been talk of
    the Jew returning to Jerusalem. Through all his years of oppression
    and wandering, this vision of his native land has been held before
    his eyes by certain of his teachers. But it is only in the last
    twelve years, since the renewal of persecution in Russia, that
    the idea has taken shape. There are now more than four thousand
    colonists in Palestine. At Jaffa the schools are Hebrew, the
    ancient language being spoken altogether, and a Hebrew literature
    is being developed. The works of the great English, French and
    German authors are being translated, and writers of their own race
    are being encouraged.

    The Zionite movement is backed by the influence of the Rothschilds
    and other great Jewish families and societies, and as we see its
    stirring in every country, we can believe it only requires a
    great popular leader to make it one of the important movements in
    history. That it is not purely religious, but racial, is proven
    by the co-operation of Rabinowitz, the Christian Jew who became
    so well known here during the World's Fair Congress. There is
    already one Jewish Christian colony in Palestine. * * * As a Jewish
    state, Palestine might well become a country that would claim
    consideration among the family of nations. If the Zionite continues
    to grow, such a result is almost assured.

During the same month, namely, in its impression of August 11th, 1896, the St. Louis Globe-Democrat published the following:

    Only two decades ago there were not more than fifteen or twenty
    thousand Jews in Jerusalem. At that [time] no houses were to be
    found outside the walls of the city. Since then many changes have
    taken place and the Hebrew population--mainly on account of the
    increase of the Jewish immigration from Russia--now stands at
    between sixty and seventy thousand. Whole streets of houses have
    been built outside the walls on the site of the ancient suburban
    districts, which for hundreds of years have remained deserted. It
    is not, however, only in Jerusalem itself that the Jews abound,
    but throughout Palestine they are buying farms and establishing
    themselves in a surprisingly rapid manner. In Jerusalem they form
    at present a larger community than either the Christian or the
    Mohammedan.
