DEATH'S HARVEST IN NAUVOO--RETURN OF PRODIGALS.

DURING the summer of 1840, death reaped a rich harvest in Nauvoo. Before his ruthless stroke fell many worthy Saints who had been connected with The Church from the time it was founded. Among the first to fall was Bishop Edward Partridge. He died on the twenty-seventh of May, in the forty-sixth year of his age. He was the first Bishop in The Church, and in that capacity had presided over the Saints who gathered to Zion, in Jackson County, Missouri, during the years 1831-33. Joseph described him as a "pattern of piety," and the Lord himself declared that he was like Nathaniel of old--his heart was pure before him, and he was without guile. His life was indeed an eventful one. He was called from his merchandising, and became a preacher of righteousness. Much, in fact all, of his riches fell into the hands of the mobs of Jackson County, in the autumn of 1833, and upon his meek and uncovered head fell a double portion of their fury. Five years later, he passed through those trying times experienced by the Saints in their exodus from the State of Missouri, under the exterminating order of the infamous Governor Boggs; and at that time, he again saw the fruits of his industry fall a prey to the rapacity of his relentless enemies. Stripped of his earthly possessions and broken in health, he reached Commerce, but the trials through which he passed had proven too much for his constitution, which was never robust, and he passed away, a victim to the intolerance and religious bigotry of this generation.

In September of the same year Father Joseph Smith, Patriarch to The Church, and father of the Prophet Joseph, was "gathered to his final home," in the sixty-ninth year of his age. He was baptized on the sixth day of April, 1830, and was one of the six who organized The Church on that date. Indeed he was the one who first received the testimony of his son after the angel Moroni visited him on that memorable night of September 21, 1823; and it was he who first exhorted his prophet son to be faithful and diligent to the message he had received. He endured many persecutions on account of the claims made by his son Joseph to being a prophet of God; for Joseph's declarations that he had received heavenly visions and revelations together with a divine commission to preach the Gospel of Christ, not only brought upon himself the wrath of the ungodly, but involved his whole family in the persecutions which followed him throughout his life. Of these things, however, his father never complained, but endured all things patiently, and with true heroism, and ever supported his son in carrying out the counsels of Heaven. He was born on the twelfth of July, 1771, in Topsfield, Massachusetts; and was the second of the seven sons of Asahel and Mary Smith; his forefathers being among those who early came from England to Massachusetts. He was a large man, ordinarily weighing two hundred pounds, was six feet two inches tall, and well proportioned, strong and active; and he stood unbowed beneath the accumulated sorrows and hardships he had experienced during his nearly three score and ten years of sojourn in this life. The exposures, however, that he suffered in the exodus from Missouri brought on him consumption, of which he died. His was an unassuming nature--noted mostly, perhaps, for its sincerity and unwavering integrity. He was a child of nature, and one of nature's noblest; his life had been spent in parts remote from the busy marts, where "wealth accumulates and men decay," and he had passed through his probation on earth without being corrupted by the evil influences of luxury or enervating civilization. He was a type of men, so well described by one of our poets, in the following lines:

  Simple their lives--yet theirs the race
  When liberty sent forth her cry,
  Who crowded conflicts deadliest place,
  To fight--to bleed--to die;
  Who stood on Bunker's heights of red,
  By hope through years were led--
  And witnessed Yorktown's sun
  Shine on a nation's banner spread,
  A nation's freedom won!

Such was the character of the first Patriarch of The Church in this dispensation.

Another circumstance of interest in Nauvoo during this eventful summer of 1840 was the return of a number of prodigals to The Church. I have already stated the case of Orson Hyde. Frederick G. Williams was dropped from his position as counselor to the Prophet in November, 1837, and in March, 1839, was excommunicated at a conference in Quincy, Illinois. At the April conference in 1840, however, he came before the assembled Church and "humbly asked forgiveness, and expressed his determination to do the will of God for the future." He was forgiven by the Saints but was never restored to his former position in the First Presidency.

About the time Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde fell during the trying scenes in Missouri, W. W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery left The Church. Elder Phelps was a man who had been of great service to The Church and to the Prophet in a literary way, though some of his work in that line was marred by pedantic verbosity, and pretension to a knowledge of ancient languages which was not justified by any extended acquaintance he had of them. Still, he it was who in the early rise of The Church gave the cast to very much of The Church literature, and, as I remarked, he had been useful to The Church and the Prophet in the capacity of an editor and writer.

During the summer of 1840 he began to feel his way back from his apostasy into The Church. He had seen his folly and began to tremble at the gulf which opened at his very feet to devour him. He felt debased and humbled, and most piteously begged to be forgiven and taken back in the confidence of his brethren and the Saints. So interesting are the circumstances connected with his return that I give in extenso the letters which passed between himself and the Prophet.

                   W. W. PHELPS' LETTER TO JOSEPH SMITH.

                                            DAYTON, OHIO, June 29, 1840.

    BROTHER JOSEPH--I am alive, and with the help of God I mean to live
    still. I am as a prodigal son, though I never doubt or disbelieve
    the fullness of the Gospel. I have been greatly abused and humbled,
    and I blessed the God of Israel when I lately read your prophetic
    blessing on my head, as follows:

    "The Lord will chasten him because he taketh honor to himself, and
    when his soul is greatly humbled he will forsake the evil. Then
    shall the light of the Lord break upon him as at noonday, and in
    him shall be no darkness," etc.

    I have seen the folly of my way, and I tremble at the gulf I have
    passed. So it is, and why I know not. I prayed and God answered,
    but what could I do? Says I, "I will repent and live, and ask my
    old brethren to forgive me, and though they chasten me to death,
    yet I will die with them, for their God is my God. The least
    place with them is enough for me, yea it is bigger and better than
    all Babylon." Then I dreamed that I was in a large house with many
    mansions, with you and Hyrum and Sidney, and when it was said,
    "Supper must be made ready," by one of the cooks, I saw no meat,
    but you said there was plenty, and showed me much, and as good as
    I ever saw; and while cutting to cook, your heart and mine beat
    within us, and we took each other's hand and cried for joy, and I
    awoke and took courage.

    I know my situation, you know it, and God knows it, and I want to
    be saved if my friends will help me. Like the captain that was cast
    away on a desert island; when he got off, he went to sea again,
    and made his fortune the next time--so let my lot be. I have done
    wrong, and am sorry. The beam is in my own eye. I have not walked
    with my friends according to my holy anointing. I ask forgiveness
    in the name of Jesus Christ of all the Saints, for I will do
    right, God helping me. I want your fellowship; if you cannot grant
    that, grant me your peace and friendship, for we are brethren, and
    our communion used to be sweet, and whenever the Lord brings us
    together again, I will make all the satisfaction on every point
    that Saints or God can require. Amen.

                                                         W. W. PHELPS.

Elders Hyde and Page, en route for the east on their mission to Jerusalem, met with Phelps at Dayton, and at his request these brethren added the following to his communication:

    Brother Phelps requests us to write a few lines in his letter, and
    we cheerfully embrace the opportunity. Brother Phelps says he wants
    to live; but we do not fell ourselves authorized to act upon his
    case, but have recommended him to you; but he says his poverty will
    not allow him to visit you in person at this time, and we think he
    tells the truth. We therefore advise him to write, which he has
    done.

    He tells us verbally, that he is willing to make any sacrifice
    to procure your fellowship, life not excepted, yet reposing that
    confidence in your magnanimity that you will take no advantage
    of this open letter and frank confession. If he can obtain your
    fellowship, he wants to come to Commerce as soon as he can. But if
    he cannot be received into the fellowship of The Church, he must do
    the best he can in banishment and exile.

    Brethren, with you are the keys of the Kingdom; to you is power
    given to "exert your clemency, or display your vengeance." By
    the former you will save a soul from death, and hide a multitude
    of sins: by the latter you will forever discourage a returning
    prodigal, cause sorrow without benefit, pain without pleasure,
    ending in wretchedness and despair. But former experience teaches
    that you are workmen in the art of saving souls; therefore with the
    greater confidence do we recommend to your clemency and favorable
    consideration, the author and subject of this communication.
    "Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely." Brother
    Phelps says he will, and so far as we are concerned, we say he may.

    In the bonds of the covenant,

                                 ORSON HYDE,

                                 JOHN E. PAGE.

To this piteous appeal from one who had wandered far from the fold, and who had been torn by the thorns, the Prophet wrote a most worthy reply--a reply which clearly indicates that the spirit of the Master burned brightly in the breast of the servant.

                JOSEPH SMITH'S LETTER TO W. W. PHELPS.

                             NAUVOO, HANCOCK CO., ILLINOIS, July 22, 1840.

    DEAR BROTHER PHELPS--I must say that it is with no ordinary
    feelings I endeavor to write a few lines to you in answer to yours
    of the 29th ultimo; at the same time I am rejoiced at the privilege
    granted me.

    You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well as
    Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were, when we read your
    letter--truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion
    when we ascertained your resolves, etc. I can assure you I feel
    a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the
    approbation of Jehovah, (whose servant I am) and agreeably to the
    principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed;
    and inasmuch as longsuffering, patience and mercy have ever
    characterized the dealings of our Heavenly Father towards the
    humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example, cherish
    the same principles, and by so doing be a savior of my fellow men.

    It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your
    behavior--the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to
    drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against
    us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and
    enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord--"had it been an
    enemy, we could have borne it." "In the day that thou stoodest on
    the other side, in the day when strangers carried away captive his
    forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
    Far West, even thou wast as one of them; but thou shouldest not
    have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a
    stranger, neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of
    distress."

    However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been
    done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. And having
    been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our
    God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the powers of
    the adversary, be brought into the liberty of God's dear children,
    and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by
    diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend yourself to our
    God, and your God, and to The Church of Jesus Christ.

    Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine,
    I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of
    fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

    Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression
    was taken, when it was unanimously--

    Resolved, That W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

         "Come on, dear brother, since the war is past,
         For friends at first are friends again at last."

                                     Yours as ever,

                                                JOSEPH SMITH, JR.

Some time after this, when laying out work for the brethren to do, in a sudden burst of kindness he said to his secretary:

    Write Oliver Cowdery, and ask him if he has not eaten husks long
    enough. If he is not almost ready to return, be clothed with robes
    of righteousness, and go up to Jerusalem. Orson Hyde hath need of
    him.

A letter was written accordingly, but the Prophet's generous tender of forgiveness and fellowship called forth no response from Oliver Cowdery, once the second Elder of The Church, and the first to make public proclamation of the Gospel to the world. Subsequently, however, he did return, namely in 1848.

It may not be amiss here to call the attention of the reader to a peculiarity of Mormonism, which is illustrated, not only by this case of Phelps, but by a multitude of other cases of the same character; and that is: whenever the religion of the Latter-day Saints--the Gospel of Jesus Christ--takes hold of men, and conviction of its truth has struck deep into the human soul, they may through transgression lose the fellowship of the Saints and of The Church; they may wander out upon the hills and through the deserts, away from the fold, but they can never forget the sweet communion of the Spirit of God, which they enjoyed before their fall; nor can they forget the fact that they once knew that Mormonism was true. The recollection of those things operates upon the mind, and not infrequently leads to a sincere repentance; and it has often happened, in the experience of The Church, that men who through transgression turned away from the truth, after thorns have torn their flesh, and the wild briar stripped them of their covering, they return and humbly beg to be re-admitted into their Father's house. Lucifer-like, they cannot forget the heights from which they fell, they cannot all forget the splendor of that glory and the happiness of that peace they enjoyed in God's Kingdom, and wicked indeed must that heart become, that these recollections will not lead to repentance. May not they have so far transgressed that they cannot repent, and are beyond even the desire for forgiveness? Are they not the sons of perdition? Thank God, their numbers are few!

Again, those who fall away from Mormonism carry with them the evidences of that fall. Unbelievers say to Mormons, "Come out of the darkness of your superstitions into God's sunlight of freedom"--but when one looks upon the fate, the condition and experience of those who have denied the faith, he receives small encouragement to obey the summons. Seldom indeed are they prospered even in the affairs of this world, and the canker-worm gnawing within, writes upon their faces the anguish of heart which their lying lips deny. They smile, but smiling suffer; the heart still beats, but brokenly lives on; and who so blind that he would exchange the peace, the joy, the holy aspirations and assurances which the Gospel brings, for the unrest, the gloom, darkness, uncertainty and fearfulness, which forever haunt the mind of the apostate? Only those who would exchange the glorious light of heaven for the murky blackness of hell.
