JOHN C. BENNETT.

ABOUT this time, there were other characters which had become attracted to The Church, and who became prominent in the events which occurred at Nauvoo. Among them was Dr. John C. Bennett, described as "a man of enterprise, extensive acquirements, and of independent mind, one calculated to be of great benefit to The Church." His attention had been attracted to the Mormon people during their persecutions in Missouri. At that time he was brigadier-general of the "Invincible Dragoons" of Illinois, and wrote to the leaders of The Church in the hours of their deepest distress, proffering to go to their assistance with all the forces he could raise in Illinois, as his bosom swelled with indignation at the treatment the Saints received at the hands of the cruel but cowardly Missourians. That proffered service, however, was not accepted; doubtless because the Saints depended for vindication of their reputation, and redress of their wrongs, upon the officers of the State and Nation, rather than upon adventurers who offered their service to wage war upon their enemies. But after the Saints began gathering at Commerce, he again expressed a desire to connect his fortunes with theirs.

As this man may properly be regarded as the "Benedict Arnold" of The Church at Nauvoo, I shall take the liberty of now noting a few expressions in his first letters to Joseph the Prophet, which, if they fail to adorn a tale, they will at least point a moral.

When he contemplated joining his fortunes with The Church at Commerce, he held the position of quartermaster-general in the militia of the State of Illinois, a position he did not wish to resign. Indeed he expressed a desire to hold the position for a number of years. He was also a physician with an extensive practice, and sent extracts from the Louisville Courier-Journal which gave evidence of high standing in his profession. Writing of these things to Joseph, he said:

    I do not expect to resign my office of quartermaster-general of
    the State of Illinois, in the event of my removal to Commerce,
    unless you advise otherwise. I shall likewise expect to practice
    my profession, but at the same time your people shall have all the
    benefit of my speaking power, and my untiring energies in behalf of
    the good and holy faith.

In a communication following the one from which I make the above quotation he said:

    You are aware that at the time of your most bitter persecution, I
    was with you in feeling, and proffered you my military knowledge
    and powers.

The egotism of the man plainly appears in these expressions, and manifests a spirit that is altogether at variance with the humility required by the Gospel, and doubtless that self-importance laid the foundation of his subsequent fall. While Joseph extended a hearty welcome to the doctor to come to Nauvoo, he by no means held out very flattering inducements to him, as may be seen by Joseph's letters to him in answer to those of Bennett's, expressing his determination to join the Saints at Commerce. He said:

    I have no doubt that you would be of great service to this
    community in practicing your profession, as well as those other
    abilities of which you are in possession. Though to devote
    your time and abilities in the cause of truth and a suffering
    people, may not be the means of exalting you in the eyes of this
    generation, or securing you the riches of this world, yet by so
    doing you may rely on the approval of Jehovah, "that blessing which
    maketh rich and addeth no sorrow." * * * Therefore, my general
    invitation is, let all who will come, come and partake of the
    poverty of Nauvoo, freely.

    I should be disposed to give you a special invitation to come as
    early as possible, believing you will be of great service to us.
    However, you must make your own arrangements according to your
    circumstances. Were it possible for you to come here this season
    to suffer affliction with the people of God, no one will be more
    pleased to give you a cordial welcome than myself.

Surely this was frank enough, and ought to have dispelled from the doctor's mind, if at that time such ideas lurked there, all thoughts of winning worldly fame, or gratifying vain ambition, by linking his fortunes with those of The Church of Jesus Christ.
