ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF GOVERNOR BOGGS.

It was rumored in Nauvoo about the middle of the month of May, 1842, that ex-Governor Boggs, of Missouri, had been assassinated by an unknown hand, at his residence in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. The ex-governor, however, did not die from the wounds he received, but recovered in the course of several days. The assault made upon him by his enemy, whoever he might be, occurred on the sixth of May, in the year above named. He was seated in a room by himself, when some person discharged a pistol loaded with buckshot, through the adjoining window. Three of the shot took effect in his head--one of which, it was said, penetrated his brain. His son, hearing the shot, burst into the room and found him in a helpless condition. The pistol from which the shot was fired was found under the window, and there, too, were the footprints of the would-be assassin.

No sooner was the news of the affair heard than speculation was rife as to the parties who had perpetrated the deed; and in consequence of the infamous part taken by Boggs in driving the Saints from the State of Missouri, during the period that he was governor, it was not long before "Joe Smith and the Mormons" were accused of the deed. The Quincy Whig, in its issue of May 21st, said:

    There are several rumors in circulation in regard to the horrid
    affair; one of which throws the crime upon the Mormons, from the
    fact, we suppose, that Mr. Boggs was governor at the time, and
    in no small degree instrumental in driving them from the State.
    Smith, too, the Mormon Prophet, as we understand, prophesied a year
    or so ago, his death by violent means. Hence, there is plenty of
    foundation for rumor.

To this statement the Prophet Joseph wrote a reply and sent it to the editor of the Whig, Mr. Bartlett:

    DEAR SIR--In your paper of the 21st inst., [May] you have done me
    manifest injustice, in ascribing to me a prediction of the demise
    of Lilburn W. Boggs, Esq., ex-governor of Missouri, by violent
    hands. Boggs was a candidate for the State senate, and, I presume,
    fell by the hand of a political opponent, with his hands and face
    yet dripping with the blood of murder; but he died [1] not through
    my instrumentality. My hands are clean and my heart pure, from the
    blood of all men.

As soon as Boggs recovered sufficiently, he went before Samuel Weston, a justice of the peace at Independence, and one of the characters that some of my readers of "The Missouri Persecutions" will remember as taking part in driving the Saints from their homes in Jackson County--before him Boggs made affidavit that he had reason to believe, from evidence and information then in his possession, that "Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, was accessory before the fact of the intended murder," and therefore applied to Thomas Reynolds, governor of Missouri, to make a demand on the governor of Illinois, to deliver Joseph Smith up to some person authorized to receive him on behalf of the State of Missouri, to be dealt with according to law.

Governor Reynolds promptly granted the request and made the demand on the governor of Illinois for the surrender of Joseph to one E. R. Ford, who was appointed the agent of Missouri to receive him. In making the demand, Governor Reynolds said:

    Whereas it appears * * * that one Joseph Smith is a fugitive from
    justice, charged with being accessory before the fact, to an
    assault with intent to kill, made by one O. P. Rockwell, on Lilburn
    W. Boggs, in this State [Missouri]; and is represented to the
    executive department of this State as having fled to the State of
    Illinois; Now, therefore, I, * * * do by these presents demand the
    surrender and delivering of the said Joseph Smith, etc., etc.

We have given this extract for the requisition verbatim, because, in the first place, the affidavit of Boggs, upon the strength of which Governor Reynolds made his demand for the surrender of Joseph Smith, does not claim that he was a fugitive from justice, or that he had fled from the State of Missouri to Illinois; but on the contrary, the affidavit says that he was a "citizen or resident of Illinois," hence the statement of fact in the affidavit was not sufficient to justify the demand for Joseph Smith to be surrendered to Missouri. A person resident in a State may not be delivered up to the authorities of another State for alleged offenses, unless it is represented that he has fled from the State making the demand for his surrender, to escape from justice. This charge was not made by Boggs in his affidavit, which was Governor Reynolds' only authority for making the demand. But in what Boggs failed, Governor Reynolds made up; and upon his own responsibility, charged in his demand on Illinois that Joseph Smith was "a fugitive from justice," and had "fled to Illinois;" a statement that was at once untrue, and wholly gratuitous on the part of the executive of Missouri, and proves him to be a willing persecutor of the innocent. Secondly, it was this assumption on the part of Reynolds that did much towards making the demand on Illinois void. But more of this anon.

Governor Carlin, of Illinois, respected the demand of Missouri, and issued a warrant for the arrest of O. P. Rockwell as principal and Joseph Smith as accessory before the fact, in an assault with intent to kill, upon ex-Governor Boggs. The papers were placed in the hands of the deputy sheriff of Adams County, who, with two assistants, at once repaired to Nauvoo, and on the eighth of August, 1842, arrested the above named parties. There was no evasion of the officers, but the municipal court of Nauvoo, at once, on the application of the parties arrested, issued a writ of habeas corpus, requiring the officers having the prisoners in charge, to bring them before that tribunal, in order that the legality of the warrant under which they were arrested might be tested. This the sheriff refused to do, as he claimed that the municipal court had no jurisdiction in the case, but he left the prisoners in the care of the city marshal, without, however, leaving the original writ upon which alone they could be held; and the deputy sheriff and his assistants returned to Quincy; the prisoners being turned loose to go about their business.

During the absence of the deputy sheriff, Joseph had secured a writ of habeas corpus from the master in chancery, as it was questionable if the municipal court of Nauvoo had the authority to issue such writs in cases arising under the laws of the State or the United States. [2] The officers returned from Quincy on the tenth, but in the interim it had been decided by Joseph and his friends, that the best thing for himself and Rockwell to do under the excitement of public sentiment then existing was to keep out of the way for a season; so that the officers were unable to find them on their return.

Joseph crossed the river and stayed at his uncle John's house for a few days, in the settlement called Zarahemla; but on the night of the eleventh of August, he met by appointment his brother Hyrum, Rockwell, his wife Emma and several other friends at the south point of the island that stands midway in the river between Nauvoo and Montrose.

It had been rumored that the governor of Iowa had also issued a warrant for the arrest of Joseph and Rockwell, where-upon it was decided that it would be better for them to remain on the Illinois side of the river. Subsequent events, however, proved that this rumor was a false one. Joseph was rowed up the river by a Brother Dunham to a point near the home of a Brother Derby. Rockwell had been set ashore and had proceeded to the same point on foot, where he built a fire on the bank of the river, that Dunham might know where to land. At Derby's, the Prophet remained in hiding for some time, and Rockwell went east, remaining for several months in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

From his place of concealment, Joseph directed the movements of the people at Nauvoo, and managed his own business through faithful agents, who met with him occasionally. Emma spent considerable of her time with him, and beguiled the loneliness of those weary hours of inactivity that he, whose life is the synonym for activity, had to endure.

During those days of exile, one gets a glimpse of the Prophet's private life and character, that in part explains the mystery of his power and influence over his friends and his people:--it was his unbounded love for them. Speaking of the meeting with his friends in the night at the island, in the account he gives of it in the Book of the Law of the Lord, he says:

    How glorious were my feelings when I met that faithful and friendly
    band, on the night of the eleventh [of August], on the island at
    the mouth of the slough between Zarahemla and Nauvoo. With what
    unspeakable delight, and what transports of joy swelled my bosom,
    when I took by the hand, on that night, my beloved Emma--she that
    was my wife, even the wife of my youth, and choice of my heart.
    Many were the vibrations of my mind when I contemplated for a
    moment the many scenes we had been called to pass through, the
    fatigues and the toils, the sorrows and sufferings, and the joys
    and the consolations, from time to time, which had strewed our
    paths and crowned our board. Oh, what a commingling of thoughts
    filled my mind for the moment!--and again she is here, even in the
    seventh trouble--undaunted, firm and unwavering--unchangeable,
    affectionate Emma!

Of his brother Hyrum on the same occasion he says:

    There was Brother Hyrum, who next took me by the hand--a natural
    brother. Thought I to myself, Brother Hyrum, what a faithful heart
    you have got! Oh, may the Eternal Jehovah crown eternal blessings
    upon your head, as a reward for the care you have had for my soul!
    Oh, how many are the sorrows we have shared together! and again
    we find ourselves shackled by the unrelenting hand of oppression.
    Hyrum, thy name shall be written in the Book of the Law of the
    Lord, for those who come after to look upon, that they may pattern
    after thy works. [3]

So he goes on to call the faithful by their names and record their deeds of love manifested towards himself, and pronounces his blessings upon them; and if, as one of old said, "We know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren"--surely Joseph Smith possessed that witness--he loved his brethren better than his life!

Some of the brethren proposed that Joseph should go up to the pine woods of Wisconsin, where a number of the brethren were engaged in getting out timber for the Temple and Nauvoo House, until the excitement should subside in Illinois. Of this proposition, Joseph said in a letter to Emma:

    My mind will eternally revolt at every suggestion of that kind. * *
    * My safety is with you if you want to have it so. * * * If I go to
    the pine country, you shall go along with me, and the children; and
    if you and the children go not with me, I don't go. I do not wish
    to exile myself for the sake of my own life. I would rather fight
    it out. It is for your sakes therefore that I would do such a thing.

This plan, however, was abandoned.

Footnotes

1. It was then supposed that Boggs was dead. It was not until several days later that the news of his recovery reached Nauvoo or Quincy.

2. I say "questionable" as representing the views of the Prophet's friends. As a matter of fact, in my judgment, there could be no question about the municipal court having no such power. And if the letter of the Nauvoo charter justified the idea that the municipal court possessed any such power to interrupt the process of the State and United States courts, it was a manifest defect in the wording of the charter, a solecism that would render that part of the charter void.

3. Some years before this, in December, 1835, Joseph said of Hyrum: "I could pray in my heart that all men were like my brother Hyrum, who possesses the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ; and I love him with that love that is stronger than death, for I never had occasion to rebuke him, nor he me."--Mill. Star, vol. VX. P. 521.
