DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENT AT NAUVOO--MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS.

In this chapter I quote the sayings and instructions of the Prophet on a variety of topics, uttered principally within the period under consideration--from January to June 1843--though there are some exceptions.

THE VARIOUS KINDS OF BEINGS IN HEAVEN.

    There are two kinds of beings in heaven, viz: Angels who are
    resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones. For
    instance, Jesus said, "Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not
    flesh and bones as you see me have." Second, the spirits of just
    men made perfect, they who are not resurrected, but inherit the
    same glory.

HOW TO DETERMINE THE NATURE OF AN ADMINISTRATION.

    When a messenger comes, saying he has a message from God, offer
    him your hand, and request him to shake hands with you. If he be
    an angel, he will do so, and you will feel his hand. If he be the
    spirit of a just man made perfect he will come in his glory, for
    that is the only way he can appear. Ask him to shake hands with
    you, but he will not move, because it is contrary to the order of
    heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will still deliver his
    message. If it be the Devil as an angel of light, when you ask him
    to shake hands, he will offer you his hand but you will not feel
    anything; you may therefore detect him. These are three grand keys
    whereby you may know whether or not any administration is from God.

THE PROPHET'S VIEW ON THE CREEDS OF MEN.

    I cannot believe in any of the creeds of the different
    denominations, because they all have some things in them I cannot
    subscribe to, though all of them have some truth. I want to come up
    in the presence of God, and learn all things; but the creeds set up
    stakes and say, "Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further," which I
    cannot subscribe to.

THE PROPHET ON FRIENDSHIP.

    Friendship is one of the grand fundamental principles of
    "Mormonism" to revolutionize and civilize the world, and cause wars
    and contentions to cease, and men to become friends and brothers.
    Even the wolf and the lamb shall dwell together; the leopard shall
    lie down with the kid; the calf and young lion, and the fatling;
    and a little child shall lead them; the bear and the cow shall lie
    down together, and the sucking child shall play on the hole of the
    asp and the weaned child shall play on the cockatrice's den, and
    they shall not hurt or destroy in all My holy mountain, saith the
    Lord of hosts. It is a time-honored adage that love begets love.
    Let us pour forth love--show forth all kindness unto all mankind
    and the Lord will reward us with everlasting increase; cast our
    bread upon the waters, and we shall receive it after many days,
    increased to a hundredfold.

ON THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD.

    Every word that proceedeth from the mouth of Jehovah has such
    an influence over the human mind--the logical mind--that it is
    convincing, without other testimony. Faith cometh by hearing. If
    ten thousand men testify to a truth you know, would it add to your
    faith? No. Or will ten thousand testimonies destroy your knowledge
    of a fact? No. I don't want any one to tell me I am a prophet, or
    attempt to prove my word.

THE PROPHET ON THE LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
UNITED STATES.

    It is one of the first principles of my life and one that I have
    cultivated from my childhood, having been taught it by my father,
    to allow every one the liberty of conscience. I am the greatest
    advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the
    earth. In my feelings I am always ready to die in the protection of
    the weak and oppressed in their just rights. The only fault I find
    with the Constitution is, it is not broad enough to cover the whole
    ground. Although it provides that all men shall enjoy religious
    freedom, yet it does not provide the manner in which that freedom
    can be preserved, nor for the punishment of government officers
    who refuse to protect the people in their religious rights, or
    punish those mobs, States or communities who interfere with the
    rights of people on account of their religion. Its sentiments are
    good, but it provides no means of enforcing them. It has but this
    one fault. Under its provision, a man or people who are able to
    protect themselves can get along well enough, but those who have
    the misfortune to be weak or unpopular are left to the merciless
    rage of popular fury. The Constitution should contain a provision
    that every officer of the government who should neglect or refuse
    to extend the protection guaranteed in the Constitution should be
    subject to capital punishment; and then the President of the United
    States would not say "Your cause is just but I can do nothing for
    you;" governors issue exterminating orders; or judges say, "The men
    ought to have the protection of law, but it won't please the mob;
    the men must die anyhow to satisfy the clamor of the rabble; they
    must be hung, or Missouri be damned to all eternity." Executive
    writs could be issued when they ought to be, and not be made
    instruments of cruelty to oppress the innocent, and persecute men
    whose religion is unpopular.

THE PROPHET'S COMMENT ON GOOD MEN.

    I do not think there have been many good men on the earth since
    the days of Adam; but there was one good man and His name was
    Jesus. Many persons think a prophet must be a great deal better
    than anybody else. Suppose I would condescend--yes, I will call
    it condescend--to be a great deal better than any of you, I would
    be raised up to the highest heavens, and who should I have to
    accompany me? I love that man better who swears a stream as long as
    my arm, yet deals justice to his neighbors and mercifully deals his
    substance to the poor, than the long, smooth-faced hypocrite. I do
    not want you to think I am very righteous, for I am not. God judges
    men according to the use they make of the light which He gives them.

THE PROPHET'S ESTIMATE AND DESCRIPTION OF HIMSELF.

    I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain,
    and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by
    coming in contact with something else, striking with accelerated
    force against religious bigotry, priest-craft, lawyer-craft,
    doctor-craft, lying editors, suborned judges and jurors, and the
    authority of perjured executives, backed by mobs, blasphemers,
    licentious and corrupt men and women, all hell knocking off a
    corner here and a corner there. Thus I will become a smooth and
    polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty, who will give me
    dominion over all and every one of them, when their refuge of lies
    shall fail, and their hiding place shall be destroyed, while these
    smooth polished stones with which I come in contact become marred.
    * * * I am a rough stone. The sound of the hammer and chisel was
    never heard on me until the Lord took me in hand. I desire the
    learning and wisdom of heaven alone. I have not the least idea, if
    Christ should come to the earth and preach such rough things as He
    preached to the Jews, but that this generation would reject Him for
    being so rough.

OTHER WORLDS THAN OURS AND THEIR REDEMPTION.

Commenting on Revelation v: 13--"And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever"--the Prophet said:

    I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that had
    been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,
    strange beasts of which we have no conception; all might be seen in
    heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven.
    John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His
    hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men, and He will
    gratify Himself with them.

THE PROPHET'S DEFINITION OF THE WORD MORMON.

    Before I give a definition, however, to the word Mormon, let me say
    that the Bible, in its widest sense, means good, for the Savior
    says, according to the Gospel of John, "I am the good shepherd,"
    and it will not be beyond the common use of terms to say that good
    is among the most important in use, and though known by various
    names in different languages, still its meaning is the same, and
    is ever in opposition to bad. We say from the Saxon good; the Dane
    god; the Goth goda; the German gut; the Dutch goed; the Latin
    bonus; the Greek kalos; the Hebrew tob, and the Egyptian mon.
    Hence, with the addition of more, or the contraction mor, we have
    the word Mormon, which means, literally, more good.

MAKE YOUR CALLING AND ELECTION SURE.

    Commenting on II Peter I, 5-10, and also verse 19, the Prophet
    said: Now there is some grand secret here, and keys to unlock the
    subject. Notwithstanding the Apostle exhorts them to add to their
    faith virtue, temperance, etc., yet he exhorts them to make their
    calling and election sure. And though they had heard an audible
    voice from heaven bearing testimony that Jesus was the Son of God,
    yet he says we have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do
    well that ye take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place.
    Now, wherein could they have a more sure word of prophecy than to
    hear the voice of God saying, "This is my beloved Son?" etc. Now
    for the secret and grand key. Though they might hear the voice
    of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God, this would be no
    evidence that their election and calling was made sure; that they
    had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with Him. They then
    would want that more sure word of prophecy, that they were sealed
    in the heavens and had the promise of eternal life in the kingdom
    of God. Then, having this promise sealed unto them, it was an
    anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Though the thunder might
    roll and the lightning flash and earthquakes bellow, and war gather
    thick around, yet this hope and knowledge would support the soul
    in every hour of trial, trouble and tribulation. Then knowledge
    through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that
    unlocks the glories and mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven.

THE VALUE OF AGED MEN IN COUNCIL.

    The way to get along in any important matter is to gather unto
    yourself wise men, experienced and aged men, to assist in council
    in all times of trouble. Handsome men are not apt to be wise
    and strong-minded; but the strength of a strong-minded man will
    generally create coarse features, like the rough, strong bough of
    the oak. You will always discover in the first glance of a man, in
    the outline of his features, something of his mind.

SALVATION--IN WHAT IT CONSISTS.

    Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our
    enemies and put them under our feet. And when we have power to
    put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to
    triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are
    saved as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until he had put
    all enemies under His feet, and the last enemy was death.

DESIRABILITY OF POSSESSING EARTHLY TABERNACLES.

    Now, in this world mankind are naturally selfish, ambitious and
    striving to excel one above another, yet some are willing to build
    up others as well as themselves. So in the other world there are a
    variety of spirits. Some seek to excel. And this was the case with
    Lucifer when he fell. He sought for things which were unlawful.
    Hence he was cast down, and it is said he drew away many with him,
    and the greatness of his punishment is that he shall not have a
    tabernacle. This is his punishment. So the Devil, thinking to
    thwart the decree of God by going up and down in the earth seeking
    whom he may destroy--any person that he can find that will yield to
    him, he will bind him, and take possession of the body and reign
    there, glorying in it mightily, not thinking that he had gotten a
    stolen tabernacle, and by and by some one having authority will
    come along and cast him out and restore the tabernacle to its
    rightful owner. But the devil steals a tabernacle because he has
    not one of his own, but if he steals one, he is always liable to be
    turned out of doors.

OF THE SPIRITS IN PRISON.

    I will say something about the spirits in prison. There has been
    much said by modern divines about the words of Jesus (when on the
    cross) to the thief, saying, "This day shalt thou be with me in
    paradise." King James' translation makes it out to say paradise.
    But what is paradise? It is a modern word, it does not answer at
    all to the original word that Jesus made use of. Find the original
    of the word paradise. You may as easily find a needle in a haymow.
    Here is a chance for battle, ye learned men. There is nothing in
    the original word in Greek from which this was taken that signifies
    paradise, but it was, "This day thou shalt be with me in the world
    of spirits: then I will teach you all about it and answer your
    inquiries." And Peter says he went out and preached to the world of
    spirits (spirits in prison, 1st Peter, 3rd chapter, 19th verse), so
    that they who would receive it could have it answered by proxy by
    those who live on the earth. * * * Hades, the Greek, or Sheol, the
    Hebrew, these two significations means a world of spirits. Hades,
    Sheol, paradise, spirits in prison, are all one, it is a world of
    spirits. The righteous and the wicked will go to the same world of
    spirits until the resurrection. "I do not think so," says one. If
    you will go to my house any time, I will take my lexicon and prove
    it to you. The great misery of departed spirits in the world of
    spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short
    of the glory that others enjoy, and that they might have enjoyed
    themselves, and they are their own accusers.

THE PERSISTENCE OF OBTAINED INTELLIGENCE.

    Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life,
    it will rise with us in the resurrection, and if a person gains
    more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence
    and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in
    the world to come. There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven
    before the foundation of this world, upon which all blessings are
    predicated, and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by
    obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.

THE DESIRABILITY AND POWER OF KNOWLEDGE.

    If we get puffed up by thinking that we have much knowledge, we
    are apt to get a contentious spirit, and correct knowledge is
    necessary to cast out that spirit. The evil of being puffed up with
    correct [though useless] knowledge is not so great as the evil of
    contention. Knowledge does away with darkness, suspense and doubt,
    for these cannot exist where knowledge is. * * * In knowledge there
    is power. God has more power than all other beings, because He has
    greater knowledge, and hence He knows how to subject all other
    beings to Him. He has power over all. * * * It is not wisdom that
    we shall have all knowledge at once presented before us, but that
    we should have a little at a time; then we can comprehend it. *
    * * Add to your faith knowledge, etc. The principle of knowledge
    is the principle of salvation. This principle can be comprehended
    by the faithful and diligent; and every one that does not obtain
    knowledge sufficient to be saved will be condemned. The principle
    of salvation is given us through the knowledge of Jesus Christ.
