MINOR MATTERS IN THE NEW MOVE AGAINST THE PROPHET.

IT now becomes necessary to note a few minor events that occurred. As soon as the sheriffs started for Dixon with Joseph in their power, Emma Smith had her carriage made ready and at once started for Nauvoo with her children, in order to set some scheme or other on foot looking to her husband's deliverance.

Joseph, when arriving at Dixon a prisoner, dispatched William Clayton with a message to his brother Hyrum telling what had befallen him, and requesting that assistance be at once sent to him. Clayton boarded the steamer Amaranth, at Rock Island, and arrived in Nauvoo about two o'clock in the afternoon of Sunday, the twenty-fifth of June. Meeting was in progress when Hyrum stepped into the stand and interrupted the proceedings, by announcing that he wanted to meet with the brethren at the Masonic Hall.

The quiet of the Sabbath was immediately changed into excitement, and the brethren rushed to the hall in such numbers that not one-fourth could gain admittance, so the meeting was adjourned to the green, where a hollow square was formed about Hyrum, who related the story Clayton had told him respecting the capture of his brother, and called for volunteers to go to his assistance, and see that he had his rights. Immediately three hundred offered their services and from them a company was selected such as was needed; and before sunset, one hundred and seventy-five men were in the saddle under command of Generals Wilson Law and C. C. Rich, en route for Peoria.

Before the company left Nauvoo Elder Wilford Woodruff opened a barrel of gunpowder and invited every man that was going to the assistance of the Prophet to fill his flask or powder horn. The company was well armed and well mounted, and presented rather a formidable appearance.

Besides sending out this company to find and protect his brother, Hyrum sent about seventy-five men on the steamer Maid of Iowa, a small steamboat purchased by the people of Nauvoo some months before, and placed under the command of Captain Dan Jones.

The company was to go down the Mississippi to the mouth of the Illinois river, thence up that stream as far as Peoria; for it was expected that Joseph was being conveyed to Ottawa, and it was feared by Hyrum that an attempt would be made when the party approached the Illinois river to convey Joseph to one of the crafts plying between Peoria and St. Louis and so take him to Missouri. Hence this company on the Maid of Iowa was instructed to take the course mentioned, and to examine the steamboats they met, and if they learned that the Prophet was a prisoner on any one of them, they were to render whatever assistance might be within their power.

The command under Brothers Law and Rich divided and subdivided in going through the country, and on the twenty-seventh a small company under the command of Captain Thomas Grover met Stephen Markham, whom Joseph had dispatched to find the brethren that he suspected had been sent from Nauvoo to his assistance; Markham had instructions to meet the Prophet with any company of brethren he might find at Monmouth.

Near Monmouth, and before the arrival of the main body of Joseph's friends, Reynolds and Wilson planned a scheme of going into that town, raising a mob and taking the Prophet by force into Missouri. The plot failed, however, as it was overheard by P. W. Conover, and Sheriff Campbell took both Wilson and Reynolds into his immediate custody. These men had a strong dislike of going to Nauvoo, as they feared they would never leave the place alive. But the Prophet pledged his word that no harm should befall them. As the friends of Joseph kept dropping in singly, or in squads, the fear of his enemies increased. Reynolds made special inquiries as to whether "Jem Flack" was in the company, and on being answered in the affirmative, he exclaimed, as he turned deathly pale, "I am a dead man!" for he had given Flack a deadly provocation. When Flack rode up, however, the Prophet called him up to him and strictly charged him that whatever insult he had received from Reynolds, not to injure a hair of his head, since he had given his word of honor that he should not be injured; and Flack agreed to let him alone.

Before noon of the thirtieth, Joseph's company, which now numbered about one hundred and forty, approached Nauvoo. Word had previously been sent in as to the probable time of his arrival, and the people prepared to give him a royal reception.

Hyrum Smith and Emma, accompanied by the brass band and a long train of carriages, met the Prophet's company a mile and a half north of the city, and received him. The enthusiasm of the people knew no bounds. The Prophet met his brother and wife with a fond embrace; from the latter, only a few days before, he had been torn away in the most arbitrary and cruel manner, and their reunion was a joy indeed.

Joseph now mounted his favorite horse, "Old Charley," and with Emma riding proudly at his side, and surrounded by his body guard, he led the procession into the city, amid the enthusiastic cheers of the people, the firing of musketry and cannon, and the lively strains of the band. At the gate of the Mansion stood the Prophet's mother, with tears of joy rolling down her aged cheeks, to welcome her son, whom she had seen so many times in the hands of his enemies. Here, too, his children flocked about him and welcomed him with unreserved, childish delight.

The vast crowd that had gathered in front of the Mansion appeared unwilling to leave without some word from their revered leader. When he observed this, he mounted the fence, thanked them and blessed them for their kindness to him, and told them he would address them in the grove, near the temple, at four o'clock.

A company of fifty sat down at the Prophet's table to partake of the feast provided, and Wilson and Reynolds, who had treated him so inhumanly when he was in their power, were placed at the head of the table, and waited upon by Emma with the utmost regard for their comfort, though they had denied her speech with her husband, and were not even willing that she should take to him his hat and coat. Gall to them indeed must have been the kindness of the Prophet and his wife, whom but a few days before they had treated with such harshness.

In the afternoon, several thousand people assembled at the grove, and at four o'clock, the Prophet addressed them in an animated speech of considerable length, in which he related to them his adventures while in the power of his enemies, and contended that the municipal court had the right to hear cases arising under writs of habeas corpus. In the course of his speech he allowed himself to be carried away by the fervor of his eloquence beyond the bounds of prudence; a circumstance, however, that will create no astonishment when the excitement and the indignation under which he was laboring, and that arose out of sense of outraged justice and humanity is taken into consideration. Under such circumstances and from such temperaments as that of the Prophet, we shall look in vain at such times for dispassionate discourse, and more than human must that man be, who, under the accumulated wrongs of years of oppression, can always confine his speech, when recounting those wrongs, within the lines that cold, calculating wisdom would draw. The speech, however, was doubtless one of the most characteristic that we have of the Prophet, and for that reason I give it in extenso, as reported by Elders Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff. It should also be remarked that the report was made in long-hand, and doubtless there exist many imperfections in it, and it should only be regarded as a synopsis of his speech:

    The congregation is large. I shall require attention. I discovered
    what the emotions of the people were on my arrival at this city,
    and I have come here to say, "How do you do?" to all parties; and
    I do now at this time say to all, "How do you do?" I meet you with
    a heart full of gratitude to Almighty God, and I presume you all
    feel the same. I am well--I am hearty. I hardly know how to express
    my feelings. I feel as strong as a giant. I pulled sticks with the
    men coming along, and I pulled up with one hand the strongest man
    that could be found. Then two men tried, but they could not pull me
    up, and I continued to pull, mentally, until I pulled Missouri to
    Nauvoo. But I will pass from that subject.

    There has been great excitement in the country since Joseph H.
    Reynolds and Harmon T. Wilson took me; but I have been cool and
    dispassionate through the whole. Thank God, I am now a prisoner in
    the hands of the municipal court of Nauvoo, and not in the hands of
    Missourians.

    It is not so much my object to tell of my afflictions, trials, and
    troubles as to speak of the writ of habeas corpus, so that the
    minds of all may be corrected. It has been asserted by the great
    and wise men, lawyers, and others, that our municipal powers and
    legal tribunals are not to be sanctioned by the authorities of the
    State; and accordingly they want to make it lawful to drag away
    innocent men from their families and friends, and have them put to
    death by ungodly men for their religion!

    Relative to our city charter, courts, right of habeas corpus,
    etc., I wish you to know and publish that we have all power; and if
    any man from this time forth says anything to the contrary, cast it
    into his teeth.

    There is a secret in this. If there is not power in our charter and
    courts, then there is not power in the State of Illinois, nor in
    the Congress or Constitution of the United States; for the United
    States gave unto Illinois her constitution or charter, and Illinois
    gave unto Nauvoo her charters, ceding unto us our vested rights,
    which she has no right or power to take from us. All the power
    there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo; and any man that says to
    the contrary is a fool.

    The municipal court has all the power to issue and determine
    writs of habeas corpus within the limits of this city that the
    legislature can confer. This city has all the power that the State
    courts have, and was given by the same authority--the legislature.

    I want you to hear and learn, O Israel, this day, what is for the
    happiness and peace of this city and people. If our enemies are
    determined to oppress us and deprive us of our constitutional
    rights and privileges as they have done, and if the authorities
    that are on the earth will not sustain us in our rights, nor give
    us that protection which the laws and Constitution of the United
    States and of this State guarantee unto us, then we will claim them
    from a higher power--from heaven,--yea, from God Almighty!

    I have dragged these men here by my hand, and will do it again; but
    I swear I will not deal so mildly with them again, for the time has
    come when forbearance is no longer a virtue; and if you or I are
    again taken unlawfully, you are at liberty to give loose to blood
    and thunder. But be cool, be deliberate, be wise, act with almighty
    power; and when you pull, do it effectually--make a sweepstakes
    for once!

    My lot has always been cast among the warmest-hearted people. In
    every time of trouble, friends, even among strangers, have been
    raised up unto me and assisted me.

    The time has come when the vail is torn off from the State of
    Illinois, and its citizens have delivered me from the State of
    Missouri. Friends that were raised up unto me would have spilt
    their life's blood to have torn me from the hands of Reynolds
    and Wilson, if I had asked them, but I told them no, I would be
    delivered by the power of God and generalship; and I have brought
    these men to Nauvoo, and committed them to her from whom I was
    torn, not as prisoners in chains, but as prisoners of kindness. I
    have treated them kindly. I have had the privilege of rewarding
    them good for evil. They took me unlawfully, treated me rigorously,
    strove to deprive me of my rights, and would have run with me into
    Missouri to have been murdered, if Providence had not interposed.
    But now they are in my hands; and I have taken them into my house,
    set them at the head of my table, and placed before them the best
    which my house afforded; and they were waited upon by my wife, whom
    they deprived of seeing me when I was taken.

    I have no doubt but I shall be discharged by the municipal court.
    Were I before any good tribunal, I should be discharged, as the
    Missouri writs are illegal and good for nothing--they are "without
    form and void."

    But before I will bear this unhallowed persecution any
    longer--before I will be dragged away again among my enemies for
    trial, I will spill the last drop of blood in my veins, and will
    see all my enemies IN HELL! To bear it any longer would be a sin,
    and I will not bear it any longer. Shall we bear it any longer?
    [One universal "NO!" ran through all that vast assembly, like a
    loud peal of thunder.]

    I wish the lawyer who says we have no powers in Nauvoo may be
    choked to death with his own words. Don't employ lawyers, or pay
    them money for their knowledge, for I have learnt that they don't
    know anything. I know more than they all.

    Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel. He that believeth
    in our chartered rights may come here and be saved; and he that
    does not shall remain in ignorance. If any lawyer shall say there
    is more power in other places and charters with respect to habeas
    corpus than in Nauvoo, believe it not. I have converted this
    candidate for Congress [pointing to Cyrus Walker, Esq.,] that
    the right of habeas corpus is included in our charter. If he
    continues converted, I will vote for him.

    I have been with these lawyers, and they have treated me well;
    but I am here in Nauvoo, and the Missourians too. I got here by a
    lawful writ of habeas corpus issued by the master of chancery
    of Lee County, and made returnable to the nearest tribunal in the
    fifth judicial district having jurisdiction to try and determine
    such writs; and here is that tribunal, just as it should be.

    However indignant you may feel about the high hand of oppression
    which has been raised against me by these men, use not the hand
    of violence against them, for they could not be prevailed upon to
    come here, till I pledged my honor and my life that a hair of their
    heads should not be hurt. Will you all support my pledge, and thus
    preserve my honor? [One universal "YES!" burst from the assembled
    thousands.] This is another proof of your attachment to me. I
    know how ready you are to do right. You have done great things,
    and manifested your love towards me in flying to my assistance on
    this occasion. I bless you, in the name of the Lord, with all the
    blessings of heaven and earth you are capable of enjoying.

    I have learnt that we have no need to suffer as we have heretofore:
    we can call others to our aid. I know the Almighty will bless all
    good men; He will bless you; and the time has come when there will
    be such a flocking to the standard of liberty as never has been or
    shall be hereafter. What an era has commenced! Our enemies have
    prophesied that we would establish our religion by the sword. Is
    it true? No. But if Missouri will not stay her cruel hand in her
    unhallowed persecutions against us, I restrain you not any longer.
    I say in the name of Jesus Christ, by the authority of the Holy
    Priesthood, I this day turn the key that opens the heavens to
    restrain you no longer from this time forth. I will lead you to
    the battle; and if you are not afraid to die, and feel disposed to
    spill your blood in your own defense, you will not offend me. Be
    not the aggressor: bear until they strike you on one cheek; then
    offer the other, and they will be sure to strike that; then defend
    yourselves, and God will bear you off, and you shall stand forth
    clear before His tribunal.

    If any citizens of Illinois say that we shall not have our rights,
    treat them as strangers and not friends, and let them go to hell
    and be damned! Some say they will mob us. Let them mob and be
    damned! If we have to give up our chartered rights, privileges, and
    freedom, which our fathers fought, bled, and died for, and which
    the Constitution of the United States and of this State guarantee
    unto us, we will do it only at the point of the sword and bayonet.

    Many lawyers contend for those things which are against the rights
    of men, and I can only excuse them because of their ignorance. Go
    forth and advocate the laws and rights of the people, ye lawyers!
    If not, don't get into my hands, or under the lash of my tongue.

    Lawyers say the powers of the Nauvoo charter are dangerous; but
    I ask, is the Constitution of the United States or of this State
    dangerous? No. Neither are the charters granted unto Nauvoo by
    the legislature of Illinois dangerous, and those who say they are
    are fools. We have not enjoyed unmolested those rights which the
    Constitution of the United States of America and our charters grant.

    Missouri and all wicked men raise the hue and cry against us, and
    are not satisfied. Some political aspirants of this State also are
    raising the hue and cry that the powers in the charters granted
    unto the city of Nauvoo are dangerous; and although the general
    assembly have conferred them upon our city, yet the whine is
    raised--"Repeal them--take them away!" Like the boy who swapped
    off his jack-knife, and then cried, "Daddy, daddy, I have sold my
    jack-knife and got sick of my bargain, and I want to get it back
    again."

    But how are they going to help themselves? Raise mobs? And what
    can mobocrats do in the midst of Kirkpatrickites? No better than a
    hunter in the claws of a bear. If mobs come upon you any more here,
    dung your gardens with them. We don't want any excitement; but
    after we have done all, we will rise up, Washington-like, and break
    off the hellish yoke that oppresses us, and we will not be mobbed.

    The day before I was taken at Inlet Grove, I rode with my wife
    through Dixon to visit my friends, and I said to her, "Here is a
    good people." I felt this by the Spirit of God. The next day I was
    a prisoner in their midst, in the hands of Reynolds, of Missouri,
    and Wilson, of Carthage. As the latter drove up, he exclaimed,
    "Ha, ha, ha! By G--, we have got the Prophet now!" He gloried
    much in it, but he is now our prisoner. When they came to take
    me, they held two cocked pistols to my head, and saluted me with,
    "G-- d-- you, I'll shoot you! I'll shoot you, G-- d-- you,"--repeating
    these threats nearly fifty times, from first to last. I asked them
    what they wanted to shoot me for. They said they would do it, if I
    made any resistance.

    "Oh, very well," I replied, "I have no resistance to make." They
    then dragged me away, and I asked them by what authority they did
    these things. They said, "By a writ from the governors of Missouri
    and Illinois." I then told them I wanted a writ of habeas corpus.
    Their reply was, "G-- d-- you, you shan't have it." I told a man
    to go to Dixon, and get me a writ of habeas corpus. Wilson then
    repeated, "G-- d-- you, you shan't have it: I'll shoot you."

    When we arrived at Dixon, I sent for a lawyer, who came; and
    Reynolds shut the door in his face, and would not let me speak
    to him, repeating, "G-- d-- you, I'll shoot you." I turned to him,
    opened my bosom, and told him to "shoot away. I have endured so
    much persecution and oppression that I am sick of life. Why, then,
    don't you shoot and have done with it, instead of talking so much
    about it?"

    This somewhat checked his insolence. I then told him that I
    would have counsel to consult, and eventually I obtained my
    wish. The lawyers came to me and I got a writ of habeas corpus
    for myself, and also a writ against Reynolds and Wilson for
    unlawful proceedings and cruel treatment towards me. Thanks to the
    good citizens of Dixon, who nobly took their stand against such
    unwarrantable and unlawful oppression, my persecutors could not get
    out of the town that night, although, when they first arrived, they
    swore I should not remain in Dixon five minutes, and I found they
    had ordered horses accordingly to proceed to Rock Island. I pledged
    my honor to my counsel that the Nauvoo city charter conferred
    jurisdiction to investigate the subject; so we came to Nauvoo,
    where I am now a prisoner in the custody of a higher tribunal than
    the circuit court.

    The charter says that "the city council shall have power and
    authority to make, ordain, establish and execute such ordinances
    not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States, or of
    this State, as they may deem necessary, for the peace, benefit,
    and safety of the inhabitants of said city." And also that "the
    municipal court shall have power to grant writs of habeas corpus
    in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city council."

    The city council have passed an ordinance "that no citizen of this
    city shall be taken out of this city by any writ, without the
    privilege of a writ of habeas corpus." There is nothing but what
    we have power over, except where restricted by the Constitution of
    the United States. "But," says the mob, "what dangerous powers!"
    Yes--dangerous, because they will protect the innocent and put down
    mobocrats. The Constitution of the United States declares that
    the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be denied.
    Deny me the writ of habeas corpus, and I will fight with gun,
    sword, cannon, whirlwind, and thunder, until they are used up like
    the Kilkenny cats. We have more power than most charters confer,
    because we have power to go behind the writ and try the merits of
    the case.

    If these powers are dangerous, then the Constitution of the United
    States and of this State are dangerous; but they are not dangerous
    to good men: they are only so to bad men who are breakers of the
    laws. So with the laws of the country, and so with the ordinances
    of Nauvoo: they are dangerous to mobs, but not to good men who wish
    to keep the laws.

    We do not go out of Nauvoo to disturb anybody, or any city, town,
    or place. Why, then, need they be troubled about us? Let them
    not meddle with our affair, but let us alone. After we have been
    deprived of our rights and privileges of citizenship, driven
    from town to town, place to place, and State to State, with the
    sacrifice of our homes and lands, our blood has been shed, many
    having been murdered, and all this because of our religion--because
    we worship Almighty God according to the dictates of our
    conscience, shall we longer bear these cruelties which have been
    heaped upon us for the last ten years in the face of heaven, and in
    open violation of the Constitution and laws of these United States
    and of this State? God forbid it. I will not bear it. If they
    take away my rights, I will fight for them manfully and righteously
    until I am used up. We have done nothing against the rights of
    others.

    You speak of lawyers. I am a lawyer, too; but the Almighty God
    has taught me the principle of law; and the true meaning and
    intent of the writ of habeas corpus is to defend the innocent
    and investigate the subject. Go behind the writ, and if the form
    of one that is issued against an innocent man is right, he should
    not be dragged into another State, and there be put to death, or
    be in jeopardy of life and limb, because of prejudice, when he is
    innocent. The benefits of the Constitution and laws are alike for
    all; and the great Eloheim has given me the privilege of having the
    benefits of the Constitution and the writ of habeas corpus; and I
    am bold to ask for this privilege this day; and I ask, in the name
    of Jesus Christ and all that is sacred, that I may have your lives
    and all your energies to carry out the freedom which is chartered
    to us. Will you all help me? If so, make it manifest by raising the
    right hand. [There was a unanimous response, a perfect sea of hands
    being elevated.] Here is truly a committee of the whole.

    When at Dixon, a lawyer came to me as counsel. Reynolds and Wilson
    said I should not speak to any man, and they would shoot any man
    who should dare to speak to me. An old, grey-headed man came up and
    said I should have counsel, and he was not afraid of their pistols.

    The people of Dixon were ready to take me from my persecutors, and
    I could have killed them, notwithstanding their pistols; but I had
    no disposition to kill any man, though my worst enemy--not even
    Boggs. In fact, he would have more hell to live in the reflection
    of his past crimes than to die. After this, I had lawyers enough,
    and I obtained a writ for Joseph H. Reynolds and Harmon T. Wilson,
    for damage, assault, and battery, as well as the writ of habeas
    corpus.

    We started for Ottoway, and arrived at Pawpaw Grove, thirty-two
    miles, where we stopped for the night. Esquire Walker sent Mr.
    Campbell, sheriff of Lee County, to my assistance, and he came and
    slept by me. In the morning, certain men wished to see me, but I
    was not allowed to see them. The news of my arrival had hastily
    circulated about the neighborhood, and very early in the morning
    the largest room in the hotel was filled with citizens, who were
    anxious to hear me preach, and requested me to address them.

    Sheriff Reynolds entered the room and said, pointing to me, "I
    wish you to understand this man is my prisoner, and I want you
    should disperse. You must not gather around in this way." Upon
    which, a aged gentleman, who was lame and carried a large, hickory
    walking-stick, advanced towards Reynolds, bringing his hickory upon
    the floor, and said, "You damned infernal puke, we'll learn you
    to come here and interrupt gentlemen! Sit down there, (pointing
    to a very low char,) and sit still. Don't open your head till
    General Smith gets through talking. If you never learned manners
    in Missouri, we'll teach you that gentlemen are not to be imposed
    by a nigger-driver. You can not kidnap men here, if you do in
    Missouri; and if you attempt it here, there's a committee in this
    grove that will sit on your case. And, sir, it is the highest
    tribunal in the United States, as from its decision there is no
    appeal."

    Reynolds, no doubt, aware that the person addressing him was at the
    head of a committee who had prevented the settlers on the public
    domain from being imposed upon by land speculators, sat down in
    silence, while I addressed the assembly for an hour and a half on
    the subject of marriage, my visitors having requested me to give
    them my views of the law of God respecting marriage.

    My freedom commenced from that hour. We came direct from Pawpaw
    Grove to Nauvoo, having got our writ directed to the nearest court
    having authority to try the case, which was the municipal court of
    this city.

    It did my soul good to see your feelings and love manifested
    towards me. I thank God that I have the honor to lead so virtuous
    and honest a people--to be your leader and lawyer, as was Moses
    to the children of Israel. Hosannah! Hosannah!! HOSANNAH!!! to
    Almighty God, who has delivered us thus from out of the seven
    troubles. I commend you to His grace; and may the blessings of
    heaven rest upon you, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

    President Smith then introduced Mr. Cyrus Walker to the assembled
    multitude, and remarked to him, "these are the greatest dupes, as a
    body of people, that ever lived, or I am not as big a rogue as I am
    reported to be. I told Mr. Warren I would not discuss the subject
    of religion with you. I understand the Gospel and you do not. You
    understand the quackery of law, and I do not." Mr. Walker then
    addressed the people to the effect that, from what he had seen in
    the Nauvoo city charter, it gave the power to try writs of habeas
    corpus, etc. After which, President Smith continued as follows:

    "If the legislature have granted Nauvoo the right of determining
    cases of habeas corpus, it is no more than they ought to have
    done, or more than our fathers fought for. Furthermore if Missouri
    continues her warfare, and to issue her writs against me and this
    people unlawfully and unjustly, as she has done, and to take away
    and trample upon our rights, I swear, in the name of Almighty God,
    and with uplifted hands to Heaven, I will spill my heart's blood
    in our defense. They shall not take away our rights; and if they
    don't stop leading me by the nose, I will lead them by the nose,
    and if they don't let me alone, I will turn up the world--I will
    make war. When we shake our own bushes, we want to catch our own
    fruit. The lawyers themselves acknowledge that we have all power
    granted us in our charters that we could ask for--that we had more
    power than any other court in the State; for all other courts were
    restricted, while ours was not; and I thank God Almighty for it. I
    will not be rode down to hell by the Missourians any longer; and it
    is my privilege to speak in my own defense; and I appeal to your
    integrity and honor that you will stand by and help me according to
    the covenant you have this day made."

In the meantime, a requisition was made on Sheriff Reynolds, to bring his prisoner before the municipal court of Nauvoo, that the validity of the writ, by virtue of which he held him, might be tested. Reynolds refused to recognize the summons of the court; therefore, his prisoner petitioned the court for a writ of habeas corpus to be directed to Sheriff Reynolds, commanding him to bring his prisoner before said court, and there state the cause of his capture and detention, in order that the lawfulness of his arrest might be inquired into. Reynolds complied with the attachment, and the Prophet was delivered into the charge of the city marshal. The next day, the municipal court held a session, William Marks, acting chief justice, D. H. Wells, N. K. Whitney, G. W. Harris, Gustavus Hills and Hiram Kimball, associate justices.

When Joseph was on trial for this same offense before Judge Douglass, on a writ of habeas corpus in 1841, as already related in a previous chapter, the court refused to enter into the consideration of the merits of the case, as the judge doubted whether on a writ of habeas corpus he had a right to go behind the writ and inquire into the merits of the case. The same point was avoided by Judge Pope in the hearing Joseph had before him on a similar writ, when charged with being accessory before the fact in an assault upon the life of ex-Governor Boggs. But the municipal court had no such scruples, and at once proceeded to try the case ex parte, on its merits; and Hyrum Smith, P. P. Pratt, Brigham Young, G. W. Pitkin, Lyman Wight and Sidney Rigdon were examined as witnesses. Their affidavits before that court concerning events that happened to the Saints in Missouri, afford the most circumstantial, reliable, and exhaustive data for the history of The Church while in that State that has ever been published.

After hearing the testimony of these witnesses, and the pleading of counsel, the court ordered that Joseph Smith be released from the arrest and imprisonment of which he complained, for want of substance in the warrant by which he was held, as well as upon the merits of the case.

At the conclusion of the trial the citizens of Nauvoo held a mass meeting and passed resolutions thanking the people of Dixon and vicinity, and of Lee County generally, for the stand they had taken in defense of the innocent, and in favor of law and justice.

A copy of the proceedings of the municipal court of Nauvoo, and of all the papers connected with the case were immediately sent to the governor, as also were affidavits from leading counsel and gentlemen from Dixon, as to the treatment of Wilson and Reynolds, that the governor and the world might know that they had not been injured.

We may conclude the account of this adventure of Joseph's by saying that about a year afterwards, a jury in Lee County awarded forty dollars damages, and costs, against Wilson and Reynolds, for false imprisonment and abuse of the Prophet--a verdict which, while it confirms the unlawful course of those officers, and the fact that their prisoner was abused, insults justice by awarding such an amount for damages.

At the time of this action before the municipal court of Nauvoo, it was a question in Illinois whether said court had the authority to hear and determine writs of habeas corpus arising from arrests made by virtue of warrants issued by the courts of the State or of the governor, as in the foregoing case; or whether the clause in the city charter granting the right of issuing such writs was not confined to cases arising from arrests made on account of the violation of some city ordinance. The clause in the charter giving to the municipal court the power to issue writs of habeas corpus was as follows:

    The municipal court shall have power to grant writs of habeas
    corpus in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city
    council.

And in addition there was the general welfare provision, which provided that the

    City council shall have power and authority to make, ordain,
    establish and execute such ordinances not repugnant to the
    Constitution of the United States, or of this State, as they may
    deem necessary for the peace, benefit and safety of the inhabitants
    of said city.

It was maintained on the part of those who believed that the municipal court had the right to issue writs of habeas corpus against process issued from the State courts that all the power there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo, and that the municipal court had all the power within the limits of the city that the State courts had, and that power was given by the same authority--the legislature. A number of lawyers of more or less prominence in the State professed to hold the same views; but little reliance can be put in the support they bring to the case, since they were seeking political preferment and would, and did, in their interpretations of the powers granted by the charter, favor that side of the controversy most likely to please the citizens of Nauvoo.

Governor Ford, too, at the time, gave a tacit approval of the course taken by the municipal court in issuing the writ of habeas corpus, though he afterwards became very pronounced in his opposition to the exercise of such powers. It occurred in this way: As soon as Joseph was liberated, Sheriff Reynolds applied to Governor Ford for a posse to retake him, representing that the Prophet had been unlawfully taken out of his hands by the municipal court of Nauvoo. The governor refused to grant the petition. Subsequently the governor of Missouri asked Governor Ford to call out the militia to retake Joseph, but this he also refused to do, and gave as a reason that "no process, officer, or authority of the State had been resisted or interfered with," and recited how the prisoner had been released on habeas corpus by the municipal court of Nauvoo. The governor acted in this instance with perfect knowledge of what had taken place, for the petition and statement of Reynolds were in his possession as were also complete copies of all the documents, which contained the proceedings before the municipal court of Nauvoo; and in addition to these sources of information, the governor had dispatched a trusted, secret agent, a Mr. Brayman, to Nauvoo who investigated the case and reported the result to him.

On the other hand it was contended that the grant in the charter was intended by the legislature only to give the power to the municipal court to issue writs of habeas corpus in cases of arrest for violation of city ordinances, and that giving power to the municipal court to test the warrants or processes issued from the State courts, was never contemplated by the legislature, and that the passage of any ordinance by the city council that would bring about or authorize any such unusual proceeding was an unwarranted assumption of power, utterly wrong in principle and consequently subversive of good government.

But whatever opinion may be entertained on the point under consideration, there can be no question but what upon the broad principles of justice the Prophet Joseph ought to have been set free. The State of Missouri had no just claims upon him. He had been arrested and several times examined on these old charges now revived by the personal malice of John C. Bennett, and after being held a prisoner awaiting indictment and trial for five months, so conscious were the officers of the State that they had no case against him that they themselves connived at his escape. After such proceedings to demand that he be dragged again into Missouri among his old enemies was an outrage against every principle of justice.
