THE PROJECTED MOVEMENT TO THE WEST.

AS an evidence that the Prophet entertained no thought of success in his candidacy for the office of Chief Executive, we may mention the fact that, during the time that vigorous preparations were being made for the presidential canvass, he was setting on foot a scheme for taking the body of The Church into the west to settle Oregon. On the twentieth of February, 1844, the Prophet in his journal says:

    "I instructed the Twelve Apostles to send out a delegation, and
    investigate the location of California and Oregon, and hunt out
    a good location, where we can remove to, after the temple is
    completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a
    government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil
    cannot dig us out, and live in a healthy climate, where we can live
    as old as we have a mind too."

In accordance with that instruction, the Twelve called the council on the twenty-first, and Jonathan Dunham, Phinehas H. Young and David Fullmer volunteered to go; and Alphonzo Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt, and Daniel Spencer were called to go.

Subsequently a memorial was drawn up by the Prophet, asking Congress to pass an enactment, authorizing him to raise a company for the purpose of establishing colonies in that vast, unsettled section of the country in the far West, known under the general name of Oregon. At that time there was no particular government existing in the region to which the names Oregon and California were loosely given. Nor was it certain whether that country would fall into the possession of England or the United States, as the northern boundary line question was then unsettled, and England and the United States held the country by a treaty of joint occupancy. As the Prophet preferred having an assurance of protection from the government on his enterprise, he asked Congress to pass the act before alluded to.

Orson Pratt and John E. Page, two of the Twelve, went to Washington in the interest of this scheme, and urged its consideration among the Congressmen. Subsequently, in April, 1844, Orson Hyde was sent to Washington in the interest of the same great project; and through the influence of Mr. Hoge, Representative to Congress from the district in which Nauvoo was included. Mr. Hardin, and Stephen A. Douglass, succeeded in approaching a number of members of Congress on the subject but received small encouragement, as Congressmen then, as now, were extremely cautions in engaging in anything affecting their reputation and prospects for political preferment for the future. But however much these men objected to advocating anything which looked like favoring openly the scheme of the Prophet, they all concurred in affirming that he had the right to lead his people to Oregon to settle, and the government would protect them. Stephen A. Douglass remarked, that if he could command the following that Mr. Smith could, he would resign his seat in Congress, to go to the West. On this subject Orson Hyde made two exhaustive reports to the Prophet in letters from Washington, which I here insert:

                                         WASHINGTON, April 25th, 1844.

    HON. SIR,--I take the liberty to transmit through you to the
    council of our Church the result of my labors thus far. I
    arrived in this place on the 23rd instant, by way of Pittsburgh,
    Philadelphia, and New Jersey.

    I found Elder Orson Pratt here, Elder Page having been called home
    to Pittsburgh on account of his wife's ill health. Elder O. Pratt
    has been indefatigable in his exertions in prosecuting the business
    entrusted to his charge. His business has been before the Senate,
    and referred to the committee on the judiciary; and the report of
    said committee is not yet rendered, which is the cause of his delay
    in writing to you.

    Yesterday we conversed with Messrs. Hoge, Hardin, Douglass, and
    Wentworth, and last evening we spent several hours with the
    Hon. Mr. Semple They all appear deeply interested in the Oregon
    question, and received us with every demonstration of respect that
    we could desire. Mr. Hoge thought that the bill would not pass,
    from the fact that there already exists between England and America
    a treaty for the joint occupancy of Oregon, and that any act of our
    Government authorizing an armed force to be raised, and destined
    for that country, would be regarded by England as an infraction of
    that treaty, and a cause of her commencing hostilities against us.

    But my reply was, These volunteers are not to be considered any
    part or portion of the army of the United States, neither acting
    under the direction or authority of the United States; and, said I,
    for men to go there and settle in the character of emigrants cannot
    be regarded by our Government as deviating in the least degree from
    her plighted faith, unless she intends to tamely submit to British
    monopoly in that country.

    Mr. H., said he would present the memorial, if we desired it. I
    thanked him for his kind offer, but observed that I was not yet
    prepared for the bill to be submitted, but wished to elicit all the
    facts relative to the condition of Oregon, and also advise with
    many other members relative to the matter; and we could better
    determine then how the bill should be introduced. We do not want it
    presented and referred to a standing committee, and stuck away with
    five or ten cords of petitions, and that be the last of it; but we
    want the memorial read, a move made to suspend the rules of the
    house, and the bill printed, etc.

    Mr. Wentworth said--"I am for Oregon anyhow. You may set me down on
    your list, and I will go for you if you will go for Oregon."

    Judge Douglass has been quite ill, but is just recovered; he will
    help all he can; Mr. Hardin likewise. But Major Semple says that
    he does not believe anything will be done about Texas or Oregon
    this session, for it might have a very important effect upon the
    presidential election; and politicians are slow to move when such
    doubtful and important matters are likely to be affected by it.
    He says that there are already two bills before the house for
    establishing a territorial government in Oregon, and to protect the
    emigrants there; and now he says, Were your bill to be introduced,
    it might be looked upon that you claimed the sole right of
    emigrating to and settling that new country to the exclusion of
    others. He was in favor of the Oregon being settled, and he thought
    the bills already before the house would extend equal protection to
    us; and equal protection to every class of citizens was what the
    government could rightly do; but particular privileges to any one
    class they could not rightly do.

    I observed that the bill asked for no exclusive rights. It asks not
    for exclusive rights in Oregon, neither do we wish it. Other people
    might make a move to Oregon, and no prejudices bar their way, and
    their motives would not be misinterpreted.

    But, said I, Missouri knows her guilt; and should we attempt to
    march to Oregon without the government throwing a protective shield
    over us, Missouri's crimes would lead her first to misinterpret
    our intentions, to fan the flame of popular excitement against
    us, and scatter the firebrands of a misguided zeal among the
    combustible materials of other places, creating a flame too hot
    for us to encounter--too desolating for us to indulge the hope of
    successfully prosecuting the grand and benevolent enterprise we
    have conceived. We have been compelled to relinquish our rights
    in Missouri. We have been forcibly driven from our homes, leaving
    our property and inheritances as spoil to the oppressor; and more
    or less in Illinois we have been subject to the whims and chimeras
    of illiberal men, and to threats, to vexatious prosecutions, and
    lawsuits.

    Our government professes to have no power to help us, or to redress
    the wrongs which we have suffered; and we now ask the government
    to protect us while raising our volunteers. And when we get into
    Oregon we will protect ourselves and all others who wish our
    protection. And after subduing a new country, encountering all
    its difficulties and hardships, and sustaining the just claims
    of our nation to its soil, we believe that the generosity of
    our government towards us will be equal to our enterprise and
    patriotism, and that they will allow us a grant or territory of
    land, which will be both honorable in them and satisfactory to us.

    This, he says, is all very just and reasonable. But still he thinks
    that Congress will take no step in relation to Oregon, from the
    fact that his resolution requesting the President of the United
    States to give notice to the British government for the abolition
    of the treaty of joint occupation was voted down; and while that
    treaty is in force, our government dare do nothing in relation to
    that country. This resolution was introduced by Mr. Semple to pave
    the way for the passage of those bills in relation to a territorial
    government in Oregon.

    All our members join in the acknowledgement that you have an
    undoubted right to go to Oregon with all the emigrants you can
    raise. They say the existing laws protect you as much as law can
    protect you; and should Congress pass an additional law, it would
    not prevent wicked men from shooting you down as they did in
    Missouri. All the Oregon men in Congress would be glad if we would
    go to that country and settle it.

    I will now give you my opinion in relation to this matter. It
    is made up from the spirit of the times in a hasty manner,
    nevertheless I think time will prove it correct:--That Congress
    will pass not act in relation to Texas or Oregon at present. She
    is afraid of England, afraid of Mexico, afraid the presidential
    election will be twisted by it. The members all appear like
    unskillful players at checkers--afraid to move, for they see not
    which way to move advantageously. All are figuring and playing
    round the grand and important questions. In the days of our Lord
    the people neglected the weightier matters of the law, but tithed
    mint, rue, anise, and cummin; but I think here in Washington they
    do little else than tithe the mint.

    A member of Congress is in no enviable situation: if he will boldly
    advocate true principles, he loses his influence and becomes
    unpopular; and whoever is committed and has lost his influence has
    no power to benefit his constituents, so that all go to figuring
    and playing round the great points.

    Mr. Semple said that Mr. Smith could not constitutionally be
    constituted a member of the army by law; and this, if nothing
    else, would prevent its passage. I observed that I would in that
    case strike out that clause. Perhaps I took an unwarrantable
    responsibility upon myself; but where I get into a straight place,
    I can do no better than act according to what appears most correct.

    I do not intend the opinion that I have hastily given shall abate
    my zeal to drive the matter through, but I have given the opinion
    for your benefit, that your indulgence of the hope that Congress
    will do something for us may not cause you to delay any important
    action.

    There is already a government established in Oregon to some extent;
    magistrates have been chosen by the people, &c. This is on the
    south of the Columbia. North of that river the Hudson Bay Company
    occupy. There is some good country in Oregon, but a great deal of
    sandy, barren desert. I have seen a gentleman who has been there,
    and also in California.

    The most of the settlers in Oregon and Texas are our old enemies,
    the mobocrats of Missouri. If, however, the settlement of Oregon
    and Texas be determined upon, the sooner the move is made the
    better; and I would not advise any delay for the action of our
    government, for there is such a jealousy of our rising power
    already, that government will do nothing to favor us. If the Saints
    possess the kingdom, I think they will have to take it; and the
    sooner it is done the more easily it is accomplished.

    Your superior wisdom must determine whether to go to Oregon, to
    Texas, or to remain within these United States, and send forth the
    most efficient men to build up churches, and let them remain for
    the time being; and in the meantime send some wise men among the
    Indians, and teach them civilization and religion, to cultivate
    the soil, to live in peace with one another and with all men. But
    whatever you do, don't be deluded with the hope that government
    will foster us, and thus delay an action which the present is the
    most proper time that ever will be [in which to accomplish it.--R.]

    Oregon is becoming a popular question; the fever of emigration
    begins to rage. If the Mormons become the early majority, others
    will not come; if the Mormons do not become an early majority, the
    others will not allow us to come.

    Elder Pratt is faithful, useful, and true; he has got the run of
    matters here very well, and is with me in all my deliberations,
    visitings, &c.

    Major Semple goes with us this evening to introduce us to the
    President, and to view the White House.

    My heart and hand are with you. May heaven bless you and me. As
    ever, I am

                                                            ORSON HYDE.

    To the council of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Also the following letter:--

                                           WASHINGTON, April 26, 1844.

    DEAR SIR,--Today I trouble you with another communication, which
    you will please have the goodness to lay before our council.

    We were last evening introduced to the President at the White
    House by the politeness of Major Semple, where we spent an hour
    very agreeably. The President is a very plain, homespun, familiar,
    farmer-like man. He spoke of our troubles in Missouri, and
    regretted that we had met with such treatment. He asked us how we
    were getting along in Illinois. I told him that we were contending
    with the difficulties of a new country, and laboring under the
    disadvantageous consequences of being driven from our property and
    homes in Missouri.

    We have this day had a long conversation with Judge Douglass. He
    is ripe for Oregon and the California. He said he would resign
    his seat in Congress if he could command the force that Mr. Smith
    could, and would be on the march to that country in a month.

    I learn that the eyes of many aspiring politicians in this place
    are now upon that country, and that there is so much jealousy
    between them that they will probably pass no bill in relation to
    it. Now all these politicians rely upon the arm of our government
    to protect them there; and if government were to pass an act
    establishing a territorial government west of the Rocky Mountains
    there would be at once a tremendous rush of emigration; but if
    government pass no act in relation to it, these men have not
    stamina or sufficient confidence in themselves and their own
    resources to hazard the enterprise.

    The northern Whig members are almost to a man against Texas and
    Oregon; but should the present administration succeed in annexing
    Texas, then all the Whigs would turn round in favor of Oregon; for
    if Texas be admitted, slavery is extended to the south; then free
    States must be added to the west to keep up a balance of power
    between the slave and the free States.

    Should Texas be admitted, war with Mexico is looked upon as
    inevitable. The Senate have been in secret session on the
    ratification of the treaty of annexation; but what they did we
    cannot say. General Gaines, who was boarding at the same house
    with Judge Douglass, was secretly ordered to repair to the Texan
    frontier four days ago, and left immediately. I asked Judge D. if
    he did not speak loud for annexation. He says, no. Santa Anna,
    being a jealous, hot-headed pate, might be suspicious the treaty
    would be ratified by the Senate, and upon mere suspicion might
    attempt some hostilities, and Gaines had been ordered there to be
    on the alert and ready for action if necessary. Probably our navy
    will in a few days be mostly in the Gulf of Mexico.

    There are many powerful checks upon our government, preventing her
    from moving in any of these important matters; and for aught I
    know, these checks are permitted, to prevent our government from
    extending her jurisdiction over that territory which God designs to
    give to His Saints. Judge Douglass says he would equally as soon go
    to that country without an act of Congress as with; 'and that in
    five years a noble State might be formed; and then, if they would
    not receive us into the Union, we would have a government of our
    own.' He is decidedly of the opinion that congress will pass no act
    in favor of any particular man going there; but he says if any man
    will go, and desires that privilege, and has confidence in his own
    ability to perform it he already has the right, and the sooner he
    is off the better for his scheme.

    It is the opinion here among politicians that it will be extremely
    difficult to have any bill pass in relation to the encouragement of
    emigration to Oregon; but much more difficult to get a bill passed
    designating any particular man to go. But all concur in the opinion
    that we are authorized already.

    In case of a removal to that country, Nauvoo is the place of
    general rendezvous. Our course from thence would be westward
    through Iowa, bearing a little north until we came to the Missouri
    river, leaving the State of Missouri on the left, thence onward
    till we come to the Platte, thence up the north fork of the Platte
    to the mouth of Sweetwater river in longitude 107 45' W., and
    thence up said Sweetwater river to the South Pass of the Rocky
    Mountains, about eleven hundred miles from Nauvoo; and from said
    South Pass in latitude 42 28' north to the Umpaque and Klamet
    valleys in Oregon, bordering on California, is about 600 miles,
    making the distance from Nauvoo to the best portions of Oregon
    1,700 miles.

    There is no government established there; and it is so near
    California that when a government shall be established there, it
    may readily embrace that country likewise. There is much barren
    country, rocks, and mountains, in Oregon; but the valleys are very
    fertile. I am persuaded that Congress will pass no act in relation
    to that country, from the fact that the resolution requesting
    the President to give notice to the British government for the
    discontinuance of the treaty of joint occupation of Oregon was
    voted down with a rush; and this notice must be given before any
    action can be had, unless Congress violates the treaty; at least so
    say the politicians here.

    Judge Douglass has given me a map of Oregon, and also a report on
    an exploration of the country lying between the Missouri river and
    the Rocky Mountains on the line of the Kansas and Great Platte
    rivers, by Lieutenant J. C. Fremont, of the corps of topographical
    engineers. On receiving it I expressed a wish that Mr. Smith could
    see it. Judge D. says it is a public document, and I will frank it
    to him. I accepted his offer, and the book will be forthcoming to
    him. The people are so eager for it here that they have even stolen
    it out of the library. The author is Mr. Benton's son-in-law.
    Judge D. borrowed it of Mr. B. I was not to tell anyone in this
    city where I got it. The book is a most valuable document to any
    one contemplating a journey to Oregon. The directions which I have
    given may not be exactly correct, but the book will tell correctly.
    Judge D. says he can direct Mr. Smith to several gentlemen in
    California who will be able to give him any information on the
    state of affairs in that country; and when he returns to Illinois,
    he will visit Mr. Smith.

    Brother Pratt and myself drafted a bill this morning, and handed
    it in to the committee on the judiciary from the Senate, asking
    an appropriation of two million dollars for the relief of the
    sufferers among our people in Missouri in 1836-9, to be deposited
    in the hands of the city council of Nauvoo, and by them dealt out
    to the sufferers in proportion to their loss. We intend to tease
    them until we either provoke them or get them to do something
    for us. I have learned this much--that if we want Congress to do
    anything for us in drawing up our memorial, we must not ask what
    is right in the matter, but we must ask what kind of a thing will
    Congress pass? Will it suit the politics of the majority? Will
    it be popular or unpopular? For you might as well drive a musket
    ball through a cotton bag, or the Gospel of Christ through the
    heart of a priest, case-hardened by sectarianism, bigotry, and
    superstition, or a camel through the eye of a needle, as to drive
    anything through Congress that will operate against the popularity
    of politicians.

    I shall probably leave here in a few days, and Brother Pratt will
    remain. I go to get money to sustain ourselves with.

    I shall write again soon, and let you know what restrictions, if
    any, are laid upon our citizens in relation to passing through the
    Indian territories. I shall communicate everything I think will
    benefit. In the meantime if the council have any instructions to
    us, we shall be happy to receive them here or at Philadelphia.

    John Ross is here; we intend to see him. It is uncertain when
    Congress rises. It will be a long pull in my opinion. As ever, I am,

                                                Yours sincerely,
                                                            ORSON HYDE.

    Elder Pratt's best respects to the brethren.

An event soon afterwards took place in the House of Representatives before the Prophet's petition was introduced, which put at rest all hopes of Congress doing anything at that time in relation to the Oregon territory. A resolution was introduced giving Great Britain notice that the treaty of joint occupancy of that country was at an end, but it was promptly voted down. That virtually served public notice that the Oregon question was not to be reopened by Congress, at least not until the conclusion of the presidential election.

Sufficient may be gathered from what is set down in the above, to prove that the mind of the Prophet Joseph was bent on establishing his people in the West--somewhere in the Rocky Mountains--so soon as they could complete the temple. The subject began to take possession of his mind wholly. Some eighteen months before his formal appeal to Congress, for the privilege of settling with his people in the far West, under the protecting aegis of the general government, viz., on the sixth of August, 1842, he prophesied, that his people would continue to suffer much persecution, and at last be driven to the Rocky Mountains. This is the prophecy as it stands in the Prophet's journal:

    Saturday, sixth, [August]. Passed over the river to Montrose,
    Iowa, in company with General Adams, Colonel Brewer, and others,
    and witnessed the installation of the officers of the Rising Sun
    Lodge, of Ancient York Masons, at Montrose, by General James Adams,
    Deputy Grand Master of Illinois. While the Deputy Grand Master was
    engaged in giving the requisite instruction to the Master elect, I
    had a conversation with a number of brethren in the shade of the
    building on the subject of our persecutions in Missouri, and the
    constant annoyance which has followed us since we were driven from
    that State. I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer
    much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many
    would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors,
    or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some
    of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build
    cities, and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of
    the Rocky Mountains. [1]--Millennial Star, Vol. xix, page 630.

As persecution in Illinois grew more relentless, and mobocrats more bold, until the whole horizon appeared black, and threatening with hatred toward the citizens of Nauvoo, the Prophet told them repeatedly it was "light in the west."

Footnotes

1. See the author's work, "Succession in the Presidency," where the subject is more exhaustively considered.
