THE STANDARD OF PEACE.

MEANTIME the people of Nauvoo, with the Prophet as chief mover in the matter, sought to establish peaceful relations with their neighbors. Armed conflict with surrounding peoples, or with any people, was no part of the policy of Joseph Smith; and no part of the work that he had in hand. It is true that it may be said of the work he introduced, as Jesus said of the work which He began by His personal ministry that it brought not peace but a sword; [1] in each case, however, "the sword" has been found in the hands, not of those who have accepted the Gospel, but in the hands of those who have rejected it, and opposed it, and made war upon it. Early in the history of the work brought forth by Joseph Smith the Lord commanded His servants to "renounce war and proclaim peace;" [2] and true to this spirit of the work the Prophet especially sought for peace. In the Warsaw Signal of the 14th of February Governor Ford published the following letter to the citizens of Hancock County, in the hope, evidently, of quelling the threatening storm:

                                        SPRINGFIELD, January 29, 1844.

    DEAR SIR,--I have received the copy of the proceedings and
    resolutions of a meeting of the citizens of Hancock County, which
    you did me the honour to send me.

    I have observed with regret that occasions have been presented for
    disturbing the peace of your county; and if I knew what I could
    legally do to apply a corrective, I would be very ready to do it.
    But if you are a lawyer or at all conversant with the law, you will
    know that, I as a governor, have no right to interfere in your
    difficulties.

    As yet, I believe that there has been nothing like war among you;
    and I hope that all of you will have the good sense to see the
    necessity of preserving peace. If there is anything wrong in the
    Nauvoo charters, or in the mode of administering them, you will see
    that nothing short of legislative or judicial power is capable of
    enforcing a remedy.

    I myself had the honor of calling the attention of the Legislature
    to this subject at the last session; but a large majority of both
    political parties in that body either did not see the evil which
    you complain of, or, if they did, they repeatedly refused to
    correct it. And yet a call is made upon me, to do that which all
    parties refused to do at the last session.

    I have also been called upon to take away the arms from the
    Mormons, to raise the militia to arrest a supposed fugitive, and
    in fact to repeal some of the ordinances of the city of Nauvoo.

    Hancock County is justly famed for its intelligence; and I cannot
    believe that any of its citizens are so ignorant as not to know
    that I have no power to do these things.

    The absurd and preposterous nature of these requests gave some
    color to the charge that they are made for political effect only.
    I hope that this charge is untrue: for, in all candor, it would be
    more creditable to those concerned to have their errors attributed
    to ignorance than to a disposition to embroil the country in the
    horrors of war for the advancement of party ends.

    But if there should be any truth in the charge, (which God forbid)
    I affectionately entreat all the good citizens engaged in it to
    lay aside their designs and yield up their ears to the voice of
    justice, reason and humanity. All that I can do at present is to
    admonish both parties to beware of carrying matters to extremity.

    Let it come to this--let a state of war ensue, and I will be
    compelled to interfere with executive power. In that case also, I
    wish, in a friendly, affectionate, and candid manner, to tell the
    citizens of Hancock County, Mormons and all, that my interference
    will be against those who shall be the first transgressors.

    I am bound by the laws and Constitution to regard you all as
    citizens of the State, possessed of equal rights and privileges,
    and to cherish the rights of one as dearly as the rights of
    another. I can know no distinction among you except that of
    assailant and assailed.

    I hope, dear sir, you will do me the favor to publish this letter
    in the papers of your county, for the satisfaction of all persons
    concerned.

                             I am, with the highest respect,
                                           Your obedient servant,
                                                          THOMAS FORD.

To this letter three days later the Prophet-mayor made the following response in the Nauvoo Neighbor, under the caption

    PACIFIC INNUENDO.

    The very candid, pacific and highly creditable advice which
    Governor Ford has done himself the honor to address to "the
    citizens of Hancock County, 'Mormons and all,'" and which appears
    in the Warsaw Signal of the 14th instant, is, like the balm
    of Gilead, well calculated to ease the pain which has troubled
    the heads and hearts of the Carthagenians, Warsawvians and other
    over-jealous bodies for weal and woe.

    It certainly must be admitted, on all hands, that Governor Ford
    has exalted himself as a mediator, patriot, lawyer, governor,
    peacemaker, and friend of all, not only to magnify the law and make
    it honorable, but also in pointing out the path of peace.

    Such is what the Latter-day Saints have ever sought at the hands of
    those in authority; and with an approving conscience clear as the
    crystal spring, and with a laudable intention warm as the summer
    zephyr, and with a charitable prayer mellow as the morning dew, it
    is now our highest consolation to hope that all difficulties will
    cease, and give way to reason, sense, peace and goodwill.

    The Saints, if they will be humble and wise, can now practice
    what they preach, and soften by good examples, rather than harden
    by a distinct course of conduct, the hearts of the people.

    For general information, it may be well to say that there has
    never been any cause for alarm as to the Latter-day Saints. The
    Legislature of Illinois granted a liberal charter for the city of
    Nauvoo; and let every honest man in the Union who has any knowledge
    of her say whether she has not flourished beyond the most sanguine
    anticipations of all. And while they witness her growing glory, let
    them solemnly testify whether Nauvoo has wilfully injured the
    country, county or a single individual one cent.

    With the strictest scrutiny publish the facts, whether a particle
    of law has been evaded or broken: virtue and innocence need no
    artificial covering. Political views and party distinctions never
    should disturb the harmony of society; and when the whole truth
    comes before a virtuous people, we are willing to abide the issue.

    We will here refer to the three late dismissals upon writs
    of habeas corpus, of Joseph Smith, when arrested under the
    requisitions of Missouri.

    The first, in June, 1841, was tried at Monmouth, before Judge
    Douglass, of the fifth judicial circuit; and as no exceptions
    have been taken to that decision by this State or Missouri, but
    Missouri had previously entered a nolle prosequi on all the old
    indictments against the "Mormons" in the difficulties of 1838, it
    is taken for granted that that decision was just.

    The second, in December, 1842, was tried at Springfield before
    Judge Pope in the United States District Court; and from that
    honorably discharged, as no exceptions from any source have been
    made to those proceedings, it follows as a matter of course that
    that decision was just!

    And the third, in July, 1843, was tried at the city of Nauvoo,
    before the municipal court of said city; and as no exceptions to
    that discharge have been taken, and as the governor says there is
    "evidence on the other side to show that the sheriff of Lee County
    voluntarily carried Mr. Reynolds (who had Mr. Smith in custody,)
    to the city of Nauvoo without any coercion on the part of any one"
    it must be admitted that that decision was just!

    But is any man still unconvinced of the justness of these
    strictures relative to the two last cases, let the astounding fact
    go forth, that Orin Porter Rockwell, whom Boggs swore was the
    principal in his assassination, and accessory to which Mr. Smith
    was arrested, has returned home, "clear of that sin." In fact,
    there was not a witness to get up an indictment against him.

    The Messrs. Averys, who were unlawfully transported out of this
    State, have returned to their families in peace; and there seems to
    be no ground for contention, no cause for jealousy, and no excuse
    for a surmise that any man, woman or child will suffer the least
    inconvenience from General Smith, the charter of Nauvoo, the city
    of Nauvoo, or even any of her citizens.

    There is nothing for a bone of contention! Even those ordinances
    which appear to excite the feeling of some people have recently
    been repealed; so that if the "intelligent" inhabitants of
    Hancock County want peace, want to abide by the governor's advice,
    want to have a character abroad grow out of their character at
    home, and really mean to follow the Savior's golden rule, "To do
    unto others as they would wish others to do unto them," they will
    be still now, and let their own works praise them in the gates of
    justice and in the eyes of the surrounding world. Wise men ought to
    have understanding enough to conquer men with kindness.

    "A soft answer turns away wrath," says the wise man; and it will be
    greatly to the credit of the Latter-day Saints to show the love of
    God, by now kindly treating those who may have, in an unconscious
    moment, done them wrong; for truly said Jesus, "Pray for thine
    enemies."

    Humanity towards all, reason and refinement to enforce virtue, and
    good for evil are so eminently designed to cure more disorders of
    society than an appeal to "arms," or even argument untempered
    with friendship and the "one thing needful," that no vision
    for the future, guideboard for the distant, or expositor for the
    present, need trouble any one with what he ought to do.

    His own good, his family's good, his neighbor's good, his country's
    good, and all good seem to whisper to every person--the governor
    has told you what to do--now do it.

    The Constitution expects every man to do his duty; and when he
    fails the law urges him; or, should he do too much, the same master
    rebukes him.

    Should reason, liberty, law, light and philanthropy now guide the
    destinies of Hancock County with as much sincerity as has been
    manifested for her notoriety or welfare, there can be no doubt
    that peace, prosperity and happiness will prevail, and that future
    generations as well as the present one will call Governor Ford a
    peacemaker. The Latter-day Saints will, at all events, and profit
    by the instruction, and call upon honest men to help them cherish
    all the love, all the friendship, all the courtesy, all the kindly
    feelings and all the generosity that ought to characterize clever
    people in a clever neighborhood, and leave candid men to judge
    which tree exhibits the best fruit--the one with the most clubs and
    sticks thrown into its boughs and the grass trodden down under it,
    or the one with no sticks in it, some dead limbs and rank grass
    growing under it; for by their signs ye can know their fruit, and
    by the fruit ye know the trees.

    Our motto, then, is Peace with all! If we have joy in the love of
    God, let us try to give a reason of that joy, which all the world
    cannot gainsay or resist. And may be, like as when Paul started
    with recommendations to Damascus to persecute the Saints, some one
    who has raised his hand against us with letters to men in high
    places may see a light at noonday, above the brightness of the sun,
    and hear the voice of Jesus saying, "It is hard for thee to kick
    against the pricks."

    Intelligence is sometimes the messenger of safety. And, willing to
    aid the governor in his laudable endeavors to cultivate peace and
    honor the laws, believing that very few of the citizens of Hancock
    County will be found in the negative of such a goodly course; and
    considering his views a kind of manifesto, or olive leaf, which
    shows that there is rest for the soles of the Saints' feet, we give
    it a place in the Neighbor, wishing it God speed, and saying,
    God bless good men and good measures! And as Nauvoo has been, so
    it will continue to be, a good city, affording a good market to
    a good country; and let those who do not mean to try the way of
    transgressors, say "Amen."

In addition to this in a note to the editor of the Neighbor, he advised that he take no further editorial notice of the fulminations of the editor of the Warsaw Signal against the people of Nauvoo, but recommended that the advice of Governor Ford be honored, and that friendship and peace be cultivated with all men.

The Prophet went further than this. He tendered the olive branch of peace even to Missouri. He dictated the following to W. W. Phelps which was published under the title--

    A FRIENDLY HINT TO MISSOURI.

    One of the most pleasing scenes that can transpire on earth, when
    a sin has been committed by one person against another, is, to
    forgive that sin; and then, according to the sublime and perfect
    pattern of the Savior, pray to our Father in heaven to forgive
    also.

    Verily, verily, such a friendly rebuke is like the mellow zephyr
    of summer's eve--it soothes, it cheers and gladdens the heart
    of the humane and the savage. Well might the wise man exclaim,
    "A soft answer turneth away wrath;" for men of sense, judgment,
    and observation, in all the various periods of time, have been
    witnesses, figuratively speaking, that water, not wood, checks the
    rage of fire.

    Jesus said, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
    the children of God." Wherefore, if the nation, a single state,
    community, or family ought to be grateful for anything, it is
    peace.

    Peace, lovely child of heaven!--peace, like light from the same
    great parent, gratifies, animates, and happifies the just and the
    unjust; and is the very essence of happiness below, and bliss above.

    He that does not strive with all his powers of body and mind,
    with all his influence at home and abroad, and to cause others to
    do so too, to seek peace and maintain it for his own benefit and
    convenience, and for the honor of his State, nation, and country,
    has no claim on the clemency of man; nor should he be entitled to
    the friendship of woman or the protection of government.

    He is the canker-worm to gnaw his own vitals, and the vulture to
    prey upon his own body; and he is, as to his own prospects and
    prosperity in life, a felo-de-se of his own pleasure.

    A community of such beings are not far from hell on earth, and
    should be let alone as unfit for the smiles of the free or the
    praise of the brave. * * * * * *

    So much to preface this friendly hint to the State of Missouri;
    for, notwithstanding some of her private citizens and public
    officers have committed violence, robbery, and even murder upon
    the rights and persons of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints, yet compassion, dignity, and a sense of the principles of
    religion among all classes, and honor and benevolence, mingled
    with charity by high-minded patriots, lead me to suppose that
    there are many worthy people in that State who will use their
    influence and energies to bring about a settlement of all those old
    difficulties, and use all consistent means to urge the State, for
    her honor, prosperity, and good name, to restore every person she
    or her citizens have expelled from her limits, to their rights,
    and pay them all damage, that the great body of high-minded and
    well-disposed Southern and Western gentlemen and ladies--the real
    peacemakers of a western world, will go forth, good Samaritan-like,
    and pour in the oil and wine, till all that can be healed are made
    whole; and, after repentance, they shall be forgiven; for verily
    the Scriptures say, "Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
    repents, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that need
    no repentance." * * * * * *

    When you meditate upon the massacre at Haun's mill, forget not that
    the constitution of your State holds this broad truth to the world,
    that none shall "be deprived of life, liberty, or property, but
    by the judgment of his peers or the law of the land."

    And when you assemble together in towns, countries, or districts,
    whether to petition your legislature to pay the damage the Saints
    have sustained in your State, by reason of oppression and misguided
    zeal, or to restore them to their rights according to Republican
    principles and benevolent designs, reflect, and make honorable,
    or annihilate, such statute law as was in force in your State in
    1838,--viz., "If twelve or more persons shall combine to levy war
    against any part of the people of this State, or to remove forcibly
    out of the State or from their habitations, evidenced by taking
    arms and assembling to accomplish such purpose, every person so
    offending shall be punished by imprisonment in the penitentiary for
    a period not exceeding five years, or by a fine not exceeding five
    thousand dollars, and imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding
    six months."

    Finally, if honor dignifies an honest people, if virtue exalts
    a community, if wisdom guides great men, if principle governs
    intelligent beings, if humanity spreads comfort among the needy,
    and if religion affords consolation by showing that charity is
    the first, best, and sweetest token of perfect love, then, O ye
    good people of Missouri, like the woman in Scripture who had lost
    one of her ten pieces of silver, arise, search diligently till
    you find the lost piece, and then make a feast, and call in your
    friends for joy.

                  With due consideration,
                      I am the friend of all good men,
                                               JOSEPH SMITH.

    Nauvoo, Ill., March 8, 1843.

Surely this was going as far in the interests of peace as men or God could require him to go; but alas! there was to be no peace.

Footnotes

1. Matt. x: 34-40.

2. August, 1833, Doc. & Cov. Sec. xcviii.
