THE EXODUS--THE FALL OF NAUVOO.

    IT is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied with
    my destruction; but I tell you that as soon as they have shed my
    blood, they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart
    dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fullness of the Gospel.
    The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary
    of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man
    and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me
    to teach in this generation.

Such were the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith to the Nauvoo Legion on the eighteenth of June, 1844. And the action of the old citizens of Hancock and the surrounding counties subsequent to the murder of the Prophet, prove how truly inspired were the words we have quoted. For no sooner did they discover that the work which Joseph had begun refused to die with him, than they renewed hostilities, and sought by every means their wicked hearts could devise to harass and destroy those who devoted their energies to the consummation of the work which had been started.

The mockery of a trial given those who had murdered the Prophets, emboldened the enemies of the Saints, for they saw justice powerless to vindicate outraged law, and that with impunity they could prey upon the citizens of Nauvoo, whom, it would seem, their hatred had selected for a sacrifice. Thieves and blacklegs generally, saw the opportunity of having their crimes charged upon an innocent people, and established themselves in the vicinity of Nauvoo, though principally on the Iowa side of the river, and all the thefts and acts of violence committed by those renegades were charged up to the account of the citizens of Nauvoo, and too gladly believed by the people in the surrounding counties.

Not only were the charges of theft and robbery made against the Sainst, but they were also accused of hiding from justice any and all criminals who came into their midst--that Nauvoo, in short, was a rendezvous for outlaws, counterfeiters and desperate men generally. These charges led the city council on the thirteenth of January, 1845, to investigate the allegations and a series of resolutions were adopted stating that the charges of theft for the most part were fabrications of their enemies bent on ruining the reputation of the city, and defied those who made the charges to sustain with proof a single case where the citizens of Nauvoo had screened criminals from justice.

The council also extended an invitation to all who had reasons to believe that their stolen property was concealed in Nauvoo to come and make diligent search for it, and pledged them the assistance of the council. To hunt out crime and put away everything that could give rise to even a suspicion of concealing criminals, the mayor was authorized to increase the force of police if necessary to five hundred; and the people were called upon to redouble their diligence in preventing criminals from coming among them, and all such persons as soon as discovered were to be given up to the officers of the law.

The next day the action of the city council was submitted to the citizens of Nauvoo, and they approved of it. Fifty delegates were chosen and sent into the surrounding counties to disabuse the public mind relative to the false accusations made against the Saints, and to ask their co-operation in ridding the country of the counterfeiters and thieves which infested it. But all these efforts were fruitless. The falsehoods of their enemies outweighed the truths of the Saints, and prejudice more cruel than hell itself hardened the hearts of the people of Illinois against the appeals of the citizens of Nauvoo, and made them deaf to all entreaties for justice.

Twice during the summer of 1845, Governor Ford himself went to Nauvoo to investigate these charges against her people; and when he came to deal with the "Mormon troubles," in his message to the legislature that fall, after speaking of the charges made, he said:

    Justice, however, requires me to say that I have investigated
    the charge of promiscuous stealing, and find it to be greatly
    exaggerated. I could not ascertain that there were a greater
    proportion of thieves in that community than in any other of the
    same number of inhabitants, and perhaps if the city of Nauvoo were
    compared with St. Louis, or any other western city, the proportion
    would not be so great.

The prejudice, not to say bitterness, of Governor Ford against the Saints would rob his statement of any suspected exaggeration favorable to them.

Nor is Governor Ford's voice the only one which vindicates the character of the citizens of Nauvoo. The deputy sheriff of Hancock County exonerated the Mormon people from any participation in the thefts perpetrated in the surrounding country. He testified that stolen property was brought through the country via Nauvoo, passed over the river to the Iowa side and taken into the interior, where it was concealed. He also stated that there were some five or six persons in Nauvoo who were assisting in this nefarious business, but said he, "they are not Mormons nor are they fellowshiped by them."

Notwithstanding all this, misrepresentation so far succeeded in poisoning the minds of the public and the leading men in the State, that in January, 1845, the city charter of Nauvoo and the charter of the Legion were both repealed, and thus the protecting aegis of the city government was snatched away from her citizens, when most they needed it, and left them exposed to the fury of their enemies.

Of this act of punic faith on the part of the State legislature, the State attorney, Josiah Lamborn, in a letter to Brigham Young, said:

    I have always considered that your enemies have been prompted by
    political and religious prejudices, and by a desire for plunder
    and blood, more than for the common good. By the repeal of your
    charter, and by refusing all amendments and modifications, our
    legislature has given a kind of sanction to the barbarous manner
    in which you have been treated. Your two representatives exerted
    themselves to the extent of their ability in your behalf, but the
    tide of popular passion and frenzy was too strong to be resisted.
    It is truly a melancholy spectacle to witness the law-makers of a
    sovereign State condescending to pander to the vices, ignorance and
    malevolence of a class of people who are at all times ready for
    riot, murder and rebellion.

Senator Jacob C. Davis was one among those who had been indicated for the murder of Joseph and Hyrum, and of him the attorney-general said:

    Your senator, Jacob C. Davis, has done much to poison the minds
    of members against anything in your favor. He walks at large in
    defiance of law an indicated murderer. If a Mormon was in his
    position, the senate would afford no protection, but he would be
    dragged forth to jail or the gallows, or be shot down by a cowardly
    and brutal mob.

In the meantime the Twelve Apostles, sustained by the Saints, put forth every exertion to carry out the designs of their martyred Prophet respecting Nauvoo. The Nauvoo House was hurried on, and the walls were growing rapidly under the constant labor of the masons. Work, too, was vigorously prosecuted at the temple. At the time of Joseph's death that edifice was but one story high, yet on the twenty-fourth of May, 1845, about six o'clock in the morning the cap-stone was laid amid the general rejoicing and shouts of "Hosanna" from the assembled thousands of the Saints. As President Brigham Young finished laying the cap-stone he stood upon it and said:

    The last stone is laid upon the temple, and I pray the Almighty in
    the name of Jesus to defend us in this place, and sustain us until
    the temple is finished and we have all got our endowments.

    The whole congregation then following the motion of President Young
    shouted as loud as possible: Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! to God and
    the Lamb! Amen! Amen! and Amen! [1]

    "So let it be, thou Almighty God," solemnly concluded President
    Young.

Thus the world began to understand that Mormonism was not born to die with its earthly leaders. And it began to be whispered that the Prophet Joseph dead was even more potent than when living. His testimony had been sealed with his blood, and it gave to his life and his labors an additional sanctity in the eyes of his followers, as well as making it more binding upon the world.

Seeing then the continued prosperity of Nauvoo and her citizens, the people in the vicinity of that city and in the surrounding counties again commenced hostilities, if, indeed, it may be said that they had ever ceased. The enormity of the murder at Carthage jail had checked them temporarily; for an instant the torch and assassin's knife had dropped from their nerveless hands and they stood aghast, at that deed of blood. But seeing the work the murdered Prophet had started surviving his fall, they took up again the weapons of fell destruction and rushed once more upon their victims.

Early in September, 1845, mobbing the scattered families of the Saints began in earnest. A meeting was held by anti-Mormons near what was called the "Morley settlement," to devise means of getting rid of the Mormons. During the meeting guns were fired at the house where it was held, and the assault charged upon the Saints, though most likely it was done by some of their own party--that they might have an excuse for their meditated acts of violence upon the people of Nauvoo. Such was the general belief at the time; and Governor Ford in his "History of Illinois," speaking of this circumstance, says:

    In the fall of 1845, the anti-Mormons of Lima and Green Plains,
    held a meeting to devise means for the expulsion of the Mormons
    from their neighborhood. They appointed some persons of their own
    number to fire a few shots at the house where they were assembled;
    but to do it in such a way as to hurt none who attended the
    meeting. The meeting was held, the house was fired at, but so as
    to hurt no one; and the anti-Mormons suddenly breaking up their
    meeting, rode all over the country spreading the dire alarm, that
    the Mormons had commenced the work of massacre and death. [2]

The attack was made upon the Morley settlement, and on the eleventh of the month twenty-nine houses were burned down, while their occupants were driven into the bushes where men, women and children laid drenched with rain, anxiously awaiting the breaking of day.

Speaking of this outrage, the editor of the Quincy Whig, Mr. Bartlett, said:

    Seriously, these outrages should be put a stop to at once; if the
    Mormons have been guilty of crime why punish them, but do not visit
    their sins upon defenseless women and children. This is as bad
    as the savages. * * * It is feared that this rising against the
    Mormons is not confined to the Morley settlement, but that there
    is an understanding among the antis in the northern part of this
    [Adams] and Hancock counties to make a general sweep, burning and
    destroying the property of the Mormons wherever it can be found. If
    this is the case, there will be employment of the executive of the
    State, and that soon. * * * Still later news from above [referring
    to Hancock County] was received late on Monday night. The outrages
    were still continued. The flouring mill, carding machine, etc.,
    of Norman Buel, a Mormon, one mile and a half west of Lima is
    now a heap of ashes. Colonel Levi Williams, of Green Plains has
    ordered out his brigade, it is said to aid the anti-Mormons. The
    anti-Mormons from Shuyler [county] and the adjoining counties,
    are flocking in and great distress of life and property may be
    expected. Heaven only knows where these proceedings will end. It is
    time the strong arm of power was extended to quell them. [3]

In the midst of the exciting scenes which followed, the sheriff of Hancock County, Mr. J. B. Backenstos proved himself a friend to law and order. He did all in his power to arrest the spread of violence and called upon all law-abiding citizens to act as a posse comitatus, but announced it as his opinion that the citizens of Nauvoo had better take no part in suppressing the mob-violence, since that might lead to a civil war. At the same time he told the people of Hancock, that "the Mormon community had acted with more than ordinary forbearance, remaining perfectly quiet, and offering no resistance when their dwellings, their buildings, stacks of grain, etc., were set on fire in their presence. They had forborne until forbearance was no longer a virtue." His vigorous efforts were making headway against the violators of the law; but in consequence of some parties who had sought his life, while acting in his official capacity, being killed, he was arrested [4] by General John J. Hardin and placed on trial for murder; after which mob-violence went unchecked of justice.

In the midst of these tumultuous scenes a mass meeting of the citizens was convened at Quincy on the twenty-second of September. It was generally known that the Prophet Joseph had contemplated going west with the main body of The Church, and it was one of the objects of this meeting to appoint a committee to confer with The Church authorities and learn what their present intentions were as to leaving the State. It was expressed as the opinion of that meeting that the only basis upon which the Mormon troubles could be settled would be the removal of that people from Illinois. "It is a settled thing," said Mr. Bartlett, editor of the Quincy Whig, in his issue following the meeting of the above date--

    It is a settled thing that the public sentiment of the State is
    against the Mormons, and it will be in vain for them to contend
    against it; and to prevent bloodshed, and the sacrifice of many
    lives on both sides, it is their duty to obey the public will, and
    leave the State as speedily as possible. That they will do this we
    have a confident hope--and that too, before the last extreme is
    resorted to--that of force.

We are sorry to say that many of the leading men of Quincy, principally prominent members of the bar, who before had been kindly disposed towards the citizens of Nauvoo, now turned against them, and became the advocates of violence, and lent the weight and influence of their characters to the support and spread of mob-law. Among such we are sorry to publish Major Warren and O. H. Browning, the latter having defended the Prophet Joseph on more than one occasion when unjustly charged with crime before the courts of the country. His burning words of eloquence, in reciting the wrongs of the Saints, when cruelly expelled from Missouri, would, one would think, have enlisted the sympathy of adamantine hearts; and now to see him leagued with those bent upon bringing about a repetition of these sorrows, is an event to be truly deplored.

In answer to the Quincy committee to state what their present intentions were relative to leaving the State, the Twelve handed them the following communication:

                                         NAUVOO, September 24, 1845.

    Whereas, a council of the authorities of the Church of Jesus
    Christ of Latter-day Saints, at Nauvoo have this day received a
    communication from Messrs. Henry Asbury, John P. Robins, Albert G.
    Pearson, P. A. Goodwin, J. N. Ralston, M. Rogers and E. Congers,
    committee of the citizens of Quincy, requesting us to communicate
    in writing our disposition and intention at this time, particularly
    with regard to removing to some place where the peculiar
    organization of our Church will not be likely to engender so much
    strife and contention as unhappily exists at this time in Hancock
    and some of the adjoining counties;

    And, whereas, said committee have reported to us the doings of
    a public meeting of the citizens of Quincy on the twenty-second
    inst., by which it appears there are some feelings concerning us as
    a people, and in relation to which sundry resolutions were passed,
    purporting to be for the purpose of maintaining or restoring peace
    to the country;

    And, whereas, it is our desire and ever has been, to live in
    peace with all men, so far as we can, without sacrificing the right
    to worship God according to the dictates of our own consciences
    which privilege is granted by the Constitution of these United
    States; and, whereas, we have time and again, been driven from our
    peaceful homes, and our women and children have been obliged to
    live on the prairies, in the forests, on the roads and in tents,
    in the dead of winter, suffering all manner of hardships--even to
    death itself--as the people of Quincy well know; the remembrance
    of whose hospitality, in former days, still causes our hearts to
    burn with joy, and raise the prayer to heaven for blessing on
    their heads; and, whereas, it is now so late in the season that
    it is impossible for us, as a people, to remove this fall without
    causing a repetition of like sufferings; and, whereas, it has
    been represented to us from other sources than those named, and
    even in some communications from the executive of the State, that
    many of the citizens of the State were unfriendly to our views
    and principles; and, whereas, many scores of our homes in this
    country have been burned to ashes without any justifiable cause
    or provocation, and we have made no resistance, till compelled
    by the authorities of the county so to do, and that authority
    not connected with our Church; and, whereas, said resistance to
    mobocracy, from legally constituted authority, appears to be
    misunderstood by some, and misconstrued by others, so as to produce
    an undue excitement in the public mind; and, whereas, we desire
    peace above all earthly blessings;

    Therefore, we would say to the committee above mentioned, and to
    the governor, and all the authorities and people of Illinois, and
    the surrounding States and Territories that we propose to leave
    this county next spring, for some point so remote, that there will
    not need be any difficulty with the people and ourselves, provided
    certain propositions necessary for the accomplishment of our
    removal shall be observed, as follows, to-wit:

    That the citizens of this and surrounding counties, and all men,
    will use their influence and exertion to help us to sell or rent
    our properties, so as to get means enough that we can help the
    widow, the fatherless and the destitute to remove with us,

    That all men will let us alone with their vexatious law-suits so
    that we may have time, for we have broken no laws; and help us to
    cash, dry goods, groceries, etc., to good oxen, beef cattle, sheep,
    wagons, mules horses, harness, etc., in exchange for our property,
    at a fair price, and deeds given on payment, that we may have means
    to accomplish a removal without the suffering of the destitute to
    an extent beyond the endurance of human nature.

    That all exchange of property shall be conducted by a committee,
    or by committees of both parties; so that all the business may be
    transacted honorably and speedily.

    That we will use all lawful means, in connection with others
    to preserve the public peace while we tarry; and shall expect,
    decidedly, that we be no more molested with house-burning, or any
    other depredations, to waste our property and time, and hinder our
    business.

    That it is a mistaken idea, that we have proposed to leave in six
    months, for that would be so early in the spring that grass may
    not grow nor water run; both of which would be necessary for our
    removal. But we propose to use our influence, to have no more seed
    time and harvest among our people in this county after gathering
    our present crops; and that all communications be made to us in
    writing.

                                         By order of the council,
                                                    BRIGHAM YOUNG,
                                                         President.

    W. RICHARDS,
         Clerk.

The Quincy committee reported to the citizens of that city, the propositions of The Church authorities, which were regarded as satisfactory in part, but thought they were not so full or decisive as was necessary. The mass meeting to which they reported, however, accepted the propositions and decided to recommend the people in the surrounding counties to do the same. "But," said one of the resolutions:

    We accept it [the proposition of The Church authorities] as an
    unconditional proposition to remove. We do not intend to bring
    ourselves under any obligation to purchase their property or
    furnish purchasers for the same, but we will in no way hinder or
    obstruct them in their efforts to sell; and will expect them to
    dispose of their property, and remove at the time appointed.

    Resolved, that it is now too late to attempt the settlement of
    the difficulties in Hancock County upon any other basis than that
    of the removal of the Mormons from the State.

    Resolved, that whilst we shall endeavor, by all the means in our
    power, to prevent the occurrence of anything which might operate
    against their removal, and afford the people of Nauvoo any grounds
    of complaint, we shall equally expect good faith upon their part;
    and if they shall not comply with their own proposition, the
    consequence must rest upon those who violate faith. And we now
    solemnly pledge ourselves to be ready at the appointed time to act,
    as the occasion may require, and that we will immediately adopt a
    preliminary military organization, for prompt future action, if
    occasion should demand it.

    Resolved, that in our opinion, the peace of Hancock County cannot
    so far be restored as to allow the desired progress to be made,
    in preparing the way for the removal of the Mormons, while J. B.
    Backenstos remains sheriff of said county: and that he ought to
    resign said office.

Of the first of these resolutions Josiah B. Conyers, the author of "A Brief History of the Hancock Mob," says with just indignation and sarcasm:

    The first one, in our opinion, is unique. They accepted and
    recommended to the people of the surrounding counties to accept an
    unconditional proposition to remove. But understand, Mr. Mormon,
    though we accept it and recommend the surrounding counties to do
    so, likewise, (reprobate you, unconditionally) we do not intend to
    bring ourselves under any obligation to purchase your property,
    or to furnish purchasers; but we will be very kind and obliging,
    and will in no way, hinder or obstruct you in your efforts to
    sell, provided, nevertheless, this shall not be so construed as to
    prevent us from running off the purchaser. But we expect this small
    favor of you, viz., that you must dispose of your property, and
    leave at the appointed time. [5]

This mass meeting closed its business by arranging a plan for adopting a preliminary military organization for prompt future action, if occasion should demand.

On the first and second of October an anti-Mormon convention assembled at Carthage, in which nine counties, those immediately surrounding Hancock, were represented. A committee on evidence, was appointed, on which Archibald Williams, one of the Saints' bitterest enemies, was chairman. It was its business to collect evidence in relation to the depredations of the Mormons. The chairman made a report to which were appended a number of affidavits, charging various crimes on the people of Nauvoo. It is needless to say that the whole thing was an ex patre affair, and sustained by the men who had assisted in the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; and it was upon their evidence the convention acted.

The convention adopted the course followed by the mass meeting at Quincy--that is, it agreed to accept the propositions of The Church authorities, to remove, in the same spirit they were received at Quincy, and proceeded to prepare a preliminary military organization to act with promptitude, provided the Saints did not remove. The convention also,

    Resolved, that it is expected as an indispensable condition to
    the pacification of the county, that the old citizens be permitted
    to return to their homes unmolested by the present sheriff
    (Backenstos,) and the Mormons, for anything alleged against them;
    any attempt on their part to arrest or prosecute such persons for
    pretended offenses, will inevitably lead to a renewal of the late
    disorder.

O. H. Browning moved the following:

    Resolved, that the Hon. W. N. Purple, judge of this judicial
    circuit court be requested not to hold a court in Hancock County
    this fall; as, in the opinion of this convention, such court could
    not be holden without producing a collision between the Mormons and
    anti-Mormons, and renewing the excitement and disturbances which
    have recently affected said county.

And thus those guilty of mob violence and house burning were to be protected by the Carthage convention from prosecution before the courts; and those who might have the temerity to prosecute them and vindicate the law, were threatened by a renewal of that same lawless violence! Where, then, proud State of Illinois, was your majesty! Your honor! Can you answer? If you, out of very shame, cannot look up and reply, history answers for you, and tells you it was trailed in the dust, under the very feet of as vile a set of traitors as ever brought shame to their country! And where was your virtuous populace, the true watch and guard of a State's honor? Alas, they were blinded by the falsehoods prompted by malice and envy, and started on foot to shield the guilty murderers of innocence, or quelled by the bold front of a traitorous but successful mob.

In the meantime every exertion was made by the citizens of Nauvoo, to be ready for the great exodus in the spring. The temple had been so far completed that a conference was held in it on the sixth of October, and committees appointed to negotiate the sale of property and attend to other branches of business.

Nauvoo presented a busy scene in those days. Men were hurrying to and fro collecting wagons and putting them in repair; the roar of the smith's forge was well nigh perpetual, and even the stillness of night was broken by the steady beating of the sledge and the merry ringing of the anvil. Committees were seeking purchasers of real estate and converting both that and personal property into anything that would be of service to those just about to plunge into an unknown and boundless wilderness.

But while these efforts were being put forth on the part of the people of Nauvoo, to fulfill their agreement with the mob forces, the conditions of removal on the part of the old settlers were frequently violated; and instances of mob violence were almost every day occurrences. The people, who were making preparations to leave the farms, gardens and homes they had redeemed from the wilderness, were constantly threatened with destruction by the hostile demonstrations of their heartless neighbors.

To give an earnest of the intentions of the Mormons to leave the State where they had suffered so much, and to thereby remove all occasion for the implacable wrath of their enemies, that was so impatient that it could not wait for the springtime to come, for the sacrifice of its victims, the Twelve and the High Council, with about four hundred families, crossed the Mississippi on the ice, on the eleventh of February, 1846, and were soon lost to view in the wilderness of Iowa. Others continued to follow as fast as they could make ready, until by the latter part of April, the great body of The Church at Nauvoo had gone.

But now, purchasers for their property failed those who remained. The people surrounding Nauvoo saw no need of purchasing that which inevitably must become theirs. The result was that it became impossible for this remnant, consisting for the most part, of the destitute, the aged, infirm and sick, to remove. And surely a people who had still any faith left in humanity, would be justified in the belief that these could remain until an asylum was found for them by their friends, who had already gone in search of new homes. But in this, be it said, to the shame of Illinois, they were deceived. In the hardened hearts of their enemies, however, there was no mercy, even for the helpless; no pity for the sick or destitute. In their enemies' veins the milk of human kindness had dried up.

During the preparations for the exodus, Major Warren had been stationed with a small military force in Hancock, to keep the peace; but about the middle of April he received orders to disband his force on the first of May, as that was adjudged by "the public expectation," to use a phrase of Major Warren's, when the last of the Mormons should have left the State. So soon as it was understood that there were still left in Nauvoo a number of Mormons who would likely remain through the summer to continue their efforts to dispose of property, an uproar was raised in the surrounding counties, meetings were held and resolutions adopted, demanding that they leave at once, under threats of extermination. When the governor saw this new furore breaking out, he countermanded the order for Major Warren to disband his forces, and commanded him to hold his position and to preserve the peace until he received further orders.

The new impetus given to mob violence, however, was not to spend its force without perpetrating some outrage, and a number of cowardly attacks were made upon Mormons. On the eleventh of May, Major Warren found it necessary to issue a circular from which I quote the following:

    The undersigned again deems it his duty to appear before you in a
    circular. It may not be known to all of you, that the day after
    my detachment was disbanded at Carthage, I received orders from
    the executive to muster them into service again, and remain in the
    county until further orders.

    I have now been in Nauvoo with my detachment a week and can say
    to you with perfect assurance that the demonstrations made by the
    Mormon population, are unequivocal. They are leaving the State, and
    preparing to leave, with every means that God and nature has placed
    in their hands. * * * The anti-Mormons desire the removal of the
    Mormons; this is being effected peaceably and with all possible
    dispatch. All aggressive movements, therefore, against them at this
    time, must be actuated by a wanton desire to shed blood, or to
    plunder. * * *

    A man of near sixty years of age, living about seven miles from
    this place, was taken from his house a few nights since, stripped
    of his clothing, and his back cut to pieces with a whip, for no
    other reason than because he was a Mormon, and too old to make
    successful resistance. Conduct of this kind would disgrace a horde
    of savages. * * * To the Mormons I would say, go on with your
    preparations and leave as fast as you can. Leave the fighting to
    be done by my detachment. If we are overpowered, then recross the
    river, and defend yourselves and property.

To those busy trying to raise mob forces, principally Squire M'Calla and Colonel Levi Williams, Major Warren gave warning that a previous order to the effect that not more than four armed men, other than State troops, should assemble together, would be enforced; and that any mob which assembled would be dispersed; his force or the mob would leave the field in double quick time. This had the effect of quieting matters down for a season, but only until Major Warren's detachment was disbanded.

A meeting was held at Carthage on the sixth of June, to make preparations for celebrating the fourth of July, the nation's natal day. It was suggested at that meeting that, as all the Mormons had not left the State, the people of Hancock County could not be considered free; and under those circumstances, they ought not to celebrate the fourth with the usual rejoicings. The meeting was therefore adjourned to meet on the twelfth, for the purpose of taking into consideration why it was that all Mormons had not left the city of Nauvoo. That happened to be the day fixed by the governor on which to raise volunteers for the Mexican war, which, in the meantime, had broken out; so that there was considerable excitement among the militia of Hancock County, and the mob leaders doubtless thought the time propitious for making a demonstration against the few Saints still remaining in Nauvoo.

A large body of men were found willing to march into Nauvoo, but it was learned that the new citizens who had purchased much of the property of the now exiled people, were unwilling to allow the mob forces to enter the city, and meeting with this unexpected opposition, the mob forces marched to Golden's point, distant from Nauvoo some five or six miles down the river. At this juncture, Stephen Markham returned to Nauvoo from the camp of the Apostles for some Church property; but it was rumored that he had returned with a large body of men, and as Markham's name was a terror among the enemies of the Saints, the mob took to flight, though no one was in pursuit. It was a case of the wicked fleeing when no man pursued.

The committee at Quincy having control of the mob forces, either chagrined by the cowardice of those who had collected at Golden's point, or appalled at the prospect of innocent blood being found upon their skirts, retired from the position which had been assigned them. This disorganized the mob and they dispersed to their homes, but agreed to assemble again at the call of their leaders; and laid an injunction upon the Mormons in Nauvoo not to go outside of the city limits, except in making their way westward.

This order of the mob was disregarded by a party of new citizens and a few Saints who went into the country several miles, to harvest a field of grain. While engaged in their work, they were surrounded by a mob and captured. They were robbed of their arms, stripped of their clothing, and cruelly beaten with hickory goads. This outrage created intense excitement in Nauvoo, and the new citizens and Saints made common cause in bringing the perpetrators of it to justice. But while the parties accused of the crime were under arrest in the hands of the officers, a second party, consisting of P. H. Young and his son, Richard Ballantyne, James Standing and Mr. Herring were kidnapped, and held by their tormentors fourteen days, during which time they were constantly threatened with death. They finally escaped, however, and returned to Nauvoo.

The parties accused of making the assault on those in the harvest field, took a change of venue to Quincy, but whether they were ever brought to trial or not, I cannot learn, but think they were not.

Among those arrested for attacking the party of harvesters was Major M'Calla; and in his possession was found a gun taken from the party. The gun was recognized by several persons, among whom was Wm. Pickett, and taken from him. The mobbers then and there made out a charge of stealing, and got out warrants for the arrest of Pickett, Furness and Clifford. Pickett, it would seem, had incurred the hatred of the mob, and they desired to get him into their power. Word was brought to him by a friend that the warrant was merely a subterfuge to get him into the hands of his enemies; consequently, when one John Carlin, a special constable from Carthage, undertook to arrest him, he asked if he would guarantee his safety; being answered in the negative, he resisted the officer and would not be taken. Though it is claimed that afterwards, in company with several friends he went before the magistrate of Green Plains, who, it was said, issued the warrant for his arrest. But as he had no record of the warrant he refused to put him under arrest. The other parties accused were acquitted on examination.

The mob now, however, saw an opportunity to accomplish their full purpose of destroying the city of Nauvoo. An officer had been resisted by a citizen, and his fellow citizens approved his course! "Nauvoo was in rebellion against the laws!" Carlin issued a proclamation calling upon the citizens to come as a posse comitatus, to assist him in executing the law. And to his clarion call,

    There was mounting in hot haste.

The old mob forces were soon assembled at Carthage, and the command given to Captain Singleton.

The citizens of Nauvoo petitioned the governor for protection, and he sent to them Major J. R. Parker, with a force of ten men from Fulton County, and also authorized him to take command of such forces as might volunteer to defend the city against any attacks that might be threatened. He was also empowered "to pursue, and in aid of any peace officer with a proper warrant, arrest the rioters who may threaten or attempt such an attack, and bring them to trial;" and to assist with an armed posse any peace officer in making an arrest, and with a like force to guard the prisoners, during the trial, and as long as he believed them in danger of mob violence. The commission bears date August 24, 1846.

Thus equipped, Major Parker went to Nauvoo and issued a proclamation calling upon the mobs then collecting, "in the name of the people of Illinois, and by virtue of the authority vested in him by the governor of the State to disperse." The issue, then, was no longer between the mob forces and the Mormons; it was between the recognized authority of the State and this lawless banditti. Major Parker also announced that he was authorized and prepared to assist the proper officers in serving any writs in their hands.

In answer to this proclamation Carlin issued a counter one to the effect that if he met with resistance from Parker, he would consider his detachment as a mob, and proceed accordingly. To which Parker replied, if the forces under Carlin undertook to enter Nauvoo, he would treat them as a mob. Parker also wrote to Singleton, and expressed a desire to bring about a settlement of the difficulty without shedding blood. To this communication Singleton replied that in Parker's proposition he saw nothing looking to the expulsion of the remnant of the Mormon people left in Nauvoo, and "that is," said he "a sine qua non with us." It will be remembered that Carlin's professed object in calling for a posse was to arrest William Pickett; but now something more is demanded--the immediate removal of the Mormons, the surrender of Nauvoo, etc. Singleton concluded his terms to Parker, the representative of the governor of the State, in these words:

    When I say to you, the Mormons must go, I speak the mind of the
    camp and the country. They can leave without force or injury to
    themselves or their property, but I say to you, sir, with all
    candor, they shall go--they may fix the time within sixty days,
    or I will fix it for them.

At this juncture a committee of one hundred, which had been appointed by the citizens of Quincy, arrived on the scene, to act--ostensibly--as mediators, to bring about a peaceful solution of the trouble, but one cannot help thinking their true mission was to insidiously carry out the project of the mob. But I leave the reader to draw his own inference respecting that; when he hears the terms proposed by that committee, and which all classes of citizens in Nauvoo, seeing no alternative, accepted:

The terms offered were that the Mormons move out of the city, or disperse within sixty days. A force of twenty-five to remain in the city during that time, half the expense of maintaining them was to be paid by the people of Nauvoo; for which amount they were to give bond; that the Mormons surrender their arms, which should be returned to them after they left the State; that as soon as those arms were surrendered, the forces under Singleton were to disperse; that all hostilities cease between the respective parties as soon as the agreement was accepted.

The singularity about this agreement is that not one word is said about giving up Pickett, to arrest whom the forces under Singleton were ostensibly called out. Does it not reveal the fact that the Pickett episode was merely a ruse--a pretext for gathering a mob to sack Nauvoo and drive away the Mormons?

This proposed settlement, however, was rejected by the mob forces. It did not sufficiently gratify their implacable hatred. They did, in very deed, as the Prophet Joseph foretold his people they would, thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwelt a single spark of the spirit of the fullness of the Gospel. But when the mob rejected these terms, Singleton and other leaders left them; saying the Mormons had done all that could be required of them.

On the retirement of Singleton and others, the command of the mob was given to Thomas S. Brockman, a Campbellite preacher, known familiarly as "Old Tom," among his followers. He at once went into active preparations for bombarding the city; and with a force of more than one thousand men, and six pieces of cannon, took up a position about one mile east of the city, in a cornfield just at the head of Mulholland street; and not far from the house of Squire D. H. Wells.

From this position Brockman issued the terms upon which he would grant peace. The terms he offered were much more outrageous than those proposed by the Quincy committee, and therefore were rejected by the people of Nauvoo, both by Mormon and non-Mormon. Brockman addressed his insolent terms of peace to "the commanding officer of Nauvoo, and the trustees of the Mormon Church." The "commanding officer" was Major Clifford, who had succeeded Major Parker in that position. He was vested with the governor's commission as Parker had been, and it was to this representative of Illinois' executive that the demand of Brockman to surrender the city, and stack his arms, was addressed; so that he and his mob forces were pitted against the laws and lawful authority of the State, and we shall see, as we proceed, how mobs were more powerful than the State authorities; or rather, how the lawful authorities of the State were so lost to all sense of shame, so recreant to the trust reposed in them, so neglectful of the honor and dignity of the State, that they permitted their own representatives to be driven in disgrace from the field by the mob led by Brockman: and furthermore, those same authorities were so lost to every principle of humanity, that they permitted the helpless and unoffending people to be driven from their homes out into the wilderness to perish from exposure.

The citizens of Nauvoo were not willing to allow Brockman's mob to enter the city without making some effort to prevent him; and although their forces numbered not more than three or four hundred, they presented a determined front to the mob. They converted some steam-boat shafts into cannon--five pieces in all--and threw up some fortifications on the north of Mulholland street, facing the mob's camp. These works were under command of Captain Lamareux. On the south of of Mulholland street, the companies of Gates and Cutler were stationed.

On September 10th, 11th, and 12th, there was some desultory firing on both sides, without much advantage being gained. On the thirteenth, however, the mob-forces advanced in solid column, making a desperate effort to reach Mulholland street, the principal street leading into Nauvoo from the east. If the onset was desperate, the resistance was equally determined. The main shock of the conflict was sustained for a time by Gates' and Cutler's companies, and they must inevitably have been overpowered by the superior numbers of the mob, had not Squire Wells come up with Lamareux's company to reinforce them. The doughty squire had ridden across an open field exposed to the fire of the enemy, to where Lamareux's company lay behind their fortifications. He called upon them to advance at once to check the approach of the mob. There was one brave spirit who needed no second call to perform his duty. That was William Anderson, captain of what was known as the "Spartan Band." He leaped from behind the trenches and calling on his men to follow, started for the front. The rest of Lamareux's company did not so readily respond, and manifested a disposition to retreat rather than advance. Squire Wells, observing this, and seeing Anderson and his few brave followers rushing headlong into the conflict, raised in his stirrups, and swinging his hat, shouted: "Hurrah for Anderson! Who wouldn't follow the brave Anderson!" This rallied their spirits, and they followed the squire to the front, where they were soon firing at the enemy as steadily as their comrades.

The mob forces by this time had nearly reached Mulholland street, but now they recoiled from the rapid firing of the reinforcements and beat a retreat to the house of a Mr. Carmichael, but a short distance from Squire Wells' house. Here they waited until wagons came from their camp, and putting their dead and wounded into them, returned to where they were encamped in the morning. The number of killed and wounded of the mob has never been ascertained, as the facts were kept concealed. The intrepid Anderson and his equally brave son, a lad not more than fifteen years of age fell in the engagement; and one Morris was killed while crossing a field by a cannon ball.

Negotiations were now renewed, and the citizens of Nauvoo, seeing that the State authorities rendered them no assistance, but permitted even their own authority to be braved by a lawless mob, and knowing that they would eventually be overpowered, accepted the following terms of settlement, in order to stop the further effusion of blood:--

    1. The city of Nauvoo will surrender. The force of Colonel Brockman
    to enter and take possession of the city tomorrow, the seventeenth
    of September, at three o'clock p. m.

    2. The arms to be delivered to the Quincy committee, to be returned
    on the crossing of the river.

    3. The Quincy committee pledge themselves to use their influence
    for the protection of persons and property from all violence, and
    the officers of the camp and the men pledge themselves to protect
    all persons and property from violence.

    4. The sick and helpless to be protected and treated with humanity.

    5. The Mormon population of the city to leave the State or disperse
    as soon as they can cross the river.

    6. Five men, including the Trustees of The Church, and five clerks,
    with their families (Wm. Pickett not one of the number) to be
    permitted to remain in the city, for the disposition of property,
    free from all molestation and personal violence.

    7. Hostilities to cease immediately, and ten men of the Quincy
    committee to enter the city, in the execution of their duty as soon
    as they think proper.

These terms of capitulation were signed on the part of the citizens of Nauvoo, by Almon W. Babbitt, Joseph L. Heywood and John S. Fullmer; and on the part of the mob by Thomas S. Brockman and John Carlin; and by Andrew Johnson on behalf of the Quincy committee.

The rest of my story is soon told. There was a hasty flight of the "Mormon" population and a number of the new citizens who had assisted in the defense of Nauvoo. They left their homes without being able to carry with them anything for their comfort. The sick, aged and infirm, together with the youth, without regard to sex or condition, shared the same fate; they had to lie out on the Mississippi bottoms where many perished through exposure, and beyond all doubt, all would have famished from hunger, had not their camp been filled with innumerable flocks of quail, so tame that women and children caught hundreds of them in their hands, and thus was the cry of hunger relieved, by what would generally be regarded as a miraculous occurrence. [6]

Brockman and his forces entered the city, and once in, he insolently violated every condition of the treaty of surrender. But lest I should be charged with inaccuracy--for such events as I am recording seem almost too much to believe--I quote from the report made by Mr. Brayman to Governor Ford. Mr. Brayman had acted as the Governor's agent, for some time, in a secret capacity from the commencement of the difficulties at Nauvoo, and the following abstract is from an elaborate report he gives of the final struggle for the defense of the city. Moreover, the fact that I have never seen this matter reproduced in any of our books encourages me to insert it here:

    The force of General Brockman marched into the city at three
    o'clock. From fifteen hundred to two thousand men marched in
    procession, through the city, and encamped on the south side, near
    the river. The march was conducted without the least disorder or
    trespass upon persons or property. The streets were deserted--the
    obnoxious persons had left the city, leaving but little to provoke
    the resentment of the victors. But a few Mormons remained in the
    city, and these were hastening their preparations for crossing the
    river as soon as possible. On my return from Carthage to the city,
    about noon, I learned that the Quincy committee had closed its
    labors at sunrise and had left for home, leaving a sub-committee to
    complete the reception and delivery of the arms of those Mormons
    who had not yet departed.

    I also learned that in addition to the duty General Brockman had
    assumed, under the treaty, of superintending the removal of the
    Mormons from the State, he had issued an order for the expulsion
    from the State, of all who had borne arms in defense of the city
    against his force, and all who were in any manner identified with
    the Mormons.

    It could scarcely be believed that such an order in such palpable
    and gross violation of the unanimous pledge which had been signed
    by the officers, agreed to by the whole force, and endorsed by
    the Quincy committee, had been given. But on applying to General
    Brockman, I learned that such an order had been given, and would be
    executed. This order was rigorously enforced throughout the day,
    with many circumstances of the utmost cruelty and injustice. Bands
    of armed men traversed the city, entering the houses of citizens,
    robbing them of arms, throwing their household goods out of doors,
    insulting them, and threatening their lives. Many were seized and
    marched to the camp, and after military examination, set across
    the river, for the crime of sympathizing with the Mormons, or the
    still more heinous offense of fighting in the defense of the city,
    under command of officers commissioned by YOU, [Governor Ford],
    and instructed to make that defense. It is, indeed, painfully true,
    that many citizens of this State, have been driven from it by an
    armed force, because impelled by our encouragement, and a sense of
    duty, they have bravely defended their homes and homes of their
    neighbors from the assaults of a force assembled for unlawful
    purposes.

    In the face of the pledge given to protect persons and property
    from all violence, (excepting of course Mormon persons and
    property), it may be estimated that nearly one half of the new
    citizens of Nauvoo have been forced from their homes and dare
    not return. Thus far, these citizens have appealed in vain for
    protection and redress.

    It remains yet to be seen whether there is efficacy in the law,
    power in the executive arm, or potency in public opinion sufficient
    to right their grievous wrongs. It is disgraceful to the character
    of the State, and a humiliation not to be borne, to permit a
    military leader, acting without a shadow of lawful authority, but
    in violation of law and right, not only to thwart the will of the
    executive, but to impose upon citizens the penalty of banishment,
    for acting under it. [7]

Was this arch traitor, Brockman, hung for his treason against the State? No; nor even tried or questioned, neither he nor his followers. Perhaps it was thought that an investigation might reveal the fact to the world that many high officials, and chief among them the governor of the State, had been engaged in an unlawful conspiracy to drive from Illinois an innocent community, whose rights they had not the moral courage to defend against the fierce attacks of lawless mobs, whose hands were crimson in the blood of innocence; and who repeatedly trampled the honor and dignity of the State under their feet.

After a time the most of the new citizens returned to the homes they had purchased for little or nothing from the now exiled founders of the beautiful city. But Nauvoo never prospered under its new masters. Out of sympathy for those who had redeemed it from a wilderness, and some portions of it from a swamp, its fields and gardens refused to yield in their strength to the industry of other hands. Its decline was as rapid and disastrous as its rise had been sudden and glorious.

A French communistic society had purchased considerable property in the deserted city, and into their hands passed the splendid temple the Saints at such sacrifice had erected. Externally, the building had been completed in the spring of 1846, even to the gilding of the angel and the trumpet at the top of the spire. During the winter of 1845-6 various rooms of the temple were dedicated for ordinance work, and there hundreds of the faithful Saints received their endowments--the sacred mysteries of the faith. The main court of worship was also prepared; and on the evening of April 30th, 1846, the building was privately dedicated, Joseph Young, the senior president of the First Council of Seventy, offering the dedicatory prayer. On the first of May, 1846, under the direction of Apostles Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff, the edifice was publicly dedicated, according to the order of the Holy Priesthood, revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The temple was always a source of envy to the enemies of the Saints, and it was feared that if it continued to stand it would be a bond between its exiled builders and the city from which they had been cruelly driven, and an inducement for them to return. On the tenth of November, 1848, an incendiary, therefore, set it on fire, and the tower was destroyed, and the whole building so shattered, that on the twenty-seventh of May, 1850, a tornado blew down the north wall. I was informed by M. M. Morrill, who at the time of my visit was mayor of Nauvoo, and, by the way, one who had assisted in its defense when attacked by the mob, that one Joseph Agnew, confessed to being the incendiary. Finally all the walls were pulled down and the stone hauled away for building purposes, until now, not one stone stands upon another. Even the very foundation has been cleared away, and the excavation for the basement filled up and the site covered with inferior buildings.

At the time of my visit, in the summer of 1885, the population of Nauvoo numbered about seventeen hundred, nine-tenths of whom were Germans. The principal occupation is grape-growing, vineyards covering some portions of the city plat, which was once the principal business center. The whole place has a half-deserted, half-dilapidated appearance, and seems to be withering under a blight, from which it refuses to recover.

Such is the fate of Nauvoo, which once promised to be the first city of Illinois, and beyond all question would have been so had there existed sufficient virtue and honor in that State to have protected its founders in their rights.

* * * * * * *

  Still stands the forest primeval; but under the
  Shade of its branches
  Dwells another race, with other customs
  And languages.

The quotation connects me with my introduction, and reminds me that I have completed the task proposed in these pages. But in the fate which overtook the survivors of the Acadian peasant-exiles from Nova Scotia, and the Mormons exiles from Illinois, the former fails altogether to suggest the faintest hint of a parallel.

  Only along the shores of the mournful and
  mystic Atlantic
  Linger a few Acadian peasants, whose fathers
  from exile
  Wandered back to their native land to die
  in its bosom,

Finishes the story of the Acadian exiles. Not so the story of the exiles from Illinois. They did not perish in exile, nor did merely a handful of them, broken in spirits as in fortunes return to live silent and sad on the site of their former homes. The Mormon exiles were not broken and scattered--they remained a people; beyond their exile they were destined to have a glorious history. Their faith in their religion was not shattered. Their church was not disrupted. Their hearts were not turned against their prophets. Their spirits were not blighted nor their hearts bowed down beyond the power of recovery; nor their fortunes so blasted that they could not hope for prosperity--for God was with them.

The institution--The Church--brought into existence, and its doctrines developed amid so much of spiritual tempest and pursued so relentlessly by mob violence, and which may be said to have had a second birth at Nauvoo, and to have received sanctification from the martyrdom of her earthly founder--The Church which these exiles bore with them into the western wilderness was not born to die. Whatever might be the fate of The Church and the Saints in other dispensations of the Gospel, God had now introduced the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times, in which He has decreed that all things in Christ shall be gathered together in one--even in Him. [8] A dispensation in which the salvation of man and the redemption of the earth itself shall be consummated. And the earth and men made ready for the all glorious reign of truth and righteousness so long promised by God and His prophets. Hence The Church was not destroyed; and the people who fled with her to the wilderness did not perish. The blinding storms of sleet and rain which enveloped their principal companies as in melancholy trains they penetrated the wilderness of the then territory of Iowa, might easily have been taken for God's curtain rung down upon the most melancholy scene in America's history--the scene of a people in free America--the boasted asylum for the oppressed, where religious freedom is guaranteed by express constitutional provision--fleeing from the worst forms of oppression--the oppression of mob violence invoked in Illinois to crush their religious faith. But the curtain so rung down was not upon the final act. The hand of God again rolled it up; and when He did, it was to reveal to the world the exiles as the redeemers of desert wastes; the planters of cities; the builders of temples, the founders of States; and for themselves and for their religious faith so entrenched, so strengthened, so enlarged that the world shall never, while the earth itself remains, or sun or stars endure be rid of that faith founded--under God--by JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET-MARTYR OF NAUVOO.

Footnotes

1. Wm. Clayton's journal, under date of May 24, 1845.

2. Ford's History of Illinois, p. 406.

3. The Hancock Mob, p. 4, by J. B. Conyers, M. D.

4. He was acquitted at his trial which took place at Peoria.

5. Hancock Mob, Conyers, pp. 13, 14.

6. The condition of the exiled Saints at this period is graphically described by General Thomas L. Kane, see appendix--

7. The Hancock Mob, by J.B. Conyers, M. D., pages 73, 74.

8. Eph. 1: 9, 10.

APPENDICES.

APPENDIX I.

CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN JOSEPH SMITH AND JOHN C. CALHOUN.

    HON. JOHN C. CALHOUN.

    DEAR SIR,--As we understand you are a candidate for the Presidency
    at the next election; and as the Latter-day Saints (sometimes
    called Mormons, who now constitute a numerous class in the school
    politic of this vast republic,) have been robbed of an immense
    amount of property, and endured nameless sufferings by the State of
    Missouri, and from her borders have been driven by force of arms,
    contrary to our national covenants; and as in vain we have sought
    redress by all constitutional, legal, and honorable means, in her
    courts, her executive councils and her legislative halls; and as
    we have petitioned Congress to take cognizance of our sufferings
    without effect, we have judged it wisdom to address you this
    communication, and solicit an immediate, specific and candid reply
    to "What will be your rule of action relative to us as a people,"
    should fortune favor your ascension to the chief magistracy?

    Most respectfully, sir, your friend,
       and the friend of peace, good order,
           and constitutional rights,
                                                   JOSEPH SMITH.

    In behalf of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

                                        FORT HILL, 2ND DECEMBER, 1843.

    SIR,--You ask me what would be my rule of action relative to the
    Mormons or Latter-day Saints, should I be elected President; to
    which I answer, that if I should be elected, I would strive to
    administer the government according to the Constitution and the
    laws of the Union; and that as they make no distinction between
    citizens of different religious creeds, I should make none. As far
    as it depends on the executive department, all should have the full
    benefit of both, and none should be exempt from their operation.

    But as you refer to the case of Missouri, candor compels me to
    repeat what I said to you at Washington, that, according to my
    views, the case does not come within the jurisdiction of the
    federal government, which is one of limited and specific powers.

                       With respect, I am, &c., &c.,
                                               J. C. CALHOUN.

    Mr. Joseph Smith.

                                    NAUVOO, ILLINOIS, JANUARY 2, 1844.

    SIR,--Your reply to my letter of last November, concerning your
    rule of action towards the Latter-day Saints, if elected president,
    is at hand; and that you and your friends of the same opinion
    relative to the matter in question may not be disappointed as to
    me or my mind upon so grave a subject, permit me, as a law-abiding
    man, as a well-wisher to the perpetuity of constitutional rights
    and liberty, and as a friend to the free worship of Almighty God by
    all, according to the dictates of every person's own conscience, to
    say I am surprised that a man or men in the highest stations of
    public life should have made up such a fragile "view" of a case,
    than which there is not one on the face of the globe fraught with
    so much consequence to the happiness of men in this world or the
    world to come.

    To be sure, the first paragraph of your letter appears very
    complacent and fair on a white sheet of paper. And who, that is
    ambitious for greatness and power, would not have said the same
    thing? Your oath would bind you to support the Constitution and
    laws; and as all creeds and religions are alike tolerated, they
    must, of course, all be justified or condemned according to merit
    or demerit. But why--tell me why are all the principal men held up
    for public stations so cautiously careful not to publish to the
    world that they will judge a righteous judgment, law or no law?
    for laws and opinions, like the vanes of steeples, change with the
    wind.

    One Congress passes a law, another repeals it; and one statesman
    says that the Constitution means this, and another that; and who
    does not know that all may be wrong? The opinion and pledge,
    therefore, in the first paragraph of your reply to my question,
    like the forced steam from the engine of a steam-boat, makes the
    show of a bright cloud at first; but when it comes in contact with
    a purer atmosphere, dissolves to common air again.

    Your second paragraph leaves you naked before yourself, like a
    likeness in a mirror, when you say that, "according to your view,
    the federal government is one of limited and specific powers," and
    has no jurisdiction in the case of the Mormons. So then a State can
    at any time expel any portion of her citizens with impunity, and,
    in the language of Mr. Van Buren, frosted over with your gracious
    "views of the case," though the cause is ever so just, Government
    can do nothing for them, because it has no power.

    Go on, then, Missouri, after another set of inhabitants (as the
    Latter-day Saints did,) have entered some two or three hundred
    thousand dollars' worth of land; and made extensive improvements
    thereon. Go on, then, I say; banish the occupants or owners, or
    kill them, as the mobbers did many of the Latter-day Saints, and
    take their land and property as spoil; and let the legislature,
    as in the case of the Mormons, appropriate a couple of hundred
    thousand dollars to pay the mob for doing that job; for the
    renowned senator from South Carolina, Mr. J. C. Calhoun, says the
    powers of the federal government are so specific and limited that
    it has no jurisdiction of the case! O ye people who groan under
    the oppression of tyrants!--ye exiled Poles, who have felt the iron
    hand of Russian grasp!--ye poor and unfortunate among all nations!
    come to the asylum of the oppressed; buy ye lands of the general
    government; pay in your money to the treasury to strengthen the
    army and the navy; worship God according to the dictates of your
    own consciences; pay in your taxes to support the great heads of a
    glorious nation: but remember a "sovereign State" is so much more
    powerful than the United States, the parent government, that it
    can exile you at pleasure, mob you with impunity, confiscate your
    lands and property, have the legislature sanction it,--yea, even
    murder you as an edict of an emperor, and it does no wrong; for
    the noble senator of South Carolina says the power of the federal
    government is so limited and specific that it has no jurisdiction
    of the case! What think ye of imperium in imperio?

    Ye spirits of the blessed of all ages, hark! Ye shades of departed
    statesmen listen! Abraham, Moses, Homer, Socrates, Solon, Solomon,
    and all that ever thought of right and wrong, look down from your
    exaltations, if you have any; for it is said, "In the midst of
    counsellors there is safety;" and when you have learned that
    fifteen thousand innocent citizens, after having purchased their
    lands of the United States and paid for them, were expelled from
    a "sovereign State," by order of the governor, at the point of
    the bayonet, their arms taken from them by the same authority,
    and their right of migration into said State denied, under pain
    of imprisonment, whipping, robbing, mobbing, and even death, and
    no justice or recompense allowed; and, from the legislature with
    the governor at the head, down to the justice of the peace, with a
    bottle of whisky in one hand and a bowie-knife in the other, hear
    them all declare that there is no justice for a Mormon in that
    State; and judge ye a righteous judgment, and tell me when the
    virtue of the States was stolen, where the honor of the general
    government lies hid, and what clothes a senator with wisdom. O
    nullifying Carolina! O little tempestuous Rhode Island! Would it
    not be well for the great men of the nation to read the fable
    of the partial judge; and when part of the free citizens of a
    State had been expelled contrary to the Constitution, mobbed,
    robbed, plundered, and many murdered, instead of searching into the
    course taken with Joanna Southcott, Ann Lee, the French Prophets,
    the Quakers of New England, and rebellious niggers in the slave
    states, to hear both sides and then judge, rather than have the
    mortification to say, "Oh, it is my bull that has killed your
    ox! That alters the case! I must inquire into it; and if, and if--

    If the general government has no power to reinstate expelled
    citizens to their rights, there is a monstrous hypocrite fed
    and fostered from the hard earnings of the people! A real "bull
    beggar" upheld by sycophants. And although you may wink to the
    priests to stigmatize, wheedle the drunkards to swear, and raise
    the hue-and-cry of--"Impostor! false prophet! G-- d-- old Joe
    Smith!" yet remember, if the Latter-day Saints are not restored
    to all their rights and paid for all their losses, according to
    the known rules of justice and judgment, reciprocation and common
    honesty among men, that God will come out of His hiding place, and
    vex this nation with a sore vexation: yea, the consuming wrath
    of an offended God shall smoke through the nation with as much
    distress and woe as independence has blazed through with pleasure
    and delight. Where is the strength of government? Where is the
    patriotism of a Washington, a Warren, and Adams? And where is a
    spark from the watch-fire of '76, by which one candle might be lit
    that would glimmer upon the confines of Democracy? Well may it be
    said that one man is not a state, nor one state the nation.

    In the days of General Jackson, when France refused the first
    installment for spoliations, there was power, force, and honor
    enough to resent injustice and insult, and the money came; and
    shall Missouri, filled with negro-drivers and white men stealers,
    go "unwhipped of justice" for tenfold greater sins than France?
    No! verily, no! While I have power of body and mind--while water
    runs and grass grows--while virtue is lovely and vice hateful, and
    while a stone points out a sacred spot where a fragment of American
    liberty once was, I or my posterity will plead the cause of injured
    innocence, until Missouri makes atonement for all her sins, or
    sinks disgraced, degraded, and damned to hell, "where the worm
    dieth not, and the fire is not quenched."

    Why, sir, the power not delegated to the United States and the
    States belong to the people, and Congress sent to do the people's
    business have all power; and shall fifteen thousand citizens groan
    in exile? O vain men! will ye not, if ye do not restore them to
    their rights and two million dollars' worth of property, relinquish
    to them (the Latter-day Saints,) as a body, their portion of power
    that belongs to them according to the Constitution? Power has its
    convenience as well as inconvenience. "The world was not made for
    Caesar alone, but for Titus too."

    I will give you a parable. A certain lord had a vineyard in a
    goodly land, which men labored in at their pleasure. A few meek
    men also went and purchased with money from some of these chief
    men that labored at pleasure a portion of land in the vineyard,
    at a very remote part of it, and began to improve it, and to eat
    and drink the fruit thereof,--when some vile persons, who regarded
    not man, neither feared the lord of the vineyard, rose up suddenly
    and robbed these meek men, and drove them from their possessions,
    killing many.

    This barbarous act made no small stir among the men in the
    vineyard; and all that portion who were attached to that part of
    the vineyard where the men were robbed rose up in grand council,
    with their chief man, who had firstly ordered the deed to be done,
    and made a covenant not to pay for the cruel deed, but to keep the
    spoil, and never let those meek men set their feet on that soil
    again, neither recompense them for it.

    Now, these meek men, in their distress, wisely sought redress
    of those wicked men in every possible manner, and got none.
    They then supplicated the chief men, who held the vineyard at
    pleasure, and who had the power to sell and defend it, for redress
    and redemption; and those men, loving the fame and favor of
    the multitude more than the glory of the lord of the vineyard,
    answered--"Your cause is just, but we can do nothing for you,
    because we have no power."

    Now, when the lord of the vineyard saw that virtue innocence
    was not regarded, and his vineyard occupied by wicked men, he
    sent men and took the possession of it to himself, and destroyed
    these unfaithful servants, and appointed them their portion among
    hypocrites.

    And let me say that all men who say that Congress has no power to
    restore and defend the rights of her citizens have not the love of
    the truth abiding in them. Congress has power to protect the nation
    against foreign invasion and internal broil; and whenever that
    body passes an act to maintain right with any power, or to restore
    right to any portion of her citizens, it is the SUPREME LAW OF THE
    LAND; and should a State refuse submission, that State is guilty of
    insurrection or rebellion, and the President has as much power
    to repel it as Washington had to march against the "whisky boys
    at Pittsburg," or General Jackson had to send an armed force to
    suppress the rebellion of South Carolina.

    To close, I would admonish you, before you let your "candor
    compel" you again to write upon a subject great as the salvation
    of man, consequential as the life of the Savior, broad as the
    principles of eternal truth, and valuable as the jewels of
    eternity, to read in the eighth section and first article of
    the Constitution of the United States, the first, fourteenth,
    and seventeenth "specific" and not very "limited powers" of
    the federal government, what can be done to protect the lives,
    property, and rights of a virtuous people, when the administrators
    of the law and law-makers are unbought by bribes, uncorrupted by
    patronage, untempted by gold, unawed by fear, and uncontaminated
    tangling alliances--even like Caeser's wife, not only
    unspotted, but unsuspected! And God, who cooled the heat of a
    Nebuchadnezzar's furnace or shut the mouths of lions for the honor
    of a Daniel, will raise your mind above the narrow notion that the
    general government has no power, to the sublime idea that Congress,
    with the President as executor, is as almighty in its sphere as
    Jehovah is in His.

          With great respect, I have the honor to be
                                   Your obedient servant,
                                             JOSEPH SMITH.

    Hon. ("Mr.") J. C. Calhoun,
        Fort Hill, S. C.

APPENDIX II.

CLAY'S LETTER TO JOSEPH SMITH AND THE LATTER'S REPLY.

                                             ASHLAND, November 15, 1843.

    DEAR SIR:--I have received your letter in behalf of the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, stating that you understand that
    I am a candidate for the presidency, and inquiring what will be my
    rule of action relative to you as a people, should I be elected.

    I am profoundly grateful for the numerous and strong expressions of
    the people in my behalf as a candidate for President of the United
    States; but I do not so consider myself. That must depend upon
    future events and upon my sense of duty.

    Should I be a candidate, I can enter into no engagements, make no
    promises, give no pledges to any particular portion of the people
    of the United States. If I ever enter into that high office, I must
    go into it free and unfettered, with no guarantees but such as are
    to be drawn from my whole life, character and conduct.

    It is not inconsistent with this declaration to say that I have
    viewed with a lively interest the progress of the Latter-day
    Saints; that I have sympathized in their sufferings under
    injustice, as it appeared to me, which has been inflicted upon
    them; and I think, in common with other religious communities, they
    ought to enjoy the security and protection of the Constitution and
    the laws.

    I am, with great respect, your friend and obedient servant,

                                                              H. CLAY.

    To Joseph Smith, Esq.

                                            NAUVOO, ILL., May 13, 1844.

    SIR:--Your answer to my inquiry, "What would be your rule of
    action towards the Latter-day Saints, should you be elected
    President of the United States?" has been under consideration since
    last November, in the fond expectation that you would give (for
    every honest citizen has a right to demand it,) to the country a
    manifesto of your views of the best method and means which would
    secure to the people, the whole people, the most freedom, the
    most happiness, the most union, the most wealth, the most fame,
    the most glory at home, and the most honor abroad, at the least
    expense. But I have waited in vain. So far as you have made public
    declarations, they have been made, like your answer to the above,
    soft to flatter, rather than solid to feed the people. You seem
    to abandon all former policy which may have actuated you in the
    discharge of a statesman's duty, when the vigor of intellect
    and the force of virtue should have sought out an everlasting
    habitation for liberty; when, as a wise man, a true patriot, and
    a friend to mankind, you should have resolved to ameliorate the
    lawful condition of our bleeding country by a mighty plan of
    wisdom, righteousness, justice, goodness and mercy, that would
    have brought back the golden days of our nation's youth, vigor
    and vivacity, when prosperity crowned the efforts of a youthful
    republic, when the gentle aspirations of the sons of liberty were,
    "We are one!"

    In your answer to my questions last fall, that peculiar tact of
    modern politicians declaring, "If you ever enter into that high
    office, you must go into it free and unfettered; with no guarantees
    but such as are to be drawn from your whole life, character and
    conduct," so much resembles a lottery-vendor's sign, with the
    goddess of good luck sitting on the car of fortune, a-straddle of
    the horns of plenty, and driving the merry steeds of beatitude,
    without reins or bridle, that I cannot help exclaiming--O frail
    man, what have you done that will exalt you? Can anything be drawn
    from your life, character or conduct that is worthy of being held
    up to the gaze of this nation as a model of virtue, charity and
    wisdom? Are you not a lottery picture, with more than two blanks
    to a prize? Leaving many things prior to your Ghent treaty, let
    the world look at that, and see where is the wisdom, honor and
    patriotism which ought to have characterized the plenipotentiary
    of the only free nation upon the earth? A quarter of a century's
    negotiation to obtain our rights on the north-eastern boundary,
    and the motley manner in which Oregon tries to shine as American
    territory, coupled with your presidential race and some-by-chance
    secretaryship in 1825, all go to convince the friends of freedom,
    the golden patriots of Jeffersonian democracy, free trade and
    sailors' rights, and the protectors of person and property, that an
    honorable war is better than a dishonorable peace.

    But had you really wanted to have exhibited the wisdom, clemency,
    benevolence and dignity of a great man in this boasted republic,
    when fifteen thousand free citizens were exiled from their own
    homes, lands and property, in the wonderful patriotic State of
    Missouri, and you then upon your oath and honor occupying the
    exalted station of a Senator of Congress from the noble-hearted
    State of Kentucky, why did you not show the world your loyalty to
    law and order, by using all honorable means to restore the innocent
    to their rights and property? Why, sir, the more we search into
    your character and conduct, the more we must exclaim from Holy
    Writ, "The tree is known by its fruit."

    Again: this is not all. Rather than show yourself an honest man,
    by guaranteeing to the people what you will do in case you should
    be elected president, "you can enter into no engagement, make no
    promises, and give no pledges as to what you will do. Well, it may
    be that some hot-headed partisan would take such nothingarianism
    upon trust; but sensible men and even ladies would think
    themselves insulted by such an evasion of coming events! If a
    tempest is expected, why not prepare to meet it, and, in the
    language of the poet, exclaim--

      Then let the trial come; and witness thou
      If terror be upon me,--If I shrink
      Or falter in my strength to meet the storm
      When hardest it besets me.

    True greatness never wavers; but when the Missouri compromise
    was entered into by you for the benefit of slavery, there was
    a mighty shrinkage of western honor; and from that day, sir,
    the sterling Yankee, the struggling Abolitionist, and the staunch
    Democrat, with a large number of the liberal-minded Whigs, have
    marked you as a black-leg in politics, begging for a chance to
    shuffle yourself into the Presidential chair, where you might
    deal out the destinies of our beloved country for a game of brag
    that would end in--"Hark from the tombs a doleful sound." Start
    not at this picture: for your "whole life, character and conduct"
    have been spotted with deeds that cause a blush upon the face of
    a virtuous patriot. So you must be contented in your lot, while
    crime, cowardice, cupidity or low cunning have handed you down
    from the high tower of a statesman to the black-hole of a gambler.
    A man that accepts a challenge or fights a duel is nothing more
    nor less than a murderer; for Holy Writ declares that, "Whose
    sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed:" and when in
    the renowned city of Washington the notorious Henry Clay dropped
    from the summit of a Senator to the sink of a scoundrel to shoot
    at that chalk-line of a Randolph, he not only disgraced his own
    fame, family and friends, but he polluted the sanctum sanctorum
    of American glory; and the kingly blackguards throughout the whole
    world are pointing the finger of scorn at the boasted "asylum of
    the oppressed," and hissing at American statesmen as gentlemen
    vagabonds and murderers, holding the olive branch of peace in
    one hand and a pistol for death in the other! Well might the
    Savior rebuke the heads of this nation with "Wo unto you scribes,
    Pharisees, hypocrites!" for the United States Government and
    Congress, with a few honorable exceptions, have gone the way of
    Cain, and must perish in their gainsayings, like Korah and his
    wicked host. And honest men of every clime, and the innocent, poor
    and oppressed, as well as heathens, pagans and Indians, everywhere,
    who could but hope that the tree of liberty would yield some
    precious fruit for the hungry human race, and shed some balmy
    leaves for the healing of nations, have long since given up all
    hopes of equal rights, of justice and judgment, and of truth and
    virtue, when such polluted, vain, heaven-daring, bogus patriots
    are forced or flung into the front rank of Government to guide
    the destinies of millions. Crape the heavens with weeds of wo,
    gird the earth with sack-cloth, and let hell mutter one melody
    in commemoration of fallen splendor! for the glory of America
    has departed, and God will set a flaming sword to guard the tree
    of liberty, while such mint-tithing Herods as Van Buren, Boggs,
    Benton, Calhoun and Clay are thrust out of the realms of virtue as
    fit subjects for the kingdom of fallen greatness. Vox reprobi, vox
    Diaboli!

    In your late addresses to the people of South Carolina, where
    rebellion budded, but could not blossom, you "renounced ultraism,"
    "high tariff," and almost banished your "banking system" for the
    more certain standard of "public opinion." This is all very well,
    and marks the intention of a politician, the calculations of a
    demagogue, and the allowance for leeings of a shrewd manager, just
    as truly as the weathercock does the wind when it turns upon the
    spire. Hustings for the South, barbecues for the West, confidential
    letters for the North and "American System" for the East.

      Lull-a-by baby upon the tree top,
      And when the wind blows the cradle will rock.

    Suppose you should also, taking your "whole life, character and
    conduct" into consideration, and, as many hands make light work,
    stir up the old "Clay party," the "National Republican party," the
    "High Protective Tariff party," and the late coon-skin party, with
    all their paraphernalia, ultraism, ne plus ultraism, sine qua
    non, which have grown with your growth, strengthened with your
    strength, and shrunk with your shrinkage, and ask the people of
    this enlightened republic what they think of your powers and policy
    as a statesman; for verily it would seem, from all past remains of
    parties, politics, projects and pictures, that you are the Clay;
    and the people the potter; and as some vessels are marred in the
    hands of the potter, the natural conclusion is that you are a
    vessel of dishonor.

    You may complain that a close examination of your "whole life,
    character and conduct" places you, as a Kentuckian would pleasantly
    term it, "in a bad fix." But, sir, when the nation has sunk deeper
    and deeper into the mud at every turn of the great wheels of the
    Union, while you have acted as one of the principal drivers, it
    becomes the bounden duty of the whole community, as one man, to
    whisper you on every point of government, to uncover every act of
    your life, and inquire what mighty acts you have done to benefit
    the nation, how much you have tithed the mint to gratify your lust,
    and why the fragments of your raiment hang upon the thorns by the
    path as signals to beware.

    But your shrinkage is truly wonderful! Not only your banking
    system and high tariff project have vanished from your mind "like
    the baseless fabric of a vision," but the "annexation of Texas"
    has touched your pathetic sensibilities of national pride so
    acutely, that the poor Texans, your own brethren, may fall back
    into the ferocity of Mexico, or be sold at auction to British
    stock-jobbers, and all is well. For "I," the old Senator from
    Kentucky, and fearful it would militate against my interest in the
    north to enlarge the borders of the Union in the south. Truly "a
    poor wise child is better than an old foolish king who will be no
    longer admonished." Who ever heard of a nation that had too much
    territory? Was it ever bad policy to make friends? Has any people
    ever become too good to do good? No, never. But the ambition and
    vanity of some men have flown away with their wisdom and judgment,
    and left a croaking skeleton to occupy the place of a noble
    soul!

    Why, sir, the condition of the whole earth is lamentable.
    Texas dreads the teeth and the nails of Mexico. Oregon has the
    rheumatism, brought on by a horrid exposure to the heat and cold of
    British and American trappers. Canada has caught a bad cold from
    extreme fatigue in the patriot war. South America has the headache
    cause by bumps against the beams of Catholicity and Spanish
    Sovereignty. Spain has the gripes from age and inquisition. France
    trembles and wastes under the effects of contagious diseases.
    England groans with the gout, and wiggles with wine. Italy and the
    German States are pale with the consumption. Prussia, Poland, and
    the little contiguous dynasties, duchies and domains, have the
    mumps so severely, that "the whole head is sick, and the whole
    heart is faint." Russia has the cramp by lineage. Turkey has the
    numb palsy. Africa, from the curse of God, has lost the use of her
    limbs China is ruined by the queen's evil, and the rest of Asia
    fearfully exposed to the small-pox, the natural way, from British
    peddlers. The islands of the sea are almost dead with the scurvy.
    The Indians are blind and lame; and the United States, which ought
    to be the good physician with "balm from Gilead" and an "asylum
    for the oppressed," has boosted and is boosting up into the
    council chamber of the Government a clique of political gamblers,
    to play for the old clothes and old shoes of a sick world, and
    "no pledge, no promise to any particular portion of the people"
    that the rightful heirs will ever receive a cent of their Father's
    legacy. Away with such self-important, self-aggrandizing and
    self-willed demagogues! Their friendship is colder than polar ice,
    and their profession meaner than the damnation of hell.

    O man! when such a great dilemma of the globe, such a tremendous
    convulsion of kingdoms shakes the earth from centre to
    circumference; when castles, prison-houses, and cells raise a
    cry to God against the cruelty of man; when the mourning of the
    fatherless and the widow causes anguish in heaven; when the poor
    among all nations cry day and night for bread, and a shelter from
    the heat and storm; and when the degraded black slave holds up his
    manacled hands to the great statesmen of the United States, and
    sings--

      "O liberty, where are thy charms,
      That sages have told me are sweet?"

    And when fifteen thousand free citizens of the high-blooded
    republic of North America are robbed and driven from one State
    to another without redress or redemption, it is not only time
    for a candidate for the presidency to pledge himself to execute
    judgment and justice in righteousness, law or no law; but it is
    his bounden duty as a man, for the honor of a disgraced country,
    and for the salvation of a once virtuous people, to call for a
    union of all honest men, and appease the wrath of God by acts of
    wisdom, holiness, and virtue! "The fervent prayer of a righteous
    man availeth much."

    Perhaps you may think I go too far with my strictures and
    innuendos, because in your concluding paragraph you say "it is not
    inconsistent with your declarations to say that you have viewed
    with a lively interest the progress of the Latter-day Saints, that
    you have sympathized in their sufferings under injustice; as it
    appeared to you, which has been inflicted upon them, and that you
    think, in common with all other religious communities, they ought
    to enjoy the security and protection of the Constitution and the
    laws." If words were not wind, and imagination not a vapor, such
    "views" "with a lively interest" might coax out a few Mormon
    votes; such "sympathy" for their suffering under injustice might
    heal some of the sick yet lingering amongst them, raise some of
    the dead, and recover some of their property from Missouri; and
    finally, if thought was not a phantom, we might, in common with
    other religious communities, "you think, enjoy the security and
    protection of the Constitution and laws." But during ten years,
    while the Latter-day Saints have bled, been robbed, driven from
    their own lands, paid oceans of money into the treasury to pay your
    renowned self and others for legislating and dealing out equal
    rights and privileges to those in common with all other religious
    communities, they have waited and expected in vain! If you have
    possessed any patriotism, it has been veiled by your popularity,
    for fear the Saints would fall in love with its charms. Blind
    charity and dumb justice never do much towards alleviating the
    wants of the needy; but straws show which way the wind blows. It
    is currently rumored that your dernier resort for the Latter-day
    Saints is to migrate to Oregon or California. Such cruel humanity,
    such noble injustice, such honorable cowardice, such foolish
    wisdom, and such vicious virtue could only emanate from Clay. After
    the Saints have been plundered of three or four millions of land
    and property by the people and powers of the sovereign State of
    Missouri--after they have sought for redress and redemption, from
    the county court to Congress, and been denied through religious
    prejudice and sacerdotal dignity--after they have builded a city
    and two temples at an immense expense of labor and treasure--after
    they have increased from hundreds to hundreds of thousands, and
    after they have sent missionaries to the various nations of the
    earth to gather Israel, according to the predictions of all the
    holy prophets since the world began, that great plenipotentiary,
    the renowned secretary of state, the ignoble duelist, the gambling
    senator, and Whig candidate for the presidency, Henry Clay, the
    wise Kentucky lawyer, advises the Latter-day Saints to go to Oregon
    to obtain justice and set up a government of their own.

    O ye crowned heads among all nations, is not Mr. Clay a wise man,
    and very patriotic? Why, great God! to transport 200,000 people
    through a vast prairie, over the Rocky Mountains, to Oregon, a
    distance of nearly two thousand miles, would cost more than four
    millions! or should they go by Cape Horn in ships to California,
    the cost would be more than twenty millions! and all this to
    save the United States from inheriting the disgrace of Missouri
    for murdering and robbing the Saints with impunity! Benton and Van
    Buren, who make no secret to say that if they get into power they
    will carry out Boggs' exterminating plan to rid the country of the
    Latter-day Saints, are

      "Little nipperkins of milk,"

    compared to "Clay's" great aquafortis jars. Why, he is a real
    giant in humanity! "Send the Mormons to Oregon, and free Missouri
    from debt and disgrace!" Ah! sir, let this doctrine go to-and-fro
    throughout the whole earth--that we, as Van Buren said, know your
    cause is just, but the United States government can do nothing for
    you, because it has no power. "You must go to Oregon, and get
    justice from the Indians!"

    I mourn for the depravity of the world; I despise the hypocrisy
    of Christendom; I hate the imbecility of American statesmen; I
    detest the shrinkage of candidates for office from pledges and
    responsibility; I long for a day of righteousness, when "He whose
    right it is to reign shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity
    for the meek of the earth;" and I pray God, who hath given our
    fathers a promise of a perfect government in the last days, to
    purify the hearts of the people and hasten the welcome day.

    With the highest consideration for virtue and unadulterated freedom,

            I have the honor to be,
                Your obedient servant,
                              JOSEPH SMITH.

    Hon. Henry Clay, Ashland, Ky.

APPENDIX III.

JOSEPH SMITH'S VIEWS OF THE POWERS AND POLICY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.

BORN in a land of liberty, and breathing an air uncorrupted with the sirocco of barbarous climes, I ever feel a double anxiety for the happiness of all men, both in time and in eternity.

My cogitations, like Daniel's have for a long time troubled me, when I viewed the condition of men throughout the world, and more especially in this boasted realm, where the Declaration of Independence "holds these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;" but at the same time some two or three millions of people are held as slaves for life, because the spirit of them is covered with a darker skin than ours; and hundreds of our own kindred for an infraction, or supposed infraction, of some over-wise statute, have to be incarcerated in dungeon glooms, or suffer the more moral penitentiary gravitation of mercy in a nutshell, while the duelist, the debauchee, and the defaulter for millions, and other criminals, take the uppermost rooms at feasts, or, like the bird of passage, find a more congenial clime by flight.

The wisdom which ought to characterize the freest, wisest, and most noble nation of the nineteenth century, should, like the sun in his meridian splendor, warm every object beneath its rays; and the main efforts of her officers, who are nothing more or less than the servants of the people, ought to be directed to ameliorate the condition of all, black or white, bond or free; for the best of books says, "God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth."

Our common country presents to all men the same advantages, the same facilities, the same prospects, the same honors, and the same rewards; and without hypocrisy, the Constitution, when it says, "We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America," meant just what it said without reference to color or condition, ad infinitum.

The aspirations and expectations of a virtuous people, environed with so wise, so liberal, so deep, so broad, and so high a charter of equal rights as appear in said Constitution, ought to be treated by those to whom the administration of the laws is entrusted with as much sanctity as the prayers of the Saints are treated in heaven, that love, confidence, and union, like the sun, moon, and stars, should bear witness,

  (For ever singing as they shine,)
  "The hand that made us is divine."

Unity is power; and when I reflect on the importance of it to the stability of all governments, I am astounded at the silly moves of persons and parties to foment discord in order to ride into power on the current of popular excitement; nor am I less surprised at the stretches of power or restrictions of right which too often appear as acts of legislators to pave the way to some favorite political scheme as destitute of intrinsic merit as a wolf's heart is of the milk of human kindness. A Frenchman would say, "Presque tout aimer richesses et pouvoir." (Almost all men like wealth and power.)

I must dwell on this subject longer than others; for nearly one hundred years ago that golden patriot, Benjamin Franklin, drew up a plan of union for the then colonies of Great Britain, that now are such an independent nation, which, among many wise provisions for obedient children under their father's more rugged hand, had this:--"They have power to make laws, and lay and levy such general duties, imports, or taxes as to them shall appear most equal and just, (considering the ability and other circumstances of the inhabitants in the several colonies.) and such as may be collected with the least inconvenience to the people, rather discouraging luxury than loading industry with unnecessary burdens." Great Britain surely lacked the laudable humanity and fostering clemency to grant such a just plan of union; but the sentiment remains, like the land that honored its birth, as a pattern for wise men to study the convenience of the people more than the comfort of the cabinet.

And one of the most noble fathers of our freedom and country's glory, great in war, great in peace, great in the estimation of the world, and great in the hearts of his countrymen, (the illustrious Washington,) said in his first inaugural address to Congress--"I behold the surest pledges that as, on one side, no local prejudices or attachments, no separate views or party animosities will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests, so, on another, that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality, and the pre-eminence of free government be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections of its citizens and command the respect of the world."

Verily, here shine the virtue and wisdom of a statesman in such lucid rays, that had every succeeding Congress followed the rich instruction, in all their deliberations and enactments, for the benefit and convenience of the whole community and the communities of which it is composed, no sound of rebellion in South Carolina, no rupture in Rhode Island, no mob in Missouri expelling her citizens by executive authority, corruption in the ballot boxes, a border warfare between Ohio and Michigan, hard times and distress, outbreak upon outbreak in the principal cities, murder, robbery, and defalcation, scarcity of money, and a thousand other difficulties, would have torn asunder the bonds of the Union, destroyed the confidence of man with man, and left the great body of the people to mourn over misfortunes in poverty brought on by corrupt legislation in an hour of proud vanity for self-aggrandizement.

The great Washington, soon after the foregoing faithful admonition for the common welfare of his nation, further advised Congress that "among the many interesting objects which will engage your attention, that of providing for the common defense will merit particular regard. To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace." As the Italian would say--"Buono aviso." (Good advice.)

The elder Adams, in his inaugural address, gives national pride such a grand turn of justification, that every honest citizen must look back upon the infancy of the United States with an approving smile, and rejoice that patriotism in their rulers, virtue in the people, and prosperity in the Union once crowned the expectations of hope, unveiled the sophistry of the hypocrite, and silenced the folly of foes. Mr. Adams said, "If national pride is ever justifiable or excusable, it is when it springs not from power or riches, grandeur or glory, but from conviction of national innocence, information and benevolence."

There is no doubt that such was actually the case with our young realm at the close of the last century. Peace, prosperity, and union filled the country with religious toleration, temporal enjoyment, and virtuous enterprise; and grandly, too, when the deadly winter of the "Stamp Act," "Tea Act," and other close communion acts of royalty had chocked the growth of freedom of speech, liberty of the press, and liberty of conscience, did light, liberty, and loyalty flourish like cedars of God.

The respected and venerable Thomas Jefferson, in his inaugural address, made more than forty years ago, shows what a beautiful prospect an innocent, virtuous nation presents to the sage's eye where there is space for enterprise, hands for industry, heads for heroes, and hearts for moral greatness. He said, "A rising nation spread over a wide and fruitful land, traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry, engaged in commerce with nations who feel power and forget right, advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal eye,--when I contemplate these transcendent objects, and see the honor, the happiness of this beloved country committed to the issue and auspices of this day, I shrink from the contemplation, and humble myself before the magnitude of the undertaking."

Such a prospect was truly soul-stirring to a good man. But "since the fathers have fallen asleep," wicked and designing men have unrobed the government of its glory; and the people if not in dust and ashes, or in sackcloth have to lament in poverty her departed greatness while demagogues build fires in the north and the south, east and west to keep up their spirits till it is better times. But year after year has left the people to hope till the very name of Congress or State Legislature is as horrible to the sensitive friend of his country as the house of "Bluebeard" is to his children, or "Crockford's Hell of London" to meek men.

When the people are secure and their rights properly respected, then the four main pillars of prosperity--viz., agriculture, manufactures, navigation, and commerce, need the fostering care of government; and in so goodly a country as ours, where the soil, the climate, the rivers, the lakes, and the sea coast, the productions, the timber, the minerals, and the inhabitants are so diversified, that a pleasing variety accommodates all tastes, trades, and calculations, it certainly is the highest point of supervision to protect the whole northern and southern, eastern and western, center and circumference of the realm, by a judicious tariff. It is an old saying and a true one, "If you wish to be respected, respect yourselves."

I will adopt in part the language of Mr. Madison's inaugural address--"To cherish peace and friendly intercourse with all nations, having corresponding dispositions; to maintain sincere neutrality towards belligerent nations; to prefer in all cases amicable discussion and reasonable accommodation of differences to a decision of them by an appeal to arms; to exclude foreign intrigues and foreign partialities, so degrading to all countries, and so baneful to free ones; to foster a spirit of independence too just to invade the rights of others, too proud to surrender our own, too liberal to indulge unworthy prejudices ourselves, and too elevated not to look down upon them in others; to hold the union of the States as the basis of their peace and happiness; to support the Constitution, which is the cement of the Union, as well in its limitations as in its authorities; to respect the rights and authorities reserved to the States and to the people as equally incorporated with and essential to the success of the general system; to avoid the slightest interference with the rights of conscience or the functions of religion, so wisely exempted from civil jurisdiction; to preserve in their full energy the other salutary provisions in behalf of private and personal rights, and of the freedom of the press,"--so far as intention aids in the fulfillment of duty, are consummations too big with benefits not to captivate the energies of all honest men to achieve them, when they can be brought to pass by reciprocation, friendly alliances, wise legislation, and honorable treaties.

The government has once flourished under the guidance of trusty servants; and the Hon. Monroe, in his day, while speaking of the Constitution, says, "Our commerce has been wisely regulated with foreign nations and between the States. New States have been admitted into our Union. Our territory has been enlarged by fair and honorable treaty, and with great advantage to the original States; the States respectively protected by the national government, under a mild paternal system against foreign dangers, and enjoying within their separate spheres, by a wise partition of power, a just proportion of the sovereignty, have improved their police, extended their settlements, and attained a strength and maturity which are the best proofs of wholesome laws well administered. And if we look to the condition of individuals, what a proud spectacle does it exhibit! On whom has oppression fallen in any quarter of the Union? Who has been deprived of any right of person or property?--who restrained from offering his vows in the mode which he prefers to the divine Author of his being? It is well known that all these blessings have been enjoyed in their fullest extent; and I add, with peculiar satisfaction, that there has been no example of a capital punishment being inflicted on any one for the crime of high treason." What a delightful picture of power, policy, and prosperity! Truly the wise man's proverb is just--"Sedaukauh teromain goy, veh-ka-sade le-u-meem khahmaut." (Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.)

But this is not all. The same honorable statesman, after having had about forty years' experience in the government, under the full tide of successful experiment, gives the following commendatory assurance of the efficacy of the Magna Charta to answer its great end and aim--to protect the people in their rights. "Such, then, is the happy government under which we live; a government adequate to every purpose for which the social compact is formed; a government elective in all its branches, under which every citizen may by his merit obtain the highest trust recognized by the Constitution, which contains within it no cause of discord, none to put at variance one portion of the community with another; a government which protects every citizen in the full enjoyment of his rights, and is able to protect the nation against injustice from foreign powers."

Again, the younger Adams, in the silver age of our country's advancement to fame, in his inaugural address (1825), thus candidly declares the majesty of the youthful republic in its increasing greatness:--"The year of jubilee, since the first formation of our union, has just elapsed: that of the Declaration of Independence is at hand. The consummation of both was effected by this Constitution. Since that period, a population of four millions has multiplied to twelve. A territory, bounded by the Mississippi, has been extended from sea to sea. New States have been admitted to the Union, in numbers nearly equal to those of the first confederation. Treaties of peace, amity, and commerce have been concluded with the principal dominions of the earth. The people of other nations, the inhabitants of regions acquired, not by conquest, but by compact, have been united with us in the participation of our rights and duties, of our burdens and blessings. The forest has fallen by the ax of our woodsman. The soil has been made to teem by the tillage of our farmers. Our commerce has whitened every ocean. The dominion of man over physical nature has been extended by the invention of our artists. Liberty and law have marched hand in hand. All the purposes of human association have been accomplished as effectively as under any other government on the globe, and at a cost little exceeding, in a whole generation, the expenditures of other nations in a single year."

In continuation of such noble sentiments, General Jackson, upon his ascension to the great chair of the chief magistracy, said, "As long as our government is administered for the good of the people, and is regulated by their will, as long as it secures to us the rights of person and property, liberty of conscience, and of the press, it will be worth defending; and so long as it is worth defending, a patriotic militia will cover it with an impenetrable aegis."

General Jackson's administration may be denominated the acme of American glory, liberty, and prosperity; for the national debt, which in 1815, on account of the late war, was $125,000,000, and being lessened gradually, was paid up in his golden day, and preparations were made to distribute the surplus revenue among the several States; and that august patriot, to use his own words in his farewell address, retired, leaving "a great people prosperous and happy, in the full enjoyment of liberty and peace, honored and respected by every nation of the world."

At the age, then, of sixty years, our blooming republic began to decline under the withering touch of Martin Van Buren! Disappointed ambition, thirst for power, pride, corruption, party spirit, faction, patronage, perquisites, fame, tangling alliances, priestcraft, and spiritual wickedness in high places, struck hands and revelled in midnight splendor.

Trouble, vexation, perplexity, and contention, mingled with hope, fear, and murmuring, rumbled through the Union and agitated the whole nation, as would an earthquake at the center of the earth, the world heaving the sea beyond its bounds and shaking the everlasting hills; so, in hopes of better times, while jealousy, hypocritical pretensions, and pompous ambition were luxuriating on the ill-gotten spoils of the people, they rose in their majesty like a tornado, and swept through the land, till General Harrison appeared as a star among the storm-clouds for better weather.

The calm came, and the language of that venerable patriot, in his inaugural address, while descanting upon the merits of the Constitution and its framers, thus expressed himself:--"There were in it features which appeared not to be in harmony with their ideas of a simple representative democracy or republic. And knowing the tendency of power to increase itself, particularly when executed by a single individual, predictions were made that, at no very remote period, the government would terminate in virtual monarchy.

"It would not become me to say that the fears of these patriots have been already realized. But as I sincerely believe that the tendency of measures and of men's opinions for some years past has been in that direction, it is, I conceive, strictly proper that I should take this occasion to repeat the assurances I have heretofore given of my determination to arrest the progress of that tendency, if it really exists, and restore the government to its pristine health and vigor."

This good man died before he had the opportunity of applying one balm to ease the pain of our groaning country, and I am willing the nation should be the judge, whether General Harrison, in his exalted station, upon the eve of his entrance into the world of spirits, told the truth, or not, with acting President Tyler's three years of perplexity, and pseudo-Whig-Democrat reign to heal the breaches or show the wounds, secundum artem (according to art).

Subsequent events, all things considered, Van Buren's downfall, Harrison's exit, and Tyler's self-sufficient turn to the whole, go to show, as a Chaldean might exclaim--"Beram etai claugh beshmayauh gauhah rauzeen." (Certainly there is a God in heaven to reveal secrets.)

No honest man can doubt for a moment but the glory of American liberty is on the wane, and that calamity and confusion will sooner or later destroy the peace of the people. Speculators will urge a national bank as a savior of credit and comfort. A hireling psuedo-priesthood will plausibly push abolition doctrines and doings and "human rights" into Congress, and into every other place where conquest smells of fame, or opposition swells to popularity. Democracy, Whiggery, and cliquery will attract their elements and foment divisions among the people, to accomplish fancied schemes and accumulate power, while poverty, driven to despair, like hunger forcing its way through a wall, will break through the statutes of men to save life, and mend the breach in prison glooms.

A still higher grade of what the "nobility of nations" call "great men" will dally with all rights, in order to smuggle a fortune at "one fell swoop," mortgage Texas, possess Oregon, and claim all the unsettled regions of the world for hunting and trapping; and should an humble, honest man, red, black, or white, exhibit a better title, these gentry have only to clothe the judge with richer ermine, and spangle the lawyer's finger with finer rings, to have the judgment of his peers and the honor of his lords as a pattern of honesty, virtue, and humanity, while the motto hangs on his nation's escutcheon--"Every man has his price!"

Now, O people! people! turn unto the Lord and live, and reform this nation. Frustrate the designs of wicked men. Reduce Congress at least two-thirds. Two senators from a State and two members to a million of population will do more business than the army that now occupy the halls of the national legislature. Pay them two dollars and their board per diem (except Sundays). That is more than the farmer gets, and he lives honestly. Curtail the officers of government in pay, number, and power; for the Philistine lords have shorn our nation of its goodly locks in the lap of Delilah.

Petition your State legislatures to pardon every convict in their several penitentiaries, blessing them as they go, and saying to them, in the name of the Lord, Go thy way, and sin no more.

Advise your legislators, when they make laws for larceny, burglary, or any felony, to make the penalty applicable to work upon roads, public works, or any place where the culprit can be taught more wisdom and more virtue, and become more enlightened. Rigor and seclusion will never do as much to reform the propensities of men as reason and friendship. Murder only can claim confinement or death. Let the penitentiaries be turned into seminaries of learning, where intelligence, like the angels of heaven, would banish such fragments of barbarism. Imprisonment for debt is a meaner practice than the savage tolerates, with all his ferocity. "Amor vincit omnia." (Love conquers all.)

Petition, also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave States, your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now, and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame.

Pray Congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands and from the deduction of pay from the members of Congress.

Break off the shackles from the poor black man, and hire him to labor like other human beings; for "an hour of virtuous liberty on earth is worth a whole eternity of bondage." Abolish the practice in the army and navy of trying men by court-martial for desertion. If a soldier or marine runs away, send him his wages, with this instruction, that his country will never trust him again; he has forfeited his honor.

Make HONOR the standard with all men. Be sure that good is rendered for evil in all cases; and the whole nation, like a kingdom of kings and priests, will rise up in righteousness, and be respected as wise and worthy on earth, and as just and holy for heaven, by Jehovah, the Author of perfection.

More economy in the national and state governments would make less taxes among the people; more equality through the cities, towns, and country, would make less distinction among the people; and more honesty and familiarity in societies would make less hypocrisy and flattery in all branches of the community; and open, frank, candid decorum to all men, in this boasted land of liberty, would beget esteem, confidence, union, and love; and the neighbor from any State or from any country, of whatever color, clime, or tongue, could rejoice when he put his foot on the sacred soil of freedom, and exclaim, The very name of "American" is fraught with friendship! Oh, then, create confidence, restore freedom, break down slavery, banish imprisonment for debt, and be in love, fellowship, and peace with all the world! Remember that honesty is not subject to law. The law was made for transgressors. Wherefore a Dutchman might exclaim--"Ein cherlicher name ist besser als Reichthum." (A good name is better than riches.)

For the accommodation of the people in every State and Territory let Congress show their wisdom by granting a national bank, with branches in each State and Territory, where the capital stock shall be held by the nation for the mother bank, and by the States and Territories for the branches; and whose officers and directors shall be elected yearly by the people, with wages at the rate of two dollars per day for services; which several banks shall never issue any more bills than the amount of capital stock in her vaults and the interest.

The net gain of the mother bank shall be applied to the national revenue, and that of the branches to the States' and Territories' revenues. And the bills shall be par throughout the nation, which will mercifully cure that fatal disorder known in cities as brokerage, and leave the people's money in their own pockets.

Give every man his constitutional freedom, and the President full power to send an army to suppress mobs, and the States authority to repeal and impugn that relic of folly which makes it necessary for the governor of a State to make the demand of the President for troops, in case of invasion or rebellion.

The governor himself may be a mobber; and instead of being punished, as he should be, for murder or treason, he may destroy the very lives, rights, and property he should protect. Like the good Samaritan, send every lawyer, as soon as he repents and obeys the ordinances of heaven, to preach the Gospel to the destitute, without purse or scrip, pouring in the oil and the wine. A learned priesthood is certainly more honorable than "an hireling clergy."

As to the contiguous territories to the United States, wisdom would direct no tangling alliance. Oregon belongs to this government honorably; and when we have the red man's consent, let the Union spread from the east to the west sea; and if Texas petitions Congress to be adopted among the sons of liberty, give her the right hand of fellowship, and refuse not the same friendly grip to Canada and Mexico. And when the right arm of freemen is stretched out in the character of a navy for the protection of rights, commerce and honor, let the iron eyes of power watch from Maine to Mexico, and from California to Columbia. Thus may union be strengthened, and foreign speculation prevented from opposing broadside to broadside.

Seventy years have done much for this goodly land. They have burst the chains of oppression and monarchy, and multiplied its inhabitants from two to twenty millions, with a proportionate share of knowledge keen enough to circumnavigate the globe, draw the lightning from the clouds, and cope with all the crowned heads of the world.

Then why--oh, why will a once flourishing people not arise, phoenix-like, over the cinders of Martin Van Buren's power, and over the sinking fragments and smoking ruins of other catamount politicians, and over the windfalls of Benton, Calhoun, Clay, Wright and a caravan of other equally unfortunate law doctors, and cheerfully help to spread a plaster and bind up the burnt, bleeding wounds of a sore but blessed country.

The Southern people are hospitable and noble. They will help to rid so free a country of every vestige of slavery, whenever they are assured of an equivalent for their property. The country will be full of money and confidence when a national bank of twenty millions, and a State bank in every State, with a million or more, gives a tone to monetary matters, and make a circulating medium as valuable in the purses of a whole community, as in the coffers of a speculating banker or broker.

The people may have faults, but they should never be trifled with. I think Mr. Pitt's quotation in the British parliament of Mr. Prior's couplet for the husband and wife, to apply to the course which the king and ministry of England should pursue to the then colonies of the now United States, might be a genuine rule of action for some of the breath-made men in high places to use towards the posterity of this noble, daring people:--

  Be to her faults a little blind;
  Be to her virtues very kind.

We have had Democratic Presidents, Whig Presidents, a pseudo-Democratic-Whig President, and now it is time to have a President of the United States; and let the people of the whole Union, like the inflexible Romans, whenever they find a promise made by a candidate that is not practiced as an officer, hurl the miserable sycophant from his exaltation, as God did Nebuchadnezzar, to crop the grass of the field with a beast's heart among the cattle.

Mr. Van Buren said, in his inaugural address, that he went "into the Presidential chair the inflexible and uncompromising opponent of every attempt, on the part of Congress, to abolish slavery in the district of Columbia, against the wishes of the slave holding States, and also with a determination equally decided to resist the slightest interference with it in the States where it exists."

Poor little Matty made this rhapsodical sweep with the fact before his eyes, that the State of New York, his native State, had abolished slavery without a struggle or a groan. Great God, how independent! From henceforth slavery is tolerated where it exists, constitution or no constitution, people or no people, right or wrong: Vox Matti--Vox Diaboli ("the voice of Matti"--"the voice of the Devil.") And, peradventure, his great "sub-treasury" scheme was a piece of the same mind. But the man and his measures have such a striking resemblance to the anecdote of the Welshman and his cart-tongue, that when the Constitution was so long that it allowed slavery at the capitol of a free people, it could not be cut off; but when it was so short that it needed a sub-treasury to save the funds of the nation, it could be spliced! Oh, granny, granny, what a long tail our puss has got! (As a Greek might say, Hysteron proteron, (the cart before the horse)). But his mighty whisk through the great national fire, for the presidential chestnuts, burnt the locks of his glory with the blaze of his folly!

In the United States the people are the government, and their united voice is the only sovereign that should rule, the only power that should be obeyed, and the only gentlemen that should be honored at home and abroad, on the land and on the sea. Wherefore, were I the President of the United States, by the voice of a virtuous people, I would honor the old paths of the venerated fathers of freedom; I would walk in the tracks of the illustrious patriots who carried the ark of the government upon their shoulders with an eye single to the glory of the people and when that people petitioned to abolish slavery in the slave States, I would use all honorable means to have their prayers granted, and give liberty to the captive by paying the Southern gentlemen a reasonable equivalent for his property; that the whole nation might be free indeed!

When the people petitioned for a national bank, I would use my best endeavors to have their prayers answered, and establish one on national principles to save taxes, and make them the controllers of its ways and means. And when the people petitioned to possess the Territory of Oregon, or any other contiguous territory, I would lend the influence of a chief magistrate to grant so reasonable a request, that they might extend the mighty efforts and enterprise of a free people from the east to the west sea, and make the wilderness blossom as the rose. And when a neighboring realm petitioned to join the union of the sons of liberty, my voice would be come--yea, come, Texas; come, Mexico; come, Canada; and come, all the world: let us be brethren, let us be one great family, and let there be a universal peace. Abolish the cruel custom of prisons (except certain cases), penitentiaries, courts-martial for desertion; and let reason and friendship reign over the ruins of ignorance and barbarity; yea, I would, as the universal friend of man, open the prisons, open the eyes, open the ears, and open the hearts of all people, to behold and enjoy freedom--unadulterated freedom; and God, who once cleansed the violence of the earth with a flood, whose Son laid down His life for the salvation of all His Father gave Him out of the world, and who has promised that He will come and purify the world again with fire in the last days, should be supplicated by me for the good of all people. With the highest esteem, I am a friend of virtue and of the people.

                                                      JOSEPH SMITH.

Nauvoo, Illinois, Feb. 7, 1844.

APPENDIX IV.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MARTYRDOM OF JOSEPH SMITH, BY PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR.

BEING requested by Elders George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, Church historians, to write an account of events that transpired before, and took place at, the time of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, in Carthage jail, in Hancock County, State of Illinois, I write the following, principally from memory, not having access at this time to any public documents relative thereto farther than a few desultory items contained in Ford's "History of Illinois." I must also acknowledge myself considerably indebted to George A. Smith who was with me when I wrote it, and who, although not there at the time of the bloody transaction, yet, from conversing with several persons who were in the capacity of Church historians, and aided by an excellent memory, has rendered me considerable service.

These and the few items contained in the note at the end of this account are all the aid I have had. I would further add that the items contained in the letter, in relation to dates especially, may be considered strictly correct.

After having written the whole, I read it over to the Hon. J. M. Bernhisel, who with one or two slight alterations, pronounced it strictly correct. Brother Bernhisel was present most of the time. I am afraid that, from the length of time that has transpired since the occurrence, and having to rely almost exclusively upon my memory, there may be some slight inaccuracies, but I believe that in the general it is strictly correct. As I figured in those transaction from the commencement to the end, they left no slight impression on my mind.

In the year 1844, a very great excitement prevailed in some parts of Hancock, Brown and other neighboring counties of Illinois, in relation to the Mormons, and a spirit of vindictive hatred and persecution was exhibited among the people, which was manifested in the most bitter and acrimonious language, as well as by acts of hostility and violence, frequently threatening the destruction of the citizens of Nauvoo and vicinity, and utter annihilation of the Mormons and Mormonism, and in some instances breaking out in the most violent acts of ruffianly barbarity. Persons were kidnapped, whipped, persecuted and falsely accused of various crimes; their cattle and houses injured, destroyed, or stolen; vexatious prosecutions were instituted to harass and annoy. In some remote neighborhoods they were expelled from their homes without redress, and in others violence was threatened to their persons and property, while in others every kind of insult and indignity were heaped upon them, to induce them to abandon their homes, the County or the State.

These annoyances, prosecutions and persecutions were instigated through different agencies and by various classes of men, actuated by different motives, but all uniting in the one object--prosecution, persecution and extermination of the Saints.

There were a number of wicked and corrupt men living in Nauvoo and its vicinity, who had belonged to the Church, but whose conduct was incompatible with the Gospel; they were accordingly dealt with by the Church and severed from its communion. Some of these had been prominent members, and held official stations either in the city or Church. Among these were John C. Bennett, formerly mayor; William Law, counselor to Joseph Smith; Wilson Law, his natural brother, and general in the Nauvoo Legion; Dr. R. D. Foster, a man of some property, but with a very bad reputation; Francis and Chauncey Higbee, the latter a young lawyer, and both sons of a respectable and honored man in the Church, known as Judge Elias Higbee, who died about twelve months before.

Besides these, there were a great many apostates, both in the city and county, of less notoriety, who for their delinquencies, had been expelled from the Church. John C. Bennett and Francis and Chauncey Higbee were cut off from the Church; the former was also cashiered from his generalship for the most flagrant acts of seduction and adultery; and the developments in the cases were so scandalous that the High Council, before which they were tried, had to sit with closed doors.

William Law, although counselor to Joseph, was found to be his most bitter foe and maligner, and to hold intercourse, contrary to all law, in his own house, with a young lady resident with him; and it was afterwards proven that he had conspired with some Missourians to take Joseph Smith's life, and was only saved by Josiah Arnold and Daniel Garn, who, being on guard at his house, prevented the assassins from seeing him. Yet, although having murder in his heart, his manners were generally courteous and mild, and he was well calculated to deceive.

General Wilson Law was cut off from the Church for seduction, falsehood, and defamation; both the above were also court-martialed by the Nauvoo Legion, and expelled. Foster was also cut off I believe, for dishonesty, fraud and falsehood. I know he was eminently guilty of the whole, but whether these were the specific charges or not, I don't know, but I do know that he was a notoriously wicked and corrupt man.

Besides the above characters and Mormonic apostates, there were other three parties. The first of these may be called religionists, the second politicians, and the third counterfeiters, black-legs, horse-thieves and cut-throats.

The religious party were chagrined and maddened because Mormonism came in contact with their religion, and they could not oppose it from the scriptures. Thus like the ancient Jews, when enraged at the exhibition of their follies and hypocrisies by Jesus and His apostles, so these were infuriated against the Mormons because of their discomfiture by them; and instead of owning the truth and rejoicing in it, they were ready to gnash upon them with their teeth, and to persecute the believers in principles which they could not disprove.

The political party were those who were of opposite politics to us. There were always two parties, the Whigs and Democrats, and we could not vote for one without offending the other; and it not unfrequently happened that candidates for office would place the issue of their election upon opposition to the Mormons, in order to gain political influence from the religious prejudice, in which case the Mormons were compelled, in self-defense, to vote against them, which resulted almost invariably against our opponents. This made them angry; and although it was of their own making, and the Mormons could not be expected to do otherwise, yet they raged on account of their discomfiture, and sought to wreak their fury on the Mormons. As an instance of the above, when Joseph Duncan was candidate for the office of governor of Illinois, he pledged himself to his party that, if he could be elected, he would exterminate or drive the Mormons from the State. [1] The consequence was that Governor Ford was elected. The Whigs, seeing that they had been out-generaled by the Democrats in securing the Mormon vote, became seriously alarmed, and sought to repair their disaster by raising a crusade against the people. The Whig newspapers teemed with accounts of the wonders and enormities of Nauvoo, and of the awful wickedness of a party which could consent to receive the support of such miscreants. Governor Duncan, who was really a brave, honest man, and who had nothing to do with getting the Mormon charters passed through the Legislature, took the stump on this subject in good earnest, and expected to be elected governor almost on this question alone.

The third party, composed of counterfeiters, black-legs, horse-thieves and cut-throats, were a pack of scoundrels that infested the whole of the western country at that time. In some districts their influence was so great as to control important State and County offices. On this subject Governor Ford has the following:

"Then, again, the northern part of the State was not destitute of its organized bands of rogues, engaged in murders, robberies, horse-stealing and in making and passing counterfeit money. These rogues were scattered all over the north, but the most of them were located in the counties of Ogle, Winnebago, Lee and De Kalb.

"In the County of Ogle they were so numerous, strong, and well organized that they could not be convicted for their crimes. By getting some of their numbers on the juries, by producing a host of witnesses to sustain their defense, by perjured evidence, and by changing the venue of one County to another, by continuances from term to term, and by the inability of witnesses to attend from time to time at distant and foreign Counties, they most generally managed to be acquitted." [2]

There was a combination of horse-thieves extending from Galena to Alton. There were counterfeiters engaged in merchandising, trading, and store-keeping in most of the cities and villages, and in some districts, I have been credibly informed by men to whom they have disclosed their secrets, the judges, sheriffs, constables, and jailors, as well, as professional men, were more or less associated with them. These had in their employ the most reckless, abandoned wretches, who stood ready to carry into effect the most desperate enterprises, and were careless alike of human life and property. Their object in persecuting the Mormons was in part to cover their own rascality, and in part to prevent them from exposing and prosecuting them; but the principal reason was plunder, believing that if they could be removed or driven they would be made fat on Mormon spoils, besides having in the deserted city a good asylum for the prosecution of their diabolical pursuits.

This conglomeration of apostate Mormons, religious bigots, political fanatics and black-legs, all united their forces against the Mormons, and organized themselves into a party, denominated anti-Mormons. Some of them, we have reason to believe, joined The Church in order to cover their infamous practices, and when they were expelled for their unrighteousness only raged with greater violence. They circulated every kind of falsehood that they could collect or manufacture against the Mormons. They also had a paper to assist them in their nefarious designs, called the Warsaw Signal, edited by a Mr. Thomas Sharp, a violent and unprincipled man, who shrunk not from any enormity. The anti-Mormons had public meetings, which were very numerously attended, where they passed resolutions of the most violent and inflammatory kind, threatening to drive, expel and exterminate the Mormons from the State, at the same time accusing them of every evil in the vocabulary of crime.

They appointed their meetings in various parts of Hancock, M'Donough, and other counties, which soon resulted in the organization of armed mobs, under the direction of officers who reported to their headquarters, and the reports of which were published in the anti-Mormon paper, and circulated through the adjoining counties. We also published in the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor (two papers published and edited by me at that time) an account, not only of their proceedings, but our own. But such was the hostile feeling, so well arranged their plans, and so desperate and lawless their measures, that it was with the greatest difficulty that we could get our papers circulated; they were destroyed by postmasters and others, and scarcely ever arrived at the place of their destination, so that a great many of the people, who would have been otherwise peaceable, were excited by their misrepresentations, and instigated to join their hostile or predatory bands.

Emboldened by the acts of those outside, the apostate Mormons, associated with others, commenced the publication of a libelous paper in Nauvoo, called the Nauvoo Expositor. This paper not only reprinted from the others, but put in circulation the most libelous, false, and infamous reports concerning the citizens of Nauvoo, and especially the ladies. It was, however, no sooner put in circulation than the indignation of the whole community was aroused; so much so, that they threatened its annihilation; and I do not believe that in any other city of the United States, if the same charges had been made against the citizens, it would have been permitted to remain one day. As it was among us, under these circumstances, it was thought best to convene the city council to take into consideration the adoption of some measures for its removal, as it was deemed better that this should be done legally than illegally. Joseph Smith, therefore, who was mayor, convened the city council for that purpose; the paper was introduced and read, and the subject examined. All, or nearly all present, expressed their indignation at the course taken by the Expositor, which was owned by some of the aforesaid apostates, associated with one or two others. Wilson Law, Dr. Foster, Charles Ivins and the Higbees before referred to, some lawyers, storekeepers, and others in Nauvoo who were not Mormons, together with the anti-Mormons outside of the city, sustained it. The calculation was, by false statements, to unsettle the minds of many in the city, and to form combinations there similar to the anti-Mormon associations outside of the city. Various attempts had heretofore been made by the party to annoy and irritate the citizens of Nauvoo; false accusations had been made, vexatious lawsuits instituted, threats made, and various devices resorted to, to influence the public mind, and, if possible, to provoke us to the commission of some overt act that might make us amenable to the law. With a perfect knowledge, therefore, of the designs of these infernal scoundrels who were in our midst, as well as those who surrounded us, the city council entered upon an investigation of the matter. They felt that they were in a critical position, and that any move made for the abating of that press would be looked upon, or at least represented, as a direct attack upon the liberty of speech, and that, so far from displeasing our enemies, it would be looked upon by them as one of the best circumstances that could transpire to assist them in their nefarious and bloody designs. Being a member of the city council, I well remember the feeling of responsibility that seemed to rest upon all present; nor shall I soon forget the bold, manly, independent expressions of Joseph Smith on that occasion in relation to this matter. He exhibited in glowing colors the meanness, corruption, and ultimate designs of the anti-Mormons; their despicable characters and ungodly influences, especially of those who were in our midst. He told of the responsibility that rested upon us, as guardians of the public interest, to stand up in the defense of the injured and oppressed, to stem the current of corruption, and, as men and Saints, to put a stop to this flagrant outrage upon this people's rights.

He stated that no man was a stronger advocate for the liberty of speech and of the press than himself: yet, when this noble gift is utterly prostituted and abused, as in the present instance, it loses all claim to our respect, and becomes as great an agent for evil as it can possibly be for good; and notwithstanding the apparent advantage we should give our enemies by this act, yet it behooved us, as men, to act independent of all secondary influences, to perform the part of men of enlarged minds, and boldly and fearlessly to discharge the duties devolving upon us by declaring as a nuisance, and removing this filthy, libelous, and seditious sheet from our midst.

The subject was discussed in various forms, and after the remarks made by the mayor, every one seemed to be waiting for some one else to speak.

After a considerable pause, I arose and expressed my feelings frankly, as Joseph had done, and numbers of others followed in the same strain; and I think, but am not certain, that I made a motion for the removal of that press as a nuisance. This motion was finally put, and carried by all but one; and he conceded that the measure was just, but abstained through fear.

Several members of the city council were not in The Church. The following is the bill referred to:

    Bill for Removing of the Press of the "Nauvoo Expositor." [3]

    Resolved by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that the
    printing-office from whence issues the Nauvoo Expositor is a
    public nuisance; and also of said Nauvoo Expositors which may
    be or exist in said establishment; and the mayor is instructed to
    cause said establishment and papers to be removed without delay, in
    such manner as he shall direct.

    Passed June 10th, 1844. GEO. W. HARRIS, President pro tem.

    W. RICHARDS, Recorder.

After the passage of the bill, the marshal, John P. Greene, was ordered to abate or remove, which he forthwith proceeded to do by summoning a posse of men for that purpose. The press was removed or broken, I don't remember which, by the marshal, and the types scattered in the street.

This seemed to be one of those extreme cases that require extreme measures, as the press was still proceeding in its inflammatory course. It was feared that, as it was almost universally execrated, should it continue longer, an indignant people might commit some overt act which might lead to serious consequences, and that it was better to use legal than illegal means.

This, as was foreseen, was the very course our enemies wished us to pursue, as it afforded them an opportunity of circulating a very plausible story about the Mormons being opposed to the liberty of the press and of free speech, which they were not slow to avail themselves of. Stories were fabricated, and facts perverted; false statements were made, and this act brought in as an example to sustain the whole of their fabrications; and, as if inspired by Satan, they labored with an energy and zeal worthy of a better cause. They had runners to circulate their reports, not only through Hancock County, but in all the surrounding counties. These reports were communicated to their anti-Mormon societies, and these societies circulated them in their several districts. The anti-Mormon paper, the Warsaw Signal, was filled with inflammatory articles and misrepresentations in relation to us, and especially to this act of destroying the press. We were represented as a horde of lawless ruffians and brigands, anti-American and anti-republican, steeped in crime and iniquity, opposed to freedom of speech and of the press, and all the rights and immunities of a free and enlightened people; that neither person nor property were secure: that we had designs upon the citizens of Illinois and of the United States, and the people were called upon to rise en masse, and put us down, drive us away, or exterminate us as a pest to society, and alike dangerous to our neighbors, the State, and commonwealth.

These statements were extensively copied and circulated throughout the United States. A true statement of the facts in question was published by us both in the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor; but it was found impossible to circulate them in the immediate counties, as they were destroyed in the post-offices or otherwise by the agents of the anti-Mormons, and in order to get the mail to go abroad, I had to send the papers a distance of thirty or forty miles from Nauvoo, and sometimes to St. Louis (upward of two hundred miles), to insure their proceeding on their route, and then one-half or two-thirds of the papers never reached the place of destination, being intercepted or destroyed by our enemies.

These false reports stirred up the community around, of whom many, on account of religious prejudice, were easily instigated to join the anti-Mormons and embark in any crusade that might be undertaken against us: hence their ranks swelled in numbers, and new organizations were formed, meetings were held, resolutions passed, and men and means volunteered for the extirpation of the Mormons.

On these points Governor Ford writes: "These also were the active men in blowing up the fury of the people, in hopes that a popular movement might be set on foot, which would result in the expulsion or extermination of the Mormon voters. For this purpose public meetings had been called, inflammatory speeches had been made, exaggerated reports had been extensively circulated, committees had been appointed, who rode night and day to spread the reports and solicit the aid of neighboring counties, and at a public meeting at Warsaw resolutions were passed to expel or exterminate the Mormon population. This was not, however, a movement which was unanimously concurred in. The county contained a goodly number of inhabitants in favor of peace, or who at least desired to be neutral in such a contest. These were stigmatized by the name of Jack-Mormons, and there were not a few of the more furious exciters of the people who openly expressed their intention to involve them in the common expulsion or extermination.

"A system of excitement and agitation was artfully planned and executed with tact. It consisted in spreading reports and rumors of the most fearful character. As examples: On the morning before my arrival at Carthage, I was awakened at an early hour by the frightful report, which was asserted with confidence and apparent consternation, that the Mormons had already commenced the work of burning, destruction, and murder, and that every man capable of bearing arms was instantly wanted at Carthage for the protection of the county.

"We lost no time in starting; but when we arrived at Carthage we could hear no more concerning this story. Again, during the few days that the militia were encamped at Carthage, frequent applications were made to me to send a force here, and a force there, and a force all about the country, to prevent murders, robberies, and larcenies which, it was said, were threatened by the Mormons. No such forces were sent, nor were any such offenses committed at that time, except the stealing of some provisions, and there was never the least proof that this was done by a Mormon. Again, on my late visit to Hancock County, I was informed by some of their violent enemies that the larcenies of the Mormons had become unusually numerous and insufferable.

"They admitted that but little had been done in this way in their immediate vicinity, but they insisted that sixteen horses had been stolen by the Mormons in one night near Lima, and, upon inquiry, was told that no horses had been stolen in that neighborhood, but that sixteen horses had been stolen in one night in Hancock County. This last informant being told of the Hancock story, again changed the venue to another distant settlement in the northern edge of Adams." [4]

In the meantime legal proceedings were instituted against the members of the city council of Nauvoo. A writ, here subjoined, was issued upon the affidavit of the Laws, Fosters, Higbees, and Ivins, by Mr. Morrison, a justice of the peace in Carthage, the county seat of Hancock, and put into the hands of one David Bettesworth, a constable of the same place.

    Writ issued upon affidavit by Thomas Morrison, J. P., State of
    Illinois, Hancock County, ss.

    "The people of the State of Illinois, to all constables, sheriffs,
    and coroners of said State, greeting:

    "Whereas complaint hath been made before me, one of the justices
    of the peace in and for the county of Hancock aforesaid, upon the
    oath of Francis M. Higbee, of the said county, that Joseph Smith,
    Samuel Bennett, John Taylor, William W. Phelps, Hyrum Smith, John
    P. Greene, Stephen Perry, Dimick B. Huntington, Jonathan Dunham,
    Stephen Markham, William Edwards, Jonathan Holmes, Jesse P.
    Harmon, John Lytle, Joseph W. Coolidge, Harvey D. Redfield, Porter
    Rockwell, and Levi Richards, of said county, did, on the tenth day
    of June instant, commit a riot at and within the county aforesaid,
    wherein they with force and violence broke into the printing office
    of the Nauvoo Expositor, and unlawfully and with force burned and
    destroyed the printing press, type and fixtures of the same, being
    the property of William Law, Wilson Law, Charles Ivins, Francis M.
    Higbee, Chauncey L. Higbee, Robert D. Foster and Charles A. Foster.

    "These are therefore to command you forthwith to apprehend the
    said Joseph Smith, Samuel Bennett, John Taylor, William W. Phelps,
    Hyrum Smith, John P. Greene, Stephen Perry, Dimick B. Huntington,
    Jonathan Dunham, Stephen Markham, William Edwards, Jonathan
    Holmes, Jesse P. Harmon, John Lytle, Joseph W. Coolidge, Harvey D.
    Redfield, Porter Rockwell, and Levi Richards, and bring them before
    me, or some other justice of the peace, to answer the premises, and
    farther to be dealt with according to law.

    "Given under my hand and seal at Carthage, in the county aforesaid,
    this 11th day of June, A. D. 1844.

                                  "THOMAS MORRISON, J. P." (Seal.) [5]

The council did not refuse to attend to the legal proceedings in the case, but as the law of Illinois made it the privilege of the persons accused to go "or appear before the issuer of the writ, or any other justice of the peace," they requested to be taken before another magistrate, either in the city of Nauvoo or at any reasonable distance out of it.

This the constable, who was a mobocrat, refused to do; and as this was our legal privilege we refused to be dragged, contrary to law, a distance of eighteen miles, when at the same time we had reason to believe that an organized band of mobocrats were assembled for the purpose of extermination or murder, and among whom it would not be safe to go without a superior force of armed men. A writ of habeas corpus was called for, and issued by the municipal court of Nauvoo, taking us out of the hands of Bettesworth, and placing us in the charge of the city marshal. We went before the municipal court and were dismissed. Our refusal to obey this illegal proceeding was by them construed into a refusal to submit to law, and circulated as such, and the people either did believe, or professed to believe, that we were in open rebellion against the laws and the authorities of the State. Hence mobs began to assemble, among which all through the country inflammatory speeches were made, exciting them to mobocracy and violence. Soon they commenced their depredations in our outside settlements, kidnapping some, and whipping and otherwise abusing others.

The persons thus abused fled to Nauvoo as soon as practicable, and related their injuries to Joseph Smith, then mayor of the city, and lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion. They also went before magistrates, and made affidavits of what they had suffered, seen and heard. These affidavits, in connection with a copy of all our proceedings were forwarded by Joseph Smith to Mr. Ford, then governor of Illinois, with an expression of our desire to abide law, and a request that the governor would instruct him how to proceed in the case of arrival of an armed mob against the city. The governor sent back instructions to Joseph Smith that, as he was lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion, it was his duty to protect the city and surrounding country, and issued orders to that effect. Upon the reception of these orders Joseph Smith assembled the people of the city, and laid before them the governor's instructions; he also convened the officers of the Nauvoo Legion for the purpose of conferring in relation to the best mode of defense. He also issued orders to the men to hold themselves in readiness in case of being called upon. On the following day General Joseph Smith, with his staff, the leading officers of the Legion, and some prominent strangers who were in our midst, made a survey of the outside boundaries of the city, which was very extensive, being about five miles up and down the river, and about two and a half back in the center, for the purpose of ascertaining the position of the ground, and the feasibility of defense, and to make all necessary arrangements in case of an attack.

It may be well here to remark that numbers of gentlemen, strangers to us, either came on purpose or were passing through Nauvoo, and upon learning the position of things, expressed their indignation against our enemies, and avowed their readiness to assist us by their counsel or otherwise. It was some of these who assisted us in reconnoitering the city, and finding out its adaptability for defense, and how to protect it best against an armed force. The Legion was called together and drilled, and every means made use of for defense. At the call of the officers, old and young men came forward, both from the city and the country, and mustered to the number of about five thousand.

In the meantime our enemies were not idle in mustering their forces and committing depredations, nor had they been; it was, in fact, their gathering that called ours into existence; their forces continued to accumulate; they assumed a threatening attitude, and assembled in large bodies, armed and equipped for war, and threatened the destruction and extermination of the Mormons.

An account of their outrages and assemblages was forwarded to Governor Ford almost daily; accompanied by affidavits furnished by eye-witnesses of their proceedings. Persons were also sent out to the counties around with pacific intentions, to give them an account of the true state of affairs, and to notify them of the feelings and dispositions of the people of Nauvoo, and thus, if possible, quell the excitement. In some of the more distant counties these men were very successful, and produced the salutary influence upon the minds of many intelligent and well-disposed men. In neighboring counties, however, where anti-Mormon influence prevailed, they produced little effect. At the same time guards were stationed around Nauvoo, and picket guards in the distance. At length opposing forces gathered so near that more active measures were taken; reconnoitering parties were sent out, and the city proclaimed under martial law. Things now assumed a belligerent attitude, and persons passing through the city were questioned as to what they knew of the enemy, while passes were in some instances given to avoid difficulty with the guards. Joseph Smith continued to send on messengers to the governor, (Philip B. Lewis and other messengers were sent.) Samuel James, then residing at La Harpe, carried a message and dispatches to him, and in a day or two after Bishop Edward Hunter and others went again with fresh dispatches, representations, affidavits, and instructions; but as the weather was excessively wet, the rivers swollen, and the bridges washed away in many places, it was with great difficulty that they proceeded on their journeys. As the mobocracy had at last attracted the governor's attention, he started in company with some others from Springfield to the scene of trouble, and missed, I believe, both Brothers James and Hunter on the road, and, of course, did not see their documents. He came to Carthage, and made that place, which was a regular mobocratic den, his headquarters; as it was the county seat, however, of Hancock County, that circumstance might, in a measure, justify his staying there.

To avoid the appearance of all hostility on our part, and to fulfill the law in every particular, at the suggestion of Judge Thomas, judge of that judicial district, who had come to Nauvoo at the time, and who stated that we had fulfilled the law, but, in order to satisfy all he would council us to go before Esquire Wells, who was not in our Church, and have a hearing, we did so, and after a full hearing we were again dismissed.

The governor on the road collected forces, some of whom were respectable, but on his arrival in the neighborhood of the difficulties he received as militia all the companies of the mob forces who united with him. After his arrival at Carthage he sent two gentlemen from there to Nauvoo as a committee to wait upon General Joseph Smith, informing him of the arrival of his excellency, with a request that General Smith would send out a committee to wait upon the governor and represent to him the state of affairs in relation to the difficulties that then existed in the county. We met this committee while we were reconnoitering the city, to find out the best mode of defense as aforesaid. Dr. J. M. Bernhisel and myself were appointed as a committee by General Smith to wait upon the governor. Previous to going, however, we were furnished with affidavits and documents in relation both to our proceedings and those of the mob; in addition to the general history of the transaction, we took with us a duplicate of those documents which had been forwarded by Bishop Hunter, Brother James, and others. We started from Nauvoo in company with the aforesaid gentlemen at about 7 o'clock on the evening of the 21st of June, and arrived at Carthage about 11 p. m.

We put up at the same hotel with the governor, kept by a Mr. Hamilton. On our arrival we found the governor in bed, but not so with the other inhabitants. The town was filled with a perfect set of rabble and rowdies, who, under the influence of Bacchus, seemed to be holding a grand saturnalia, whooping, yelling and vociferating as if Bedlam had broken loose.

On our arrival at the hotel, and while supper was preparing, a man came to me, dressed as a soldier, and told me that a man named Daniel Garn had just been taken prisoner, and was about to be committed to jail, and wanted me to go bail for him. Believing this to be a ruse to get me out alone, and that some violence was intended, after consulting with Dr. Bernhisel, I told the man that I was well acquainted with Mr. Garn, that I knew him to be a gentleman, and did not believe that he had transgressed law, and, moreover, that I considered it a very singular time to be holding courts and calling for security, particularly as the town was full of rowdyism.

I informed him that Dr. Bernhisel and myself would, if necessary go bail for him in the morning, but that we did not feel ourselves safe among such a set at that late hour of the night.

After supper, on retiring to our room, we had to pass through another, which was separated from ours only by a board partition, the beds in each room being placed side by side, with the exception of this fragile partition. On the bed that was in the room which we passed through I discovered a man by the name of Jackson, a desperate character, and a reputed, notorious cut-throat and murderer. I hinted to the doctor that things looked rather suspicious, and looked to see that my arms were in order. The doctor and I occupied one bed. We had scarcely laid down when a knock at the door, accompanied by a voice announced the approach of Chauncey Higbee, the young lawyer and apostate before referred to.

He addressed himself to the doctor, and stated that the object of his visit was to obtain the release of Daniel Garn; that Garn he believed to be an honest man; that if he had done anything wrong, it was through improper counsel, and that it was a pity that he should be incarcerated, particularly when he could be so easily released; he urged the doctor, as a friend, not to leave so good a man in such an unpleasant situation; he finally prevailed upon the doctor to go and give bail, assuring him that on his giving bail Garn would be immediately dismissed.

During this conversation I did not say a word.

Higbee left the doctor to dress, with the intention of returning and taking him to the court. As soon as Higbee had left, I told the doctor that he had better not go; that I believed this affair was all a ruse to get us separated; that they knew we had documents with us from General Smith to show to the governor; that I believed their object was to get possession of those papers, and, perhaps, when they had separated us, to murder one or both. The doctor, who was actuated by the best of motives in yielding to the assumed solicitude of Higbee, coincided with my views; he then went to Higbee, and told him that he had concluded not to go that night, but that he and I would both wait upon the justice and Mr. Garn in the morning.

That night I lay awake with my pistols under my pillow, waiting for any emergency. Nothing more occurred during the night. In the morning we arose early, and after breakfast sought an interview with the governor, and were told that we could have an audience, I think, at ten o'clock. In the meantime we called upon Mr. Smith, a justice of the peace, who had Mr. Garn in charge. We represented that we had been called upon the night before by two different parties to go bail for a Mr. Daniel Garn, whom we were informed he had in custody, and that, believing Mr. Garn to be an honest man, we had now come for that purpose, and were prepared to enter into recognizances for his appearance, whereupon Mr. Smith, the magistrate, remarked that, under the present excited state of affairs, he did not think he would be justified in receiving bail from Nauvoo, as it was a matter of doubt whether property would not be rendered valueless there in a few days.

Knowing the party we had to deal with, we were not much surprised at this singular proceeding; we then remarked that both of us possessed property in farms out of Nauvoo in the country, and referred him to the county records. He then stated that such was the nature of the charge against Mr. Garn that he believed he would not be justified in receiving any bail. We were thus confirmed in our opinion that the night's proceedings before, in relation to their desire to have us give bail, was a mere ruse to separate us. We were not permitted to speak with Garn, the real charge against whom was that he was traveling in Carthage or its neighborhood: what the fictitious one was, if I knew, I have since forgotten, as things of this kind were of daily occurrence.

After waiting the governor's pleasure for some time we had an audience; but such an audience!

He was surrounded by some of the vilest and most unprincipled men in creation; some of them had an appearance of respectability, and many of them lacked even that. Wilson, and, I believe, William Law, were there, Foster, Frank and Chauncey Higbee, Mr. Mar, a lawyer from Nauvoo, a mobocratic merchant from Warsaw, the aforesaid Jackson, a number of his associates, among whom was the governor's secretary, in all, some fifteen or twenty persons, most of whom were recreant to virtue, honor, integrity, and everything that is considered honorable among men. I can well remember the feelings of disgust that I had in seeing the governor surrounded by such an infamous group, and on being introduced to men of so questionable a character; and had I been on private business, I should have turned to depart, and told the governor that if he thought proper to associate with such questionable characters, I should beg leave to be excused; but coming as we did on public business, we could not, of course, consult our private feelings.

We then stated to the governor that, in accordance with his request, General Smith had, in response to his call, sent us to him as a committee of conference; that we were acquainted with most of the circumstances that had transpired in and about Nauvoo lately, and were prepared to give him all information; that, moreover, we had in our possession testimony and affidavits confirmatory of what we should say, which had been forwarded to his excellency by Messrs. Hunter, James, and others, some of which had not reached their destination, but of which we had duplicates with us. We then, in brief, related an outline of the difficulties, and the course we had pursued from the commencement of the trouble up to the present, and handing him the documents, respectfully submitted the whole.

During our conversation and explanations with the governor we were frequently, rudely and impudently contradicted by the fellows he had around him, and of whom he seemed to take no notice.

He opened and read a number of the documents himself, and as he proceeded he was frequently interrupted by, "that's a lie!" "that's a God damned lie!" "that's an infernal falsehood!" "that's a blasted lie!" etc.

These men evidently winced at the exposure of their acts, and thus vulgarly, impudently, and falsely repudiated them. One of their number, Mr. Mar, addressed himself several times to me while in conversation with the governor. I did not notice him until after a frequent repetition of his insolence, when I informed him that "my business at that time was with Governor Ford," whereupon I continued my conversation with his excellency. During the conversation, the governor expressed a desire that Joseph Smith, and all parties concerned in passing or executing the city law in relation to the press, had better come to Carthage; that, however repugnant it might be to our feelings, he thought it would have a tendency to allay public excitement, and prove to the people what we professed, that we wished to be governed by law. We represented to him the course we had taken in relation to this matter, and our willingness to go before another magistrate other than the municipal court; the illegal refusal of our request by the constable; our dismissal by the municipal court, a legally constituted tribunal; our subsequent trial before Squire Wells at the instance of Judge Thomas, the circuit judge, and our dismissal by him; that we had fulfilled the law in every particular; that it was our enemies who were breaking the law, and, having murderous designs, were only making use of this as a pretext to get us into their power. The governor stated that the people viewed it differently, and that, notwithstanding our opinions, he would recommend that the people should be satisfied. We then remarked to him that, should Joseph Smith comply with his request, it would be extremely unsafe, in the present excited state of the country, to come without an armed force; that we had a sufficiency of men, and were competent to defend ourselves, but there might be danger of collision should our forces and those of our enemies be brought into such close proximity. He strenuously advised us not to bring our arms, and pledged his faith as governor, and the faith of the State, that we should be protected, and that he would guarantee our perfect safety.

We had at that time about five thousand men under arms, one thousand of whom would have been amply sufficient for our protection.

At the termination of our interview, and previous to our withdrawal, after a long conversation and the perusal of the documents which we had brought, the governor informed us that he would prepare a written communication for General Joseph Smith, which he desired us to wait for. We were kept waiting for this instrument some five or six hours.

About five o'clock in the afternoon we took our departure with not the most pleasant feelings. The associations of the governor, the spirit he manifested to compromise with these scoundrels, the length of time that he had kept us waiting, and his general deportment, together with the infernal spirit that we saw exhibited by those whom he had admitted to his counsels, made the prospect anything but promising.

We returned on horseback, and arrived at Nauvoo, I think, at about eight or nine o'clock at night, accompanied by Captain Yates in command of a company of mounted men, who came for the purpose of escorting Joseph Smith and the accused in case of their complying with the governor's request, and going to Carthage. We went directly to Brother Joseph's, when Captain Yates delivered to him the governor's communication. A council was called, consisting of Joseph's brother, Hyrum, Dr. Richards, Dr. Bernhisel, myself, and one or two others.

We then gave a detail of our interview with the governor. Brother Joseph was very much dissatisfied with the governor's letter and with his general deportment, and so were the council, and it became a serious question as to the course we should pursue. Various projects were discussed, but nothing definitely decided upon for some time.

In the interim two gentlemen arrived; one of them, if not both, sons of John C. Calhoun. They had come to Nauvoo, and were very anxious for an interview with Brother Joseph.

These gentlemen detained him for some time; and, as our council was held in Dr. Bernhisel's room in the Mansion House, the doctor lay down; and as it was now between 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning, and I had had no rest on the previous night, I was fatigued, and thinking that Brother Joseph might not return, I left for home and rest.

Being very much fatigued, I slept soundly, and was somewhat surprised in the morning by Mrs. Thompson entering my room about 7 o'clock, and exclaiming in surprise, "What, you here! the brethren have crossed the rive some time since."

"What brethren?" I asked.

"Brother Joseph, and Hyrum, and Brother Richards," she answered.

I immediately arose upon learning that they had crossed the river, and did not intend to go to Carthage. I called together a number of persons in whom I had confidence, and had the type, stereotype plates, and most of the valuable things removed from the printing office, believing that, should the governor and his force come to Nauvoo, the first thing they would do would be to burn the printing office, for I knew they would be exasperated if Brother Joseph went away. We had talked over these matters the night before, but nothing was decided upon. It was Brother Joseph's opinion that, should we leave for a time, public excitement, which was then so intense, would be allayed; that it would throw on the governor the responsibility of keeping the peace; that in the event of an outrage, the onus would rest upon the governor, who was amply prepared with troops, and could command all the forces of the State to preserve order; and that the act of his own men would be an overwhelming proof of their seditious designs, not only to the governor, but to the world. He moreover thought that, in the east, where he intended to go, public opinion would be set right in relation to these matters, and its expression would partially influence the west, and that, after the first ebullition, things would assume a shape that would justify his return.

I made arrangements for crossing the river, and Brother Elias Smith and Joseph Cain, who were both employed in the printing office with me, assisted all that lay in their power together with Brother Brower and several hands in the printing office. As we could not find out the exact whereabouts of Joseph and the brethren, I crossed the river in a boat furnished by Brother Cyrus H. Wheelock and Alfred Bell; and after the removal of the things out of the printing office, Joseph Cain brought the account books to me, that we might make arrangements for their adjustment; and Brother Elias Smith, cousin to Brother Joseph, went to obtain money for the journey, and also to find out and report to me the location of the brethren.

As Cyrus H. Wheelock was an active, enterprising man, and in the event of not finding Brother Joseph I calculated to go to Upper Canada for the time being, and should need a companion, I said to Brother Cyrus H. Wheelock, "Can you go with me ten or fifteen hundred miles?"

He answered, "Yes."

"Can you start in half an hour?"

"Yes."

However, I told him that he had better see his family, who lived over the river, and prepare a couple of horses and the necessary equipage for the journey, and that, if we did not find Brother Joseph before, we would start at nightfall.

A laughable incident occurred on the eve of my departure. After making all the preparations I could, previous to leaving Nauvoo, and having bid adieu to my family, I went to a house adjoining the river, owned by Brother Eddy. There I disguised myself so as not to be known, and so effectually was the transformation that those who had come after me with a boat did not know me. I went down to the boat and sat in it. Brother Bell, thinking it was a stranger, watched my moves for some time very impatiently, and then said to Brother Wheelock, "I wish that old gentleman would go away; he has been pottering around the boat for some time, and I am afraid Elder Taylor will be coming." When he discovered his mistake, he was not a little amused.

I was conducted by Brother Bell to a house that was surrounded by timber on the opposite side of the river. There I spent several hours in a chamber with Brother Joseph Cain, adjusting my accounts; and I made arrangements for the stereotype plates of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, to be forwarded east, thinking to supply the company with subsistence money through the sale of these books in the east.

My horses were reported ready by Brother Wheelock, and funds on hand by Brother Elias Smith. In about half an hour I should have started, when Brother Elias Smith came to me with word that he had found the brethren; that they had concluded to go to Carthage, and wished me to return to Nauvoo and accompany them. I must confess that I felt a good deal disappointed at this news, but I immediately made preparations to go. Escorted by Brother Elias Smith, I and my party went to the neighborhood of Montrose, where we met Brother Joseph, Hyrum, Brother Richards and others. Dr. Bernhisel thinks that W. W. Phelps was not with Joseph and Hyrum in the morning, but that he met him, myself, Joseph and Hyrum, W. Richards and Brother Cahoon, in the afternoon, near Montrose, returning to Nauvoo.

On meeting the brethren I learned that it was not Brother Joseph's desire to return, but that he came back by request of some of the brethren, and that it coincided more with Brother Hyrum's feelings than those of Brother Joseph. In fact, after his return, Brother Hyrum expressed himself as perfectly satisfied with the course taken, and said he felt much more at ease in his mind than he did before. On our return the calculation was to throw ourselves under the immediate protection of the governor, and to trust to his word and faith for our preservation.

A message was, I believe, sent to the governor that night, stating that we should come to Carthage in the morning, the party that came along with us to escort us back, in case we returned to Carthage, having returned.

It would seem from the following remarks of General Ford that there was a design on foot, which was, that if we refused to go to Carthage at the governor's request, there should be an increased force called for by the governor, and that we should be destroyed by them. In accordance with this project, Captain Yates returned with his posse, accompanied by the constable who held the writ.

The following is the governor's remark in relation to this affair:

    "The constable and his escort returned. The constable made no
    effort to arrest any of them, nor would he or the guard delay their
    departure one minute beyond the time, to see whether an arrest
    could be made. Upon their return they reported that they had been
    informed that the accused had fled, and could not be found. I
    immediately proposed to a council of officers to march into Nauvoo
    with the small force then under my command, but the officers were
    of the opinion that it was too small, and many of them insisted
    upon a further call of the militia. Upon reflection I was of the
    opinion that the officers were right in the estimate of our force,
    and the project for immediate action was abandoned.

    "I was soon informed, however, of the conduct of the constable and
    guard, and then I was perfectly satisfied that a most base fraud
    had been attempted, that, in fact, it was feared that the Mormons
    would submit, and thereby entitle themselves to the protection of
    the law. It was very apparent that many of the bustling, active
    spirits were afraid that there would be no occasion for calling
    out an overwhelming militia force, for marching into Nauvoo, for
    probable mutiny when there, and for the extermination of the Mormon
    race. It appeared that the constable and the escort were fully in
    the secret, and acted well their part to promote the conspiracy."
    [6]

In the morning Brother Joseph had an interview with the officers of the Legion, with the leading members of the city council, and with the principal men of the city. The officers were instructed to dismiss their men, but to have them in a state of readiness to be called upon in any emergency that might occur.

About half past six o'clock the members of the city council, the marshal, Brothers Joseph and Hyrum, and a number of others, started for Carthage, on horseback. We were instructed by Brother Joseph Smith not to take any arms, and we consequently left them behind. We called at the house of Brother Fellows on our way out. Brother Fellows lived about four miles from Carthage.

While at Brother Fellow's house, Captain Dunn, accompanied by Mr. Coolie, one of the governor's aides-de-camp, came up from Carthage en route for Nauvoo with a requisition from the governor for the State arms. We all returned to Nauvoo with them; the governor's request was complied with, and after taking some refreshments, we all returned to proceed to Carthage. We arrived there late in the night. A great deal of excitement prevailed on and after our arrival. The governor had received into his company all of the companies that had been in the mob; these fellows were riotous and disorderly, hallowing, yelling, and whooping about the streets like Indians, many of them intoxicated; the whole presented a scene of rowdyism and low-bred ruffianism only found among mobocrats and desperadoes, and entirely revolting to the best feelings of humanity. The governor made a speech to them to the effect that he would show Joseph and Hyrum Smith to them in the morning.

About here the companies with the governor were drawn up in line, and General Demming, I think, took Joseph by the arm and Hyrum (Arnold says that Joseph took the governor's arm), and as he passed through between the ranks, the governor leading in front, very politely introduced them as General Joseph Smith and General Hyrum Smith. [7]

All were orderly and courteous except one company of mobocrats--the Carthage Grays--who seemed to find fault on account of too much honor being paid to the Mormons. There was afterwards a row between the companies, and they came pretty near having a fight; the more orderly not feeling disposed to endorse or submit to the rowdyism of the mobocrats. The result was that General Demming, who was very much of a gentleman, ordered the Carthage Grays, a company under the command of Captain Smith, a magistrate in Carthage, and a most violent mobocrat, under arrest. This matter, however, was shortly afterward adjusted, and the difficulty settled between them.

The mayor, aldermen, councilors, as well as the marshal of the city of Nauvoo, together with some persons who had assisted the marshal in removing the press in Nauvoo, appeared before Justice Smith, the aforesaid captain and mobocrat, to again answer the charge of destroying the press; but as there was so much excitement, and as the man was an unprincipled villain before whom we were to have our hearing, we thought it most prudent to give bail, and consequently became security for each other in $500 bonds each, to appear before the County Court at its next session. We had engaged as counsel a lawyer by the name of Wood, of Burlington, Iowa; and Reed, I think, of Madison, Iowa After some little discussion the bonds were signed, and we were all dismissed.

Almost immediately after our dismissal, two men--Augustine Spencer and Norton--two worthless fellows, whose words would not have been taken for five cents, and the first of whom had a short time previously been before the mayor in Nauvoo for maltreating a lame brother, made affidavits that Joseph and Hyrum Smith were guilty of treason, and a writ was accordingly issued for their arrest, and the constable Bettesworth, a rough, unprincipled man, wished immediately to hurry them away to prison without any hearing. His rude, uncouth manner in the administration of what he considered the duties of his office made him exceedingly repulsive to us all. But, independent of these acts, the proceedings in this case were altogether illegal. Providing the court was sincere, which it was not, and providing these men's oaths were true, and that Joseph and Hyrum were guilty of treason, still the whole course was illegal.

The magistrate made out a mittimus, and committed them to prison without a hearing, which he had no right legally to do. The statue of Illinois expressly provides that "all men shall have a hearing before a magistrate before they shall be committed to prison;" and Mr. Robert H. Smith, the magistrate, had made out a mittimus committing them to prison contrary to law without such hearing. As I was informed of this illegal proceeding, I went immediately to the governor and informed him of it. Whether he was apprised of it before or not, I do not know; but my opinion is that he was.

I represented to him the characters of the parties who had made oath, the outrageous nature of the charge, the indignity offered to men in the position which they occupied, and declared to him that he knew very well it was a vexatious proceeding, and that the accused were not guilty of any such crime. The governor replied, he was very sorry that the thing had occurred; that he did not believe the charges, but that he thought the best thing to be done was to let the law take its course. I then reminded him that we had come out there at his instance, not to satisfy the law, which we had done before, but the prejudices of the people, in relation to the affairs of the press; that at his instance we had given bonds, which we could not by law be required to do to satisfy the people, and that it was asking too much to require gentlemen in their position in life to suffer the degradation of being immured in a jail at the instance of such worthless scoundrels as those who had made this affidavit. The governor replied that it was an unpleasant affair, and looked hard; but that it was a matter over which he had no control, as it belonged to the judiciary; that he, as the executive, could not interfere with their proceedings, and that he had no doubt but that they would immediately be dismissed. I told him that we had looked to him for protection from such insults, and that I thought we had a right to do so from the solemn promises which he had made to me and to Dr. Bernhisel in relation to our coming without guard or arms; that we had relied upon his faith, and had a right to expect him to fulfill his engagements after we had placed ourselves implicity under his care, and complied with all his requests, although extrajudicial.

He replied that he would detail a guard, if we required it, and see us protected, but that he could not interfere with the judiciary. I expressed my dissatisfaction at the course taken, and told him, that, if we were to be subject to mob rule, and to be dragged, contrary to law, into prison at the instance of every infernal scoundrel whose oaths could be bought for a dram of whiskey, his protection availed very little, and we had miscalculated his promises.

Seeing there was no prospect of redress from the governor, I returned to the room, and found the constable Bettesworth very urgent to hurry Brothers Joseph and Hyrum to prison, while the brethren were remonstrating with him. At the same time a great rabble was gathered in the streets and around the door, and from the rowdyism manifested I was afraid there was a design to murder the prisoners on the way to jail.

Without conferring with any person, my next feelings were to procure a guard, and seeing a man habited as a soldier in the room, I went to him and said, "I am afraid there is a design against the lives of the Messrs. Smith; will you go immediately and bring your captain; and, if not convenient, any other captain of a company, and I will pay you well for your trouble?" He said he would, and departed forthwith, and soon returned with his captain, whose name I have forgotten, and introduced him to me. I told him of my fears, and requested him immediately to fetch his company.

He departed forthwith, and arrived at the door with them just at the time when the constable was hurrying the brethren down stairs. A number of the brethren went along, together with one or two strangers; and all of us, safely lodged in prison, remained there during the night.

At the request of Joseph Smith for an interview with the governor, he came the next morning, Thursday, June 26th, at half past 9 o'clock, accompanied by Colonel Geddes, when a lengthy conversation was entered into in relation to the existing difficulties; and after some preliminary remarks, at the governor's request, Brother Joseph gave him a general outline of the state of affairs in relation to our difficulties, the excited state of the country, the tumultuous mobocratic movements of our enemies, the precautionary measures used by himself (Joseph Smith), the acts of the city council, the destruction of the press, and the moves of the mob and ourselves up to that time.

The following report is, I believe, substantially correct:

    Governor--"General Smith, I believe you have given me a general
    outline of the difficulties that have existed in the country in
    the documents forwarded to me by Dr. Bernhisel and Mr. Taylor;
    but, unfortunately, there seems to be a great discrepancy between
    your statements and those of your enemies. It is true that you
    are substantiated by evidence and affidavit, but for such an
    extraordinary excitement as that which is now in the country
    there must be some cause, and I attribute the last outbreak to
    the destruction of the Expositor, and to your refusal to comply
    with the writ issued by Esquire Morrison. The press in the United
    States is looked upon as the great bulwark of American freedom,
    and its destruction in Nauvoo was represented and looked upon as
    a high-handed measure, and manifests to the people a disposition
    on your part to suppress the liberty of speech and of the press.
    This, with your refusal to comply with the requisition of a writ, I
    conceive to be the principal cause of this difficulty; and you are
    moreover represented to me as turbulent, and defiant of the laws
    and institutions of your country."

    General Smith--"Governor Ford, you, sir, as governor of this
    State, are aware of the persecutions that I have endured. You know
    well that our course has been peaceable and law-abiding for I have
    furnished this State ever since our settlement here with sufficient
    evidence of my pacific intentions, and those of the people with
    whom I am associated, by the endurance of every conceivable
    indignity and lawless outrage perpetrated upon me and upon this
    people since our settlement here; and you know yourself that I have
    kept you well posted in relation to all matters associated with the
    late difficulties. If you have not got some of my communications,
    it has not been my fault.

    "Agreeably to your orders, I assembled the Nauvoo Legion for the
    protection of Nauvoo and the surrounding country against an armed
    band of marauders; and ever since they have been mustered I have
    almost daily communicated with you in regard to all the leading
    events that have transpired; and whether in the capacity of mayor
    of the city, or lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion, I have
    striven, according to the best of my judgment, to preserve the
    peace and to administer even-handed justice; but my motives are
    impugned, my acts are misconstrued, and I am grossly and wickedly
    misrepresented. I suppose I am indebted for my incarceration to
    the oath of a worthless man, who was arraigned before me and fined
    for abusing and maltreating his lame, helpless brother. That I
    should be charged by you, sir, who know better, of acting contrary
    to law, is to me a matter of surprise. Was it the Mormons or our
    enemies who first commenced these difficulties? You know well it
    was not us; and when this turbulent, outrageous people commenced
    their insurrectionary movements I made you acquainted with them
    officially, and asked your advice, and have followed strictly your
    counsel in every particular. Who ordered out the Nauvoo Legion?
    I did, under your direction. For what purpose? To suppress the
    insurrectionary movements. It was at your instance, sir, that I
    issued a proclamation calling upon the Nauvoo Legion to be in
    readiness at a moment's warning to guard against the incursions of
    mobs, and gave an order to Jonathan Dunham, acting major-general,
    to that effect.

    "Am I, then, to be charged with the acts of others? and because
    lawlessness and mobocracy abound, am I, when carrying out your
    instructions, to be charged with not abiding law? Why is it that I
    must be made accountable for other men's acts? If there is trouble
    in the country, neither I nor my people made it; and all that we
    have ever done, after much endurance on our part, is to maintain
    and uphold the Constitution and institutions of our country, and to
    protect an injured, innocent, and persecuted people against misrule
    and mob violence.

    "Concerning the destruction of the press to which you refer, men
    may differ somewhat in their opinions about it; but can it be
    supposed that after all the indignities to which they have been
    subjected outside, that people could suffer a set of worthless
    vagabonds to come into their city, and, right under their own eyes
    and protection, vilify and calumniate not only themselves, but
    the character of their wives and daughters, as was impudently and
    unblushingly done in that infamous and filthy sheet?

    "There is not a city in the United States that would have suffered
    such an indignity for twenty-four hours. Our whole people were
    indignant, and loudly called upon our city authorities for a
    redress of their grievances, which, if not attended to, they
    themselves would have taken into their own hands, and have
    summarily punished the audacious wretches as they deserved. The
    principle of equal rights that has been instilled into our bosoms
    from our cradles as American citizens forbids us submitting to
    every foul indignity, and succumbing and pandering to wretches so
    infamous as these. But, independent of this, the course that we
    pursued we consider to be strictly legal; for, notwithstanding
    the result, we were anxious to be governed strictly by law, and
    therefore we convened the city council; and being desirous in our
    deliberations to abide by law, we summoned legal counsel to be
    present on the occasion. Upon investigating the matter, we found
    that our city charter gave us power to remove all nuisances.
    Furthermore, after consulting Blackstone upon what might be
    considered a nuisance, it appeared that that distinguished lawyer,
    who is considered authority, I believe, in all our courts, states
    among other things that 'a libelous and filthy press may be
    considered a nuisance, and abated as such.' Here, then, one of
    the most eminent English barristers, whose works are considered
    standard with us, declares that a libelous and filthy press may
    be considered a nuisance; and our own charter, given us by the
    Legislature of this State, gives us power to remove nuisances; and
    by ordering that press to be abated as a nuisance, we conceived
    that we were acting strictly in accordance with law. We made that
    order in our corporate capacity, and the city marshal carried it
    out. It is possible there may have been some better way, but I must
    confess that I could not see it.

    "In relation to the writ served upon us, we are willing to abide
    the consequences of our own acts, but are unwilling, in answering
    a writ of that kind, to submit to illegal exactions, sought to be
    imposed upon us under the pretense of law, when we knew they were
    in open violation of it. When that document was presented to me by
    Mr. Bettesworth, I offered, in the presence of more than twenty
    persons, to go to any other magistrate, either in our city, in
    Appanoose, or any other place where we should be safe, but we all
    refused to put ourselves into the power of a mob. What right had
    that constable to refuse our request? He had none according to
    law; for you know, Governor Ford, that the statute law in Illinois
    is, that the parties served with the writ 'shall go before him who
    issued it, or some other justice of the peace.' Why, then, should
    we be dragged to Carthage, where the law does not compel us to
    go? Does not this look like many others of our persecutions with
    which you are acquainted? and have we not a right to expect foul
    play? This very act was a breach of law on his part, an assumption
    of power that did not belong to him, and an attempt, at least, to
    deprive us of our legal and constitutional rights and privileges.
    What could we do, under the circumstances, different from what we
    did do? We sued for, and obtained a writ of habeas corpus from
    the municipal court, by which we were delivered from the hands of
    Constable Bettesworth, and brought before and acquitted by the
    municipal court. After our acquittal, in a conversation with Judge
    Thomas, although he considered the acts of the party illegal,
    he advised that, to satisfy the people, we had better go before
    another magistrate who was not in our Church. In accordance with
    his advice, we went before Esquire Wells, with whom you are well
    acquainted; both parties were present, witnesses were called on
    both sides, the case was fully investigated, and we were again
    dismissed. And what is this pretended desire to enforce law, and
    wherefore are these lying, base rumors put into circulation but
    to seek, through mob influence, under pretense of law, to make us
    submit to requisitions which are contrary to law and subversive
    of every principle of justice? And when you, sir, required us to
    come out here, we came, not because it was legal, but because you
    required it of us, and we were desirous of showing to you, and
    to all men, that we shrunk not from the most rigid investigation
    of our acts. We certainly did expect other treatment than to be
    immured in a jail at the instance of these men, and I think, from
    your plighted faith, we had a right so to expect, after disbanding
    our own forces, and putting ourselves entirely in your hands. And
    now, after having fulfilled my part, sir, as a man and an American
    citizen, I call upon you, Governor Ford, to deliver us from this
    place, and rescue us from this outrage that is sought to be
    practiced upon us by a set of infamous scoundrels."

    Governor Ford.--"But you have placed men under arrest, detained
    men as prisoners, and given passes to others, some of which I have
    seen,"

    John P. Greene, City Marshal.--"Perhaps I can explain. Since
    these difficulties have commenced, you are aware that we have been
    placed under very peculiar circumstances; our city has been placed
    under a very rigid police guard; in addition to this, frequent
    guards have been placed outside the city to prevent any sudden
    surprise, and those guards have questioned suspected or suspicious
    persons as to their business. To strangers, in some instances,
    passes have been given to prevent difficulty in passing those
    guards; it is some of these passes that you have seen. No person,
    sir, has been imprisoned without a legal cause in our city."

    Governor--"Why did you not give a more speedy answer to the posse
    that I sent out?"

    General Smith.--"We had matters of importance to consult upon;
    your letter showed anything but an amiable spirit. We have
    suffered immensely in Missouri from mobs, in loss of property,
    imprisonment, and otherwise. It took some time for us to weigh duly
    these matters; we could not decide upon matters of such importance
    immediately, and your posse were too hasty in returning; we were
    consulting for a large people, and vast interests were at stake. We
    had been outrageously imposed upon, and knew not how far we could
    trust any one; besides, a question necessarily arose, How shall we
    come? Your request was that we should come unarmed. It became a
    matter of serious importance to decide how far promises could be
    trusted, and how far we were safe from mob violence."

    Colonel Geddes.--"It certainly did look, from all I have heard,
    from the general spirit of violence and mobocracy that here
    prevails, that it was not safe for you to come unprotected."

    Governor Ford.--"I think that sufficient time was not allowed
    by the posse for you to consult and get ready. They were too
    hasty; but I suppose they found themselves bound by their orders.
    I think, too, there is a great deal of truth in what you say, and
    your reasoning is plausible, but I must beg leave to differ from
    you in relation to the acts of the City Council. That Council, in
    my opinion, had no right to act in a legislative capacity, and in
    that of the judiciary. They should have passed a law in relation
    to the matter, and then the Municipal Court, upon complaint, could
    have removed it; but for the City Council to take upon themselves
    the law-making and the execution of the law, is, in my opinion,
    wrong; besides, these men ought to have had a hearing before their
    property was destroyed; to destroy it without was an infringement
    on their rights; besides, it is so contrary to the feelings of
    American people to interfere with the press. And, furthermore, I
    cannot but think that it would have been more judicious for you to
    have gone with Mr. Bettesworth to Carthage, notwithstanding the
    law did not require it. Concerning your being in jail, I am sorry
    for that; I wish it had been otherwise. I hope you will soon be
    released, but I can not interfere."

    Joseph Smith.--"Governor Ford, allow me, sir, to bring one thing
    to your mind that you seem to have overlooked. You state that you
    think it would have been better for us to have submitted to the
    requisition of Constable Bettesworth, and to have gone to Carthage.
    Do you not know, sir, that that writ was served at the instance of
    an anti-Mormon mob, who had passed resolutions, and published them,
    to the effect that they would exterminate the Mormon leaders? And
    are you not informed that Captain Anderson was not only threatened
    but had a gun fired at his boat by this said mob in Warsaw when
    coming up to Nauvoo, and that this very thing was made use of as
    a means to get us into their hands; and we could not, without
    taking an armed force with us, go there without, according to their
    published declarations, going into the jaws of death? To have taken
    a force with us would only have fanned the excitement, and they
    would have stated that we wanted to use intimidation; therefore, we
    thought it the most judicious to avail ourselves of the protection
    of the law."

    Governor Ford.--"I see, I see."

    Joseph Smith.--"Furthermore, in relation to the press, you say
    that you differ from me in opinion. Be it so; the thing, after all,
    is only a legal difficulty, and the courts, I should judge, are
    competent to decide on that matter. If our act was illegal, we are
    willing to meet it; and although I cannot see the distinction that
    you draw about the acts of the City Council, and what difference
    it could have made in point of fact, law, or justice between the
    City Council, acting together or separate or how much more legal
    it would have been for the Municipal Court, who were a part of the
    City Council, to act separately instead of with the councilors,
    yet, if it is deemed that we did a wrong in destroying that press,
    we refuse not to pay for it; we are desirous to fulfill the law
    in every particular, and are responsible for our acts. You say
    that the parties ought to have a hearing. Had it been a civil
    suit, this of course, would have been proper; but there was a
    flagrant violation of every principle of right--a nuisance; and
    it was abated on the same principle that any nuisance, stench,
    or putrefied carcass would have been removed. Our first step,
    therefore, was to stop the foul, noisome, filthy sheet, and then
    the next in our opinion would have been to have prosecuted the man
    for a breach of public decency. And, furthermore, again let me say,
    Governor Ford, I shall look to you for our protection. I believe
    you are talking of going to Nauvoo; if you go, sir, I wish to go
    along. I refuse not to answer any law, but I do not consider myself
    safe here."

    Governor.--"I am in hopes that you will be acquitted, and if I
    go I will certainly take you along. I do not, however, apprehend
    danger. I think you are perfectly safe either here or anywhere
    else. I can not, however, interfere with the law. I am placed in
    peculiar circumstances and seem to be blamed by all parties."

    Joseph Smith.--"Governor Ford, I ask nothing but what is legal;
    I have a right to expect protection, at least from you; for,
    independent of law, you have pledged your faith and that of the
    State for my protection, and I wish to go to Nauvoo."

    Governor.--"And you shall have protection, General Smith. I did
    not make this promise without consulting my officers, who all
    pledged their honor to its fulfillment. I do not know that I shall
    go tomorrow to Nauvoo, but if I do I will take you along."

At a quarter past ten o'clock the governor left.

At about half past twelve o'clock, Mr. Reed, one of Joseph's counsel, came in, apparently much elated; he stated that, upon an examination of the law, he found that the magistrate had transcended his jurisdiction, and that having committed them without an examination, his jurisdiction ended, that he had him upon a pin hook; that he ought to have examined them before he committed them, and that, having violated the law in this particular, he had no further power over them; for, once committed, they were out of his jurisdiction, as the power of the magistrate extended no farther than their committal, and that now they could not be brought out except at the regular session of the Circuit Court, or by a writ of habeas corpus; but that if Justice Smith would consent to go to Nauvoo for trial, he would compromise matters with him, and overlook this matter.

Mr. Reed further stated that the anti-Mormons, or mob, had concocted a scheme to get out a writ from Missouri, with a demand upon Governor Ford for the arrest of Joseph Smith, and his conveyance to Missouri, and that a man by the name of Wilson had returned from Missouri the night before the burning of the press for this purpose.

At half past two o'clock Constable Bettesworth came to the jail with a man named Simpson, professing to have some order, but he would not send up his name, and the guard would not let him pass. Dr. Bernhisel and Brother Wasson went to inform the governor and council of this. At about twenty minutes to three Dr. Bernhisel returned, and stated that he thought the governor was doing all he could. At about ten minutes to three Hyrum Kimball appeared with news from Nauvoo.

Soon after Constable Bettesworth came with an order from Esquire Smith to convey the prisoners to the court-house for trial. He was informed that the process was illegal, that they had been placed there contrary to law, and that they refused to come unless by legal process. I was informed that Justice Smith (who was also captain of the Carthage Grays) went to the governor and informed him of the matter, and that the governor replied, "You have your forces, and of course can use them." The constable certainly did return, accompanied by a guard of armed men, and by force, and under protest, hurried the prisoners to the court.

About four o'clock the case was called by Captain Robert F. Smith, J. P. The counsel for the prisoners called for subpoenas to bring witnesses. At twenty-five minutes past four he took a copy of the order to bring the prisoners from jail to trial, and afterwards he took names of witnesses.

Counsel present for the State; Higbee, Skinner, Sharp, Emmons, and Morrison. Twenty-five minutes to five the writ was returned as served, June 25th.

Many remarks were made at the court that I paid but little attention to, as I considered the whole thing illegal and a complete burlesque. Wood objected to the proceedings in total, in consequence of its illegality, showing that the prisoners were not only illegally committed, but that, being once committed, the magistrate had no further power over them; but as it was the same magistrate before whom he was pleading who imprisoned them contrary to law, and the same who, as captain, forced them from jail, his arguments availed but little. He then urged that the prisoners be remanded until witnesses could be had, and applied for a continuance for that purpose. Skinner suggested until twelve o'clock next day. Wood again demanded until witnesses could be obtained; that the court meet at a specified time, and that, if witnesses were not present, again adjourn, without calling the prisoners. After various remarks from Reed, Skinner, and others, the court stated that the writ was served yesterday, and that it will give until tomorrow at twelve m. to get witnesses.

We then returned to jail. Immediately after our return Dr. Bernhisel went to the governor, and obtained from him an order for us to occupy a large open room containing a bedstead. I rather think that the same room had been appropriated to the use of debtors; at any rate, there was free access to the jailer's house, and no bars or locks except such as might be on the outside door of the jail. The jailer, Mr. George W. Steghall, and his wife, manifested a disposition to make us as comfortable as they could; we ate at their table, which was well provided, and, of course, paid for it.

I do not remember the names of all who were with us that night and the next morning in jail, for several went and came; among those that we considered stationery were Stephen Markham, John S. Fullmer, Captain Dan Jones, Dr. Willard Richards, and myself. Dr. Bernhisel says that he was there from Wednesday in the afternoon until eleven o'clock next day. We were, however, visited by numerous friends, among whom were Uncle John Smith, Hyrum Kimball, Cyrus H. Wheelock, besides lawyers, as counsel. There was also a great variety of conversation, which was rather desultory than otherwise, and referred to circumstances that had transpired, our former and present grievances, the spirit of the troops around us, and the disposition of the governor; the devising for legal and other plans for deliverance, the nature of testimony required; the gathering of proper witnesses, and a variety of other topics, including our religious hopes, etc.

During one of these conversations Dr. Richards remarked: "Brother Joseph, if it is necessary that you die in this matter, and if they will take me in your stead, I will suffer for you." At another time, when conversing about deliverance, I said, "Brother Joseph, if you will permit it, and say the word, I will have you out of this prison in five hours, if the jail has to come down to do it." My idea was to go to Nauvoo, and collect a force sufficient, as I considered the whole affair a legal farce, and a flagrant outrage upon our liberty and rights. Brother Joseph refused.

Elder Cyrus H. Wheelock came in to see us, and when he was about leaving drew a small pistol, a six-shooter, from his pocket, remarking at the same time, "Would any of you like to have this?" Brother Joseph immediately replied, "Yes, give it to me;" whereupon he took the pistol, and put it in his pantaloons pocket. The pistol was a six-shooting revolver, of Allen's patent; it belonged to me, and was one that I furnished to Brother Wheelock when he talked of going with me to the east, previous to our coming to Carthage. I have it now in my possession. Brother Wheelock went out on some errand, and was not suffered to return. The report of the governor having gone to Nauvoo without taking the prisoners along with him caused very unpleasant feelings, as we were apprised that we were left to the tender mercies of the Carthage Grays, a company strictly mobocratic, and whom we knew to be our most deadly enemies; and their captain, Esquire Smith, was a most unprincipled villain. Besides this, all the mob forces, comprising the governor's troops, were dismissed, with the exception of one or two companies, which the governor took with him to Nauvoo. The great part of the mob was liberated, the remainder was our guard.

We looked upon it not only as a breach of faith on the part of the governor, but also as an indication of a desire to insult us, if nothing more, by leaving us in the proximity of such men. The prevention of Wheelock's return was among the first of their hostile movements.

Colonel Markham then went out, and he was also prevented from returning. He was very angry at this, but the mob paid no attention to him; they drove him out of town at the point of the bayonet, and threatened to shoot him if he returned. He went, I am informed, to Nauvoo for the purpose of raising a company of men for our protection. Brother Fullmer went to Nauvoo after witnesses; it is my opinion that Brother Wheelock did also.

Some time after dinner we sent for some wine. It has been reported by some that this was taken as a sacrament. It was no such thing; our spirits were generally dull and heavy, and it was sent for to revive us. I think it was Captain Jones who went after it, but they would not suffer him to return. I believe we all drank of the wine, and gave some to one or two of the prison guards. We all of us felt unusually dull and languid, with a remarkable depression of spirits. In consonance with those feelings I sang a song, that had lately been introduced into Nauvoo, entitled, "A poor, wayfaring man of grief," etc.

The song is pathetic, and the tune quite plaintive, and was very much in accordance with our feelings at the time, for our spirits were all depressed, dull and gloomy, and surcharged with indefinite ominous forebodings. After a lapse of some time, Brother Hyrum requested me again to sing that song. I replied, "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing;" when he remarked, "Oh, never mind; commence singing, and you will get the spirit of it." At his request I did so. Soon afterwards I was sitting at one of the front windows of the jail, when I saw a number of men, with painted faces, coming around the corner of the jail, and aiming towards the stairs. The other brethren had seen the same, for, as I went to the door, I found Brother Hyrum Smith and Dr. Richards already leaning against it. They both pressed against the door with their shoulders to prevent its being opened, as the lock and latch were comparatively useless. While in this position, the mob, who had come up stairs, and tried to open the door, probably thought it was locked, and fired a ball through the keyhole; at this Dr. Richards and Brother Hyrum leaped back from the door, with their faces towards it; almost instantly another ball passed through the panel of the door, and struck Brother Hyrum on the left side of the nose, entering his face and head. At the same instant, another ball from the outside entered his back, passing through his body and striking his watch. The ball came from the back, through the jail window, opposite the door, and must, from its range, have been fired from the Carthage Grays, who were placed there ostensibly for our protection, as the balls from the fire-arms, shot close by the jail, would have entered the ceiling, we being in the second story, and there never was a time after that when Hyrum could have received the latter wound. Immediately, when the balls struck him, he fell flat on his back, crying as he fell, "I am a dead man." He never moved afterwards.

I shall never forget the deep feeling of sympathy and regard manifested in the countenance of Brother Joseph as he drew nigh to Hyrum, and, leaning over him, exclaimed, "Oh! my poor, dear brother Hyrum!" He, however, instantly arose, and with a firm, quick step, and a determined expression of countenance, approached the door, and pulling the six-shooter left by Brother Wheelock from his pocket, opened the door slightly, and snapped the pistol six successive times; only three of the barrels, however, were discharged. I afterwards understood that two or three were wounded by these discharges, two of whom, I am informed, died. I had in my hands a large, strong hickory stick, brought there by Brother Markham, and left by him, which I had seized as soon as I saw the mob approach; and while Brother Joseph was firing the pistol, I stood close behind him. As soon as he had discharged it he stepped back, and I immediately took his place next to the door, while he occupied the one I had done while he was shooting. Brother Richards, at this time, had a knotty walking-stick in his hands belonging to me, and stood next to Brother Joseph, a little farther from the door, in an oblique direction, apparently to avoid the rake of the fire from the door. The firing of Bother Joseph made our assailants pause for a moment; very soon after, however, they pushed the door some distance open, and protruded and discharged their guns into the room, when I parried them off with my stick, giving another direction to the balls.

It certainly was a terrible scene: streams of fire as thick as my arm passed by me as these men fired, and, unarmed as we were, it looked like certain death. I remember feeling as though my time had come, but I do not know when, in any critical position, I was more calm, unruffled, energetic, and acted with more promptness and decision. It certainly was far from pleasant to be so near the muzzles of those fire-arms as they belched forth their liquid flames and deadly balls. While I was engaged in parrying the guns, Brother Joseph said, "That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can." These were the last words I ever heard him speak on earth.

Every moment the crowd at the door became more dense, as they were unquestionably pressed on by those in the rear ascending the stairs, until the whole entrance at the door was literally crowded with muskets and rifles, which, with the swearing, shouting and demoniacal expressions of those outside the door and on the stairs, and the firing of the guns, mingled with their horrid oaths and execrations, made it look like Pandemonium let loose, and was, indeed, a fit representation of the horrid deed in which they were engaged.

After parrying the guns for some time, which now protruded thicker and farther into the room, and seeing no hope of escape or protection there, as we were now unarmed, it occurred to me that we might have some friends outside, and that there might be some chance of escape in that direction, but here there seemed to be none. As I expected them every moment to rush into the room--nothing but extreme cowardice having thus far kept them out--as the tumult and pressure increased, without any other hope, I made a spring for the window which was right in front of the jail door, where the mob was standing, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Grays, who were stationed some ten or twelve rods off. The weather was hot, we all of us had our coats off, and the window was raised to admit air. As I reached the window, and was on the point of leaping out, I was struck by a ball from the door about midway of my thigh, which struck the bone, and flattened out almost to the size of a quarter of a dollar, and then passed on through the fleshy part to within about half an inch of the outside. I think some prominent nerve must have been severed or injured, for, as soon as the ball struck me, I fell like a bird when shot, or an ox when struck by a butcher, and lost entirely and instantaneously all power of action or locomotion. I fell upon the window-sill, and cried out, "I am shot!" Not possessing any power to move, I felt myself falling outside of the window, but immediately I fell inside, from some, at that time, unknown cause. When I struck the floor my animation seemed restored, as I have seen it sometimes in squirrels and birds after being shot. As soon as I felt the power of motion I crawled under the bed which was in a corner of the room, not far from the window where I received my wound. While on my way and under the bed I was wounded in three other places; one ball entered a little below the left knee, and never was extracted; another entered the forepart of my left arm, a little above the wrist, and, passing down by the joint, lodged in the fleshy part of my hand, about midway, a little above the upper joint of my little finger; another struck me on the fleshy part of my left hip, and tore away the flesh as large as my hand, dashing the mangled fragments of flesh and blood against the wall.

My wounds were painful, and the sensation produced was as though a ball had passed through and down the whole length of my leg. I very well remember my reflections at the time. I had a very painful idea of becoming lame and decrepit, and being an object of pity, and I felt as though I would rather die than be placed in such circumstances.

It would seem that immediately after my attempt to leap out of the window, Joseph also did the same thing, of which circumstance I have no knowledge only from information. The first thing that I noticed was a cry that he had leaped out of the window. A cessation of firing followed, the mob rushed down stairs, and Dr. Richards went to the window. Immediately afterwards I saw the doctor going towards the jail door, and as there was an iron door at the head of the stairs adjoining our door which led into the cells for criminals, it struck me that the doctor was going in there, and I said to him, "Stop, doctor, and take me along." He proceeded to the door and opened it, and then returned and dragged me along to a small cell prepared for criminals.

Brother Richards was very much troubled, and exclaimed, "Oh! Brother Taylor, is it possible that they have killed both Brother Hyrum and Joseph? it cannot surely be, and yet I saw them shoot them;" and, elevating his hands two or three times, he exclaimed, "Oh Lord, my God, spare thy servants!" He then said, "Brother Taylor, this is a terrible event;" and he dragged me farther into the cell, saying, "I am sorry I can do no better for you," and, taking an old, filthy mattress, he covered me with it, and said, "That may hide you, and you may yet live to tell the tale, but I expect they will kill me in a few moments." While lying in this position I suffered the most excruciating pain.

Soon afterwards Dr. Richards came to me, informed me that the mob had precipitately fled, and at the same time confirmed my worst fears that Joseph was assuredly dead. I felt a dull, lonely, sickening sensation at the news. When I reflected that our noble chieftain, the prophet of the living God, had fallen, and that I had seen his brother in the cold embrace of death, it seemed as though there was a void or vacuum in the great field of human existence to me, and a dark, gloomy chasm in the kingdom, and that we were left alone. Oh how lonely was that feeling! How cold, barren and desolate! In the midst of difficulties he was always the first in motion; in critical positions his counsel was always sought. As our prophet he approached our God, and obtained for us his will; but now our prophet, our counselor, our general, our leader was gone, and amid the fiery ordeal that we then had to pass through, we were left alone without his aid, and as our future guide for things spiritual or temporal, and for all things pertaining to this world or the next, he had spoken for the last time on earth!

These reflections and a thousand others flashed upon my mind. I thought, Why must the good perish, and the virtuous be destroyed? Why must God's nobility, the salt of the earth, the most exalted of the human family, and the most perfect types of all excellence, fall victims to the cruel, fiendish hate of incarnate devils?

The poignancy of my grief, I presume, however, was somewhat allayed by the extreme suffering that I endured from my wounds.

Soon afterwards I was taken to the head of the stairs and laid there, where I had a full view of our beloved and now murdered Brother Hyrum. There he lay as I had left him; he had not moved a limb; he lay placid and calm, a monument of greatness even in death; but his noble spirit had left its tenement, and was gone to dwell in regions more congenial to its exalted nature. Poor Hyrum! he was a great and good man, and my soul was cemented to his. If ever there was an exemplary, honest, and virtuous man, an embodiment of all that is noble in the human form, Hyrum Smith was its representative.

While I lay there a number of persons came around, among whom was a physician. The doctor, on seeing a ball lodged in my left hand, took a penknife from his pocket and made an incision in it for the purpose of extracting the ball therefrom, and having obtained a pair of carpenter's compasses, made use of them to draw or pry out the ball, alternately using the penknife and compasses. After sawing for some time with a dull penknife, and prying and pulling with the compasses, he ultimately succeeded in extracting the ball, which weighed about half an ounce. Some time afterwards he remarked to a friend of mine that I had "nerves like the devil," to stand what I did in its extraction. I really thought I had need of nerves stand such surgical butchery, and that, whatever my nerves may be, his practice was devilish.

This company wished to remove me to Mr. Hamilton's hotel, the place where we had stayed previous to our incarceration in jail. I told them, however, that I did not wish to go; I did not consider it safe. They protested that it was, and that I was safe with them; that it was a perfect outrage for men to be used as we had been; that they were my friends; that it was for my good they were counseling me, and that I could be better taken care of there than here.

I replied, "I don't know you. Who am I among? I am surrounded by assassins and murderers; witness your deeds! Don't talk to me of kindness or comfort; look at your murdered victims. Look at me! I want none of your counsel nor comfort. There may be some safety here; I can be assured of none anywhere," etc.

They G-- d-- their souls to hell, made the most solemn asseverations, and swore by God and the devil, and everything else that they could think of, that they would stand by me to death and protect me. In half an hour every one of them had fled from the town.

Soon after a coroner's jury were assembled in the room over the body of Hyrum. Among the jurors was Captain Smith, of the Carthage Grays, who had assisted in the murder, and the same justice before whom we had been tried. I learned of Francis Higbee as being in the neighborhood. On hearing his name mentioned, I immediately arose and said, "Captain Smith, you are a justice of the peace; I have heard his name mentioned; I want to swear my life against him." I was informed that word was immediately sent to him to leave the place, which he did.

Brother Richards was busy during this time attending to the coroner's inquest, and to the removal of the bodies, and making arrangements for their removal from Carthage to Nauvoo.

When he had a little leisure, he again came to me, and at his suggestion I was removed to Hamilton's tavern. I felt that he was the only friend, the only person, that I could rely upon in that town. It was with difficulty that sufficient persons could be found to carry me to the tavern; for immediately after the murder a great fear fell upon all the people, and men, women, and children fled with great precipitation, leaving nothing nor anybody in the town but two or three women and children and one or two sick persons.

It was with great difficulty that Brother Richards prevailed upon Mr. Hamilton, hotel-keeper, and his family, to stay; they would not until Brother Richards had given a solemn promise that he would see them protected, and hence I was looked upon as a hostage. Under these circumstances, notwithstanding, I believe they were hostile to the Mormons, and were glad that the murder had taken place, though they did not actually participate in it; and, feeling that I should be a protection to them, they stayed.

The whole community knew that a dreadful outrage had been perpetrated by those villains, and fearing lest the citizens of Nauvoo, as they possessed the power, might have a disposition to visit them with a terrible vengeance, they fled in the wildest confusion. And, indeed, it was with very great difficulty that the citizens of Nauvoo could be restrained. A horrid, barbarous murder had been committed, the most solemn pledge violated, and that, too, while the victims were, contrary to the requirements of the law, putting themselves into the hands of the governor to pacify a popular excitement. This outrage was enhanced by the reflection that our people were able to protect themselves against not only all the mob, but against three times their number and that of the governor's troops put together. They were also exasperated by the speech of the governor in town.

The whole events were so faithless, so dastardly, so mean, cowardly, and contemptible, without one extenuating circumstance, that it would not have been surprising if the citizens of Nauvoo had arisen en masse, and blotted the wretches out of existence. The citizens of Carthage knew they would have done so under such circumstances, and, judging us by themselves, they were all panic-stricken, and fled. Colonel Markham, too, after his expulsion from Carthage, had gone home, related the circumstances of his ejectment, and was using his influence to get a company to go out. Fearing that when the people heard that their prophet and patriarch had been murdered under the above circumstances they might act rashly, and knowing that if they once got roused, like a mighty avalanche they would lay the country waste before them and take a terrible vengeance--as none of the Twelve were in Nauvoo, and no one, perhaps, with sufficient influence to control the people, Dr. Richards, after consulting me, wrote the following note, fearing that my family might be seriously affected by the news. I told him to insert that I was slightly wounded.

    Willard Richards' Note from Carthage Jail to Nauvoo. [8]

    "Carthage jail, 8 o'clock 5 min. p. m., June 27th, 1844.

    "Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded, not very badly. I am
    well. Our guard was forced, as we believe, by a band of Missourians
    from 100 to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled
    towards Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens
    here are afraid of the 'Mormons' attacking them; I promise them no.

                                                       W. RICHARDS.

    "N. B.--The citizens promise us protection; alarm guns have been
    fired.

                                                      "JOHN TAYLOR."

I remember signing my name as quickly as possible, lest the tremor of my hand should be noticed, and the fears of my family excited.

A messenger was dispatched immediately with the note, but he was intercepted by the governor, who, on hearing a cannon fired at Carthage, which was to be the signal for the murder, immediately fled with his company, and fearing that the citizens of Nauvoo, when apprised of the horrible outrage, would immediately rise and pursue, he turned back the messenger, who was George D. Grant. A second one was sent, who was treated similarly; and not until a third attempt could news be got to Nauvoo.

Samuel H. Smith, brother to Joseph and Hyrum, was the first brother I saw after the outrage; I am not sure whether he took the news or not; he lived at the time in Plymouth, Hancock County, and was on his way to Carthage to see his brothers, when he was met by some of the troops, or rather mob, that had been dismissed by the governor, and who were on their way home. On learning that he was Joseph Smith's brother they sought to kill him, but he escaped, and fled into the woods, where he was chased for a length of time by them; but, after severe fatigue, and much danger and excitement, he succeeded in escaping, and came to Carthage. He was on horseback when he arrived, and was not only very much tired with the fatigue and excitement of the chase, but was also very much distressed in feelings on account of the death of his brothers. These things produced a fever, which laid the foundation for his death, which took place on the 30th of July. Thus another of the brothers fell a victim although not directly, but indirectly to this infernal mob.

I lay from about five o'clock until two next morning without having my wounds dressed, as there was scarcely any help of any kind in Carthage, and Brother Richards was busy with the dead bodies, preparing them for removal. My wife Leonora started early the next day, having had some little trouble in getting a company or a physician to come with her; after considerable difficulty she succeeded in getting an escort, and Dr. Samuel Bennet came along with her. Soon after my father and mother arrived from Oquakie, near which place they had a farm at that time, and hearing of the trouble hastened along.

General Demming, Brigadier General of the Hancock County Militia, was very much of a gentleman, and showed me every courtesy, and Colonel Jones also was very solicitous about my welfare.

I was called upon by several gentlemen of Quincy and other places, among whom was Judge Ralston, as well as by our own people, and a medical man extracted a ball from my left thigh that was giving me much pain; it lay about half an inch deep, and my thigh was considerably swollen. The doctor asked me if I would be tied during the operation; I told him no; that I could endure the cutting associated with the operation as well without, and I did so; indeed, so great was the pain I endured that the cutting was rather a relief than otherwise.

A very laughable incident occurred at the time; my wife Leonora went into an adjoining room to pray for me, that I might be sustained during the operation. While on her knees at prayer, a Mrs. Bedell, an old lady of the Methodist association, entered, and, patting Mrs. Taylor on her back with her hand, said, "There's a good lady, pray for God to forgive your sins, pray that you may be converted, and the Lord may have mercy on your soul."

The scene was so ludicrous that Mrs. Taylor knew not whether to laugh or be angry. Mrs. Taylor informed me that Mr. Hamilton, the father of the Hamilton who kept the house, rejoiced at the murder, and said in company that "it was done up in the best possible style, and showed good generalship;" and she further believed that the other branches of the family sanctioned it. These were the associates of the old lady referred to, and yet she could talk of conversion and saving souls in the midst of blood and murder: such is man and such consistency.

The ball being extracted was the one that first struck me, which I before referred to: it entered on the outside of my left thigh, about five inches from my knee, and, passing rather obliquely towards my body, had, it would seem, struck the bone, for it was flatted out nearly as thin and large as a quarter of a dollar.

The governor passed on, staying at Carthage only a few minutes, and he did not stop until he got fifty miles from Nauvoo. There had been various opinions about the complicity of the governor in the murder, some supposing that he knew all about it, and assisted or winked at its execution. It is somewhat difficult to form a correct opinion; from the facts presented it is very certain that things looked more than suspicious against him.

In the first place, he positively knew that we had broken no law.

Secondly. He knew that the mob had not only passed inflammatory resolutions, threatening extermination to the Mormons, but that they had actually assembled armed mobs and commenced hostilities against us.

Thirdly. He took those very mobs that had been arrayed against us, and enrolled them as his troops, thus legalizing their acts.

Fourthly. He disbanded the Nauvoo Legion, which had never violated law, and disarmed them, and had about his person in the shape of militia known mobocrats and violators of the law.

Fifthly. He requested us to come to Carthage without arms, promising protection, and then refused to interfere in delivering us from prison, although Joseph and Hyrum were put there contrary to law.

Sixthly. Although he refused to interfere in our behalf, yet, when Captain Smith went to him and informed him that the persons refused to come out, he told him that he had a command and knew what to do, thus sanctioning the use of force in the violation of law when opposed to us, whereas he would not for us interpose his executive authority to free us from being incarcerated contrary to law, although he was fully informed of all the facts of the case, as we kept him posted in the affairs all the time.

Seventhly. He left the prisoners in Carthage jail contrary to his plighted faith.

Eightly. Before he went he dismissed all the troops that could be relied upon, as well as many of the mob, and left us in charge of the "Carthage Grays," a company that he knew were mobocratic, our most bitter enemies, and who had passed resolutions to exterminate us, and who had been placed under guard by General Demming only the day before.

Ninthly. He was informed of the intended murder, both before he left and while on the road, by several different parties.

Tenthly. When the cannon was fired in Carthage, signifying that the deed was done, he immediately took up his line of march and fled. How did he know that this signal portrayed their death if he was not in the secret? It may be said some of the party told him. How could he believe what the party said about the gun signal if he could not believe the testimony of several individuals who told him in positive terms about the contemplated murder?

He has, I believe, stated that he left the "Carthage Grays" there because he considered that, as their town was contiguous to ours, and as the responsibility of our safety rested solely upon them, they would not dare suffer any indignity to befall us. This very admission shows that he did really expect danger; and then he knew that these people had published to the world that they would exterminate us, and his leaving us in their hands and taking of their responsibilities was like leaving a lamb in charge of a wolf, and trusting to its humanity and honor for its safe-keeping.

It is said, again that he would not have gone to Nauvoo, and thus placed himself in the hands of the Mormons, if he had anticipated any such event, as he would be exposed to their wrath. To this it may be answered that the Mormons did not know their signals, while he did; and they were also known in Warsaw, as well as in other places; and as soon as the gun was fired, a merchant of Warsaw jumped upon his horse and rode directly to Quincy, and reported "Joseph and Hyrum killed, and those who were with them in jail." He reported further that "they were attempting to break jail, and were all killed by the guard." This was their story; it was anticipated to kill all, and the gun was to be the signal that the deed was accomplished. This was known in Warsaw. The governor also knew it and fled; and he could really be in no danger in Nauvoo, for the Mormons did not know it, and he had plenty of time to escape, which he did.

It is said that he made all his officers promise solemnly that they would help him to protect the Smiths; this may or may not be. At any rate, some of these same officers helped to murder them.

The strongest argument in the governor's favor, and one that would bear more weight with us than all the rest put together, would be that he could not believe them capable of such atrocity; and, thinking that their talk and threatenings were a mere ebullition of feeling, a kind of braggadocio, and that there was enough of good moral feeling to control the more violent passions, he trusted to their faith. There is, indeed, a degree of plausibility about this, but when we put it in juxtaposition to the amount of evidence that he was in possession of, it weighs very little. He had nothing to inspire confidence in them, and everything to make him mistrust them. Besides, why his broken faith? why his disregard of what was told him by several parties? Again, if he knew not the plan, how did he understand the signal? Why so oblivious to everything pertaining to the Mormon interest, and so alive and interested about the mobocrats? At any rate, be this as it may, he stands responsible for their blood, and it is dripping on his garments. If it had not been for his promises of protection, they would have protected themselves; it was plighted faith that led them to the slaughter; and to make the best of it, it was a breach of that faith and a non-fulfillment of that promise, after repeated warning, that led to their death.

Having said so much, I must leave the governor with my readers and with his God. Justice, I conceive, demanded this much, and truth could not be told with less; as I have said before, my opinion is that the governor would not have planned this murder, but he had not sufficient energy to resist popular opinion, even if that opinion led to blood and death.

It was rumored that a strong political party, numbering in its ranks many of the prominent men of the nation, were engaged in a plot for the overthrow of Joseph Smith, and that the governor was of this party, and Sharp, Williams, Captain Smith, and others were his accomplices, but whether this was the case or not I do not know. It is very certain that a strong political feeling existed against Joseph Smith, and I have reason to believe that his letters to Henry Clay, were made use of by political parties opposed to Mr. Clay, and were the means of that statesman's defeat. Yet, if such a combination as the one referred to existed, I am not apprised of it.

While I lay at Carthage, previous to Mrs. Taylor's arrival, a pretty good sort of a man, who was lame of a leg, waited upon me, and sat up at night with me; afterwards Mrs. Taylor, mother and others waited upon me.

Many friends called upon me, among whom were Richard Ballantyne, Elizabeth Taylor, several of the Perkins family, and a number of the brethren from Macedonia and La Harpe. Besides these, many strangers from Quincy, some of whom expressed indignant feelings against the mob and sympathy for myself. Brother Alexander Williams called upon me, who suspected that they had some designs in keeping me there, and stated that he had, at a given point in some woods, fifty men, and if I would say the word he would raise other fifty, and fetch me out of there. I thanked him, but told him I thought there was no need. However, it would seem that I was in some danger; for Colonel Jones, before referred to, when absent from me, left two loaded pistols on the table in case of an attack, and some time afterward, when I had recovered and was publishing the affair, a lawyer, Mr. Backman, stated that he had prevented a man by the name of Jackson, before referred to, from ascending the stairs, who was coming with a design to murder me, and that now he was sorry he had not let him do the deed.

There were others also, of whom I heard, that said I ought to be killed, and they would do it, but that it was too damned cowardly to shoot a wounded man; and thus, by the chivalry of murderers, I was prevented from being a second time mutilated or killed. Many of the mob, came around and treated me with apparent respect, and the officers and people generally looked upon me as a hostage, and feared that my removal would be the signal for the rising of the Mormons.

I do not remember the time that I stayed at Carthage, but I think three or four days after the murder, when Brother Marks with a carriage, Brother James Allred with a wagon, Dr. Ells, and a number of others on horseback, came for the purpose of taking me to Nauvoo. I was very weak at the time, occasioned by the loss of blood and the great discharge of my wounds, so when my wife asked me if I could talk I could barely whisper, no. Quite a discussion arose as to the propriety of my removal, the physician and people of Carthage protesting that it would be my death, while my friends were anxious for my removal if possible.

I suppose the former were actuated by the above-named desire to keep me. Colonel Jones was, I believe, sincere; he had acted as a friend all the time, and he told Mrs. Taylor she ought to persuade me not to go, for he did not believe I had strength enough to reach Nauvoo. It was finally agreed, however, that I should go; but it was thought that I could not stand riding in a wagon or carriage, they prepared a litter for me; I was carried down stairs and put upon it. A number of men assisted to carry me, some of whom had been engaged in the mob. As soon as I got down stairs, I felt much better and strengthened, so that I could talk; I suppose the effect of the fresh air.

When we got near the outside of the town I remembered some woods that we had to go through, and telling a person near to call for Dr. Ells, who was riding a very good horse, I said, "Doctor, I perceive that the people are getting fatigued with carrying me; a number of Mormons live about two or three miles from here, near our route, will you ride to their settlement as quick as possible, and have them come and meet us?" He started off on a gallop immediately. My object in this was to obtain protection in case of an attack, rather than to obtain help to carry me.

Very soon after the men from Carthage made one excuse after another until they had all left, and I felt glad to get rid of them. I found that the tramping of those carrying me produced violent pain, and a sleigh was produced and attached to the hind end of Brother James Allred's wagon, a bed placed upon it, and I propped up on the bed. Mrs. Taylor rode with me, applying ice and ice-water to my wounds. As the sleigh was dragged over the grass on the prairie, which was quite tall, it moved very easy and gave me very little pain.

When I got within five or six miles of Nauvoo the brethren commenced to meet me from the city, and they increased in number as we drew nearer, until there was a very large company of people of all ages and both sexes, principally, however, men.

For some time there had been almost incessant rain, so that in many low places on the prairie it was from one to three feet deep in water, and at such places the brethren whom we met took hold of the sleigh, lifted it, and carried it over the water; and when we arrived in the neighborhood of the city, where the roads were excessively muddy and bad, the brethren tore down the fences, and we passed through the fields.

Never shall I forget the difference of feeling that I experienced between the place that I had left and the one that I had now arrived at. I had left a lot of reckless, bloodthirsty murderers, and had come to the City of the Saints, the people of the living God; friends of truth and righteousness, thousands of whom stood there with warm, true hearts to offer their friendship and services, and to welcome my return. It is true it was a painful scene, and brought sorrowful remembrance to mind, but to me it caused a thrill of joy to find myself once more in the bosom of my friends, and to meet with the cordial welcome of true, honest hearts. What was very remarkable, I found myself very much better after my arrival at Nauvoo than I was when I started on my journey, although I had travelled eighteen miles.

The next day as some change was wanting, I told Mrs. Taylor that if she could send to Dr. Richards, he had my purse and watch, and they would find money in my purse.

Previous to the doctor leaving Carthage, I told him that he had better take my purse and watch, for I was afraid the people would steal them. The doctor had taken my pantaloons' pocket, and put the watch in it with the purse, cut off the pocket, and tied a string around the top; it was in this position when brought home. My family, however, were not a little startled to find that my watch had been struck with a ball. I sent for my vest, and, upon examination, it was found that there was a cut as if with a knife, in the vest pocket which had contained my watch. In the pocket the fragments of the glass were found literally ground to powder. It then occurred to me that a ball had struck me at the time I felt myself falling out of the window, and that it was this force that threw me inside. I had often remarked to Mrs. Taylor the singular fact of finding myself inside the room, when I felt a moment before after being shot, that I was falling out, and I never could account for it until then; but here the thing was fully elucidated, and was rendered plain to my mind. I was indeed falling out, when some villain aimed at my heart. The ball struck my watch, and forced me back; if I had fallen out I should assuredly have been killed, if not by the fall, by those around, and this ball intended to dispatch me, was turned by an overruling Providence into a messenger of mercy, and saved my life. I shall never forget the feelings of gratitude that I then experienced towards my Heavenly Father; the whole scene was vividly portrayed before me, and my heart melted before the Lord. I felt that the Lord had preserved me by a special act of mercy; that my time had not yet come, and that I had still a work to perform upon the earth.

                            (Signed),

                                                       JOHN TAYLOR.

Footnotes

1. See his remarks as contained in his History of Illinois, page 269.

2. Ford's History of Illinois, page 246.

3. Deseret News, No. 29, Sept. 23, 1857, p. 226.

4. Ford's History of Illinois, page 330, 331.

5. Deseret News, No. 30, September 30, 1857, page 233.

6. Ford's History of Illinois, page 333.

7. The Deseret News gives the following account of Joseph and Hyrum Smith's passing through the troops in Carthage:

"CARTHAGE, June 25, 1844.

"Quarter past nine. The governor came and invited Joseph to walk with him through the troops. Joseph solicited a few moments' private conversation with him, which the governor refused.

"While refusing, the governor looked down at his shoes, as though he was ashamed. They then walked through the crowd, with Brigadier General Miner R. Demming, and Dr. Richards, to General Demming's quarters. The people appeared quiet until a company of Carthage Grays flocked round the doors of General Demming in an uproarious manner, of which notice was sent to the governor. In the meantime the governor had ordered the McDonough troops to be drawn up in line, for Joseph and Hyrum to pass in front of them, they having requested that they might have a clear view of the General Smiths. Joseph had a conversation with the governor for about ten minutes, when he again pledged the faith of the State that he and his friends should be protected from violence.

"Robinson, the postmaster, said, on report of martial law being proclaimed in Nauvoo, he had stopped the mail, and notified the postmaster general of the state of things in Hancock County.

"From the general's quarters Joseph and Hyrum went in front of the lines, in a hollow square of a company of Carthage Grays. At seven minutes before ten they arrived in front of the lines, and passed before the whole, Joseph being on the right of General Demming and Hyrum on his left, Elders Richards, Taylor and Phelps following. Joseph and Hyrum were introduced by Governor Ford about twenty times along the line as General Joseph Smith and General Hyrum Smith, the governor walking in front on the left. The Carthage Grays refused to receive them by that introduction, and some of the officers threw up their hats, drew their swords, and said they would introduce themselves to the damned Mormons in a different style. The governor mildly entreated them not to act so rudely, but their excitement increased; the governor, however, succeeded in pacifying them by making a speech, and promising them that they should have 'full satisfaction.' General Smith and party returned to their lodgings at five minutes past ten."--Deseret News, No. 35, Nov. 4, 1857, page 274.

8. Deseret News, No. 38, Nov. 25, 1857, p. 297.
