When I received the May 1998 A Liahona (Portuguese) and read the article “What Should We Be Searching For in the Scriptures?” I felt a strong desire to feast on the scriptures and feed my spirit. Feasting on the scriptures has made my love for the gospel grow. It has increased my testimony and helped me know more what my Heavenly Father would have me do.

Elsa Soto,
Indianopolis Ward, São Paulo Brazil Santo Amaro Stake

How exciting it is to read the Liahona (Spanish) from month to month. It’s a very rewarding way to nourish our spirits. The magazine is excellent for everyone—whether they are members of the Church or not. It is a great blessing to be able to depend on it.

Our family would like to encourage other members to subscribe and to buy a gift subscription for another family or a friend, so they, too, will have the opportunity to experience the magazine’s spiritual lift. It is available in 37 languages.

We and the other members of the first Spanish branch in Minnesota are very happy to learn that a small temple will be built in our area!

Pedro and Adriana Pinner family,
Twin Cities First (Spanish) Branch, Anoka Minnesota Stake

Editors’ note: To subscribe to any of the 37 language editions of the International Magazine, see the subscription information at the [beginning of the year] or contact your local Church distribution center or ward or branch leader.

Now that our family lives in Utah, we are even more eager for the Liahona (Spanish) to arrive every month. It is a link connecting us to our language and to other members living in different parts of the world. It reminds us that color, race, culture, and language must not separate us from others; we are all striving each day to be worthy of the beautiful blessings Heavenly Father has given us.

Martina González de Fernández,
BYU 102nd Ward, BYU Sixth Stake

Editors’ note: The above letter was the first we received from a subscriber via e-mail. We are excited to take advantage of this new technology, and we invite our readers to e-mail comments and suggestions to us at CUR-Liahona-IMag@ldschurch.org. We can also be reached by regular mail at International Magazine, 50 East North Temple Street, Floor 24, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3223, USA. Please continue to send photographs by regular mail.
