WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE.

BY W. A. SUTLIFFE.

Come, say the Ave-Mary prayer. And chant the Miserere! The autumn frosts have chilled the air, The winter groweth dreary! The willow, bending o'er the tomb, Moans dolefully for ever,— The north-wind bloweth in the gloom, The morning cometh never!

Avaunt, thou memory, springing up Like demon bold uprising! Full cold and bitter is our cup, Nor needeth thine apprising! The Future glimmereth in the dark, We hear the billows roaring, The wind beleaguereth our barque, The storm will soon be pouring.

Of all the visions of our youth, The mind is disenchanted; When manhood sternly paints the truth, The soul is sadly haunted. The sun is sepulchred of night, The flower in autumn bendeth; Fair fruitfulness has soonest blight— All beauty graveward tendeth.

The world is petrified at heart, No sympathy is welling; Each plays in mine his soulless part, Too woful 'tis for telling. Then say the Ave-Mary prayer, And chant the Miserere! The autumn frosts have chilled the air— The winter groweth dreary!

Bethink ye that He made ye all! The same God bends above ye! The same God spreads the light or pall, The same God deigns to love ye! The wind that blows the cultured lea. And through the rich man's hedges, Sighs round the poor man pleasantly, And o'er the barren ledges.

The rich go up on Fortune's wheel. The poor are crushed beneath it; Oppression draws the bloody steal, Alas, when will she sheathe it! Then say the Ave-Mary prayer, And chant the Miserere! The autumn frosts have chilled the air, The winter groweth dreary!

The beldame sitteth at her loom, She weepeth 'mid the weaving; The orphan lingers at the tomb, He's mickle cause for grieving. The dust is laid with dropping tears; The slave cowers 'neath the scourging; Each day is filled with busy fears, Like restless spirits urging.

O, God! within the Heaven unseen! When will the sun be shining; Until the spring-time cometh green, Forgive us for our pining! Then say the Ave-Mary prayer, And chant the Miserere! The autumn frosts have chilled the air, The winter groweth dreary!
