The Editor's Page By President David O. McKay

TRUTH AND HONESTY

"...For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. (Luke 12:48.)

ONCE while visiting one of our outlying stakes the president of the stake was called from the dinner table to the telephone, and this conversation followed, one part of which I heard and one part of which was reported to me later:

"Do you know," said the stranger, a non-member of the Church, to the president of the stake, "do you know Mr.—?"

"Yes."

"Is he a member of your Church?"

"He is."

"Well, is he in good standing in your Church?"

"Yes."

"All right; thank you. He is here in our office desiring to borrow some money to make an investment. He referred us to you, and said he was a member of your Church. If he is in good standing, we will lend him the money."

My heart rejoiced, and it rejoices today that in honesty and integrity the Church of Jesus Christ is a "light set upon a hill." We grieve most deeply when we hear of a member who forgets himself and destroys, by his dishonesty, that confidence.

Jesus the Christ lived a life of truth. Men have called him an enthusiast; they have accused him of being a dreamer, an ascetic, a recluse, and other such epithets have they hurled at him, but they are loath ever to say that Christ, the Redeemer, was dishonest or untrue. His life was a life of honesty, honor, uprightness.

He was drawn to men who were honest themselves, whose hearts were pure and guileless. Witness how quickly he saw purity and guilelessness in Nathanael. "Behold," said he, "an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile." (John 1:47.) Their souls attracted each other as two drops of morning dew fall together on the same flower. So the purity of Christ seemed to absorb, to attract the purity of Nathanael. Nathanael was honest and upright, as a follower of Christ should be. No guileless man can stoop to chicanery and fraud, deceiving a brother. Christ's life and his teachings always bore testimony to the truth.

In our day, the Lord has said, through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "For God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round." (D. & C. 3:2.) To the Latter-day Saints, as God's people, he has declared that one of the fundamental principles of their belief is honesty and truthfulness. I rejoice in repeating our thirteenth Article of Faith.

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:16.) In probably no more effective way can the truth be witnessed before men than for every Latter-day Saint to maintain and foster the confidence of all men everywhere. Now, in order to do that we must be honest in all things. If we are contractors, and agree to put certain materials into a building, let us put that material in. If we agree to the stipulations of a contract, let us live up to what we agree. Such things may be only "details," but they are the "details" by which the men with whom we deal will judge our actions.

If we are taking potatoes of a particular grade to market, and we so describe that grade, let us know that an investigation will prove our statements to be true. I was grieved when once I heard a wholesale dealer say that he had opened sacks of produce brought in from the farm and found foreign material, such as rocks and dirt, placed in to make up weight. I did not ask him for the religion of those men; I asked for no name; but such things are dishonorable, and no true member of the Church of Jesus Christ can stoop to such trickery.

In this world today there needs to be an ensign, a people standing out in bold relief as an example to the world in honesty and fair dealing. I will not condemn the world, but to illustrate what I mean, I shall let a reverend gentleman give his opinion. I quote from Mr. Jefferson, author of The Character of Jesus. Speaking of the insincerity of the world, he says:

"And yet how common insincerity is. What a miserable old humbug of a world we are living in, full of trickery and dishonesty, and deceit of every kind. Society is cursed with affectation, business is honeycombed with dishonesty. The political world abounds in duplicity and chicanery. There is sham, and pretense, and humbuggery everywhere. Some use big words we do not understand, and some will claim to knowledge which they do not have, and some parade in dresses which they cannot pay for; the life of many a man and many a woman is one colossal lie. We say things which we do not mean; express emotions which we do not feel; we praise when we secretly condemn; we smile when there is a frown on the face of the heart; we give compliments when we are really thinking curses, striving a hundred times a week to make people think we are other than we are. It is a penitentiary offense to obtain money under false pretenses;... But how many other things are obtained, do you think, by shamming and pretending, for which there is no penalty but the condemnation of Almighty God. Yes, it is a sad, deceitful, demoralized world in the midst of which we find ourselves; but thank God there are hearts, here and there, upon which we can ever more depend. We have tested them, and we know them to be true." (The Character of Jesus, Charles. Edward Jefferson, New York, 1908, pp. 57-58.)

Such hearts as he mentions at the last must be found everywhere in the Church of Jesus Christ, if we believe—not just think, "believe" must be stronger than "think"—if "we believe in being honest, true, chaste," and accept it as part of our lives, that our acts may so shine among men. And there is one reason deeper than this: because it is right and is the only way to live.

May we be honest in all our dealings; be true to ourselves; never be false to our honest convictions; be true to the Church of Jesus Christ; be true to the testimonies we possess. God help us in this, and in all worthy things, to bear witness to the truth.
