“What does ‘Families Are Forever’ mean?” Mia asked. She moved her game piece across the board. She and her best friend, Zoey, were playing a game in Zoey’s living room. On the wall was a picture that said, “Families Are Forever.” Mia liked the sound of that.

“It means that even after you die, you’re still a family,” Zoey explained. She put down a card and moved her game piece.

Mia looked around the room. It looked normal. There were couches, tables, pillows, and a TV. But Zoey’s house felt different from her own. “Do you have a forever family?” Mia asked.

Zoey looked up from the game with a smile. “Yes! My mom and dad were married in the temple. So we can be together forever.”

“Is that why your house feels different?” Mia asked.

Zoey looked confused. “Different?”

Mia didn’t know how to explain the feeling in Zoey’s house. It was happy and warm. But that sounded silly to say. “Never mind,” she said. “Let’s keep playing.”

That night Mia couldn’t stop thinking about Zoey’s forever family. She loved the feeling in Zoey’s house. Mia’s family was going to move to Ontario, Canada, in a few days. She wondered how their new house would feel.

“Mom, Zoey’s house feels so happy,” Mia said as Mom tucked her into bed. “I want our new house to feel like that.” Mia thought about how much she loved Mom, Dad, and her little brothers. “I want our family to be forever too.”

Mom listened quietly. Then she said, “I do too.”

The next day, Mom called Zoey’s mom. She found out that Zoey’s family went to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

“I want to go to that church,” Mia told her parents while they packed. Their house was almost empty now.

“Zoey’s mom said she could help us find a church building,” Dad said as he taped up a box.

Mia smiled and felt a flutter in her stomach. Maybe their new house could feel as warm and happy as Zoey’s!

Once they were settled in their new house, Mia’s family started going to church. The people there were very nice. Everyone called each other “Brother” and “Sister.” Mia went to Primary with her little brothers. She loved singing songs and reading the scriptures.

Soon two young women came to Mia’s house. Their names were Sister Justin and Sister Ramos, and they were missionaries. They told Mia’s family about Heavenly Father, Jesus, and the Book of Mormon. Mia loved hearing about the gospel. Even her brothers sat quietly and listened!

Mia told Sister Ramos and Sister Justin about Zoey’s house. “I want a forever family like Zoey’s.”

“Heavenly Father wants all of us to have forever families,” Sister Ramos said with a big smile. “He wants us to be happy.”

Soon Mia’s family decided to be baptized.

Zoey and her family drove all the way to Ontario for the baptisms. A year later, they came back again. This time it was because Mia and her family were being sealed in the temple!

The day of the sealing, Mia stood outside the temple with her family, dressed in white. They were all smiling from ear to ear. Mia felt warm and peaceful inside. “We’re a forever family now!” she said happily.

“That’s right,” Dad said. “We’re a forever family.”
