Reed H. Blake, Twenty-four Hours to Martyrdom ( 1973)

The Last Afternoon

12:00 Noon

About two thousand men of the Nauvoo Legion turned out to parade. The number included only those men living within the city limits of Nauvoo and none of the Legion's cohorts from any of the other smaller towns of north Hancock County. Of these two thousand men, nearly all were armed, the men having brought to the drill their private arms from home.

108Upon facing the Legion for the first time, Captain Singleton was visibly astonished at its size and the number of arms carried. Particularly the arms, for the state arms had been taken from the Legion three days past. Turning to his aide, the captain spoke of his surprise, concluding, "It would not do to come against such as this."

108The review had hardly begun when a messenger from Carthage arrived and gave Singleton a communication from the Governor. This ordered the immediate dismissal within the county of all troops, except a small escort force of Augusta dragoons with the Governor, Captain Singleton's small command of McDonough troops in Nauvoo, and the two Carthage companies to guard the county jail.

108The Nauvoo Legion was accordingly disbanded.

109The town of Carthage behind him, John S. Fullmer left the road to Nauvoo and cut across the prairie to the city of the Saints. Earlier in the day it had taken him just thirty minutes-from the time he left the jail until the time he returned-to get a pass from the Governor, and he wondered why Jones was having such difficulty in obtaining one. Prior to his leaving the jail, he had left his single-shot pistol with the Prophet-the one the Prophet later gave to Hyrum-and was happy he had done so, for on his return from seeing the Governor he had been given a thorough search. He had spent the remainder of the morning in the upstairs room, but after the departure of Wheelock and Mills it was decided that he, too, should assist in gathering witnesses for the trial. It would take the better part of the day to reach Nauvoo, which would only leave about a day and a half in which to gather witnesses and return to Carthage.

109Putting spur to his horse, he eased the animal into a rocking lope. He had hopes of catching Wheelock and Mills somewhere between Golden's Point and Big Mound.

109Warsaw was behind them seven miles when the order to disband reached the forces of Colonel Levi Williams. They arrived at noon at some deserted shanties that had been built and abandoned during the flurry of public works in 1838, the unstableness of which had contributed to the hard times, as they were known. The courier was David Mathews, but the officers' warm greeting to this well-known Warsaw citizen soon faded before the news of the Governor's order.

109The troops reacted instantly. Most of them were angered at having their "Nauvoo picnic" cut short by Ford, and the Chief Executive was soon cast in the same die as the Mormons.

109Some, now they were disbanded, left promptly, saying they could be home by supper. In minutes Captain Grover found himself without a company.

109After the order had been read, Captain Mark Aldrich began calling for volunteers-to go not to Nauvoo, but to Carthage. His speech did not generate much enthusiasm, and the companyless Grover took over, calling the men to action, and shouting, "We're not going to be made the tools and puppets of Tommy Ford. We'll go to Carthage and see the boys about it and talk things over!"

110The surgeon-general, Charles Hay, denounced the move and started for Warsaw. Others followed.

110As Aldrich and Grover spoke, Thomas Sharp could see the expedition crumbling slowly before his eyes. The men still left to them were shifting, murmuring in the ranks. Once the movement to return gained momentum it wouldn't stop, and save for a few there would be no Warsaw militia left to command. The thought hit him hard. Sensing the need for a voice of authority, he weaved the big bay to the head of the men and spoke from the saddle where he would be above them, the position enhancing his stand against a dissenter. Then, to enforce his position, he called the men to their feet and formed them back into ranks. Known as a "spirited and impressive talker," Sharp launched into a speech and soon won over the men. When he called for a vote of those who would go on to Carthage, he got a good show of hands.

110While they were thus assembled, a second courier appeared at the shanties. He delivered a note from Lt. Worrell of the Greys. The communication said the time was at hand for the killing, that the jail was guarded by eight Greys with blanks in their arms, that the guards would offer only token resistance.

110Now Sharp found a sizeable force about him. Of the four captains, only Davis, the Illinois state senator who liked the Mormon vote, was hesitant about the matter. If the plot failed, he would lose the Mormon bloc; if he didn't support the movement at hand, and it succeeded, he would lose the anti-Mormon vote.

110When asked to speak on the matter, he declined, and his troops went over to Grover, whose earlier command was trailing back to Warsaw.

111To one side, Calvin Cole, the Warsaw tavernkeeper, was sitting in his wagon, and Davis, not wanting to have a complete falling out with his fellow citizens, went to the wagon and climbed up beside the driver. Cole, one of the chief conspirators against the Prophet, was following the troops to Nauvoo as a spectator. The two men followed the Warsaw force at a distance.

111Some of the troops who had not left with the first party, yet were still reluctant to forgo the mobbing, now turned back to Warsaw.

111With six runners sent south to stop the twenty men on their way to kill the Prophet at Carthage, the march was resumed.

111Of the original four companies of Warsaw militiamen, only about half, or less than two hundred men, now remained. As they plodded along, the sun now to their backs, they chanted new words to a camp-meeting hymn known on the frontier as the "Hebrew Children":

111"Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Safe in Carthage Jail!"

111Dr. Southwick, who had been down on the town square most of the morning, returned to the jail. He and the Prophet conversed for a short time, and when Southwick was to leave again the Prophet gave him a note addressed to Governor Ford or General Deming. It requested that Dr. Southwick, the visitor from Louisiana and Texas, be given a pass.

111It was 12:55 P.M.

1:00 p.m.

The afternoon in Carthage came warm and humid. And quiet, except for the spatters of sound from the courthouse square.

112At 1:15 Jailer Stigall called that dinner was ready. Only Taylor and Markham went down. Mrs. Stigall was standing in the dining-room doorway that went outside, fanning herself. Her hair, done up in a bun, hung down in moist strings about her face and neck. She smiled as she started the food around and said she hoped the men would enjoy the meal.

112Afterwards, Taylor and Markham visited with the Stigalls for a few minutes. The jailer told of the new reports circulating. And Mrs. Stigall added still others which she had heard. The two Mormons seemed dismayed at the accounts-particularly the number of speculations about. Indeed, as Hancock County, caught in an ambiguous situation, made attempts to derive a meaningful interpretation of it by pooling their social resources, it had come to the point where, as Alexander Pope wrote in "The Temple of Fame":

112"The flying rumours gathr'd as they roll'd, Scarce any tale was sooner heard than told; And all who told it added something new, And all who heard it made enlargements too."

112On arriving upstairs following their visit, the two men found Richards on the bed. His color was gone and he was breathing heavily. As they entered, the Prophet said, "Brother Markham, as you have a pass from the Governor to go in and out of the jail, go and get the doctor something to settle his stomach."

112Taking his horse from the pasture, Markham proceeded up Walnut Street. Shortly, others of the jailhouse yard gathered their mounts and followed. Behind them, Lieutenant Worrell again regarded the second-story windows. Step four was nearly completed.

112It was a quarter to two when Markham went inside the mercantile that was also the apothecary. On coming out a few minutes later he found his horse surrounded by several Greys and mobbers, and one man, not in uniform, named Stewart, shouted, "Old man, you have got to leave town in five minutes!"

113"I shall not do it," Markham returned, and pushed his way to his horse.

113On that, several of the Greys hoisted him to his saddle-some reports have it he was stabbed in the leg several times-and at bayonet's point escorted him from Carthage. They did not leave him until he was well on his way to Nauvoo.

2:00 p.m.

At the foot of the town square on South Main Street, the McDonough County militia was forming. Their services being no longer called for in Carthage and his men being anxious to return to their farming, Captain John Lawn was attempting to muster his disbanded troops for a march home.

113Around him the clatter of the Greys as they strove to amuse themselves between the serious duty of drills, and the noise of others in the square, connected or unconnected with those in bivouac, hindered Lawn's efforts at organization, and he sent up a message to the Greys asking that the racket cease for a few moments while he called the roll.

113His was a foot company, and while the Mormon expedition had offered little to be gained of either honor or profit, Lawn had had little difficulty in assembling a full company of men to walk to Carthage. For some years now the times had been hard. Money was scarce-except that of broken banks-and failure, he noted, seemed to follow every attempt at industrial or commercial enterprise. While no one was starving-living was cheap, as the farmers could not sell their produce at remunerative rates-the unemployed were always looking for an outlet for their energy. To these, a military expedition offered the certainty of chance and the hope of advancement.

114War, mused the captain, is always popular under the pressure of bad times.

114With the roll call completed, the captain commenced the trek east. Minutes earlier he had paid a farewell visit to the Mormon leader. It was not his custom to pay such visits, yet to this man he had felt compelled to do so. As in their previous meetings, the Prophet was cordial, and Lawn had enjoyed his minutes spent in the jail. During the stay, Joseph had read to him the fifty-fifth Psalm, saying to him that he should remember that chapter, that on his arrival home it should be read to his friends.

114"Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my supplication. Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise; because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me. My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon me. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me. And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest. Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.

114"I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest. Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and strife in the city. Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her streets. For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him. But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.

114"Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them. As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me. Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice. He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me.

115"God shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old. Selah.

115"Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he hath broken his covenant. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.

115"Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in thee."

115It was a scene Lawn would long remember. The room was hushed. All were motionless. The Prophet closed the book. And as he had done so the guard at the door crossed the room, took it from his hands, and continued:

115"Hear my cry, O God; attend unto my prayer. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I. For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah.

115"For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name. Thou wilt prolong the king's life: and his years as many generations. He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him. So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows."

115It was the sixty-first Psalm.

115On taking his leave of the prisoners, Lawn had given his hand to each, and when he reached the Prophet, he had received his blessing and heard him say: "Farewell, Captain Lawn; when you and your men leave me my life guard is gone."

116Now the captain turned in his saddle and looked back at Carthage. Behind his company the grass moved before the breeze toward the trees that edged the town.

116He could not see the jail.

3:00 p.m.

It was near the mid-hour of three when Governor Ford and his company entered the city of Nauvoo. Going directly to the Mansion House, the Governor announced he wanted an immediate assemblage of the citizens. The message was given to Captain Singleton, who carried it to the people.

116During this time, the Prophet's wife, Emma, provided the Governor and his officers with a suite of rooms on the second floor of the Mansion. Here they could wash themselves and rest until the four o'clock meeting. In one of the rooms was quartered Orrin Porter Rockwell, the Prophet's personal bodyguard and, in that day before the gunfighter, the best shot along the upper Mississippi. Two days before, he had been making preparation to join the Prophet in Carthage when he received the message-carried by those who had been released on bail on the twenty-fifth-that he was "not to come to Carthage, but to stay in Nauvoo, and not to suffer himself to be delivered into the hands of his enemies, or to be taken prisoner by anyone." It was sent by the Prophet after he had seen the situation in Carthage.

116From across the street came the sound of carpenters at work. It was upon the frame of a new building that men were now nailing a platform from which the Governor could deliver his address to the people.

116Now Emma informed Rockwell that his room was temporarily occupied by the Governor's staff, and should the Governor elect to remain overnight, as he had been invited to do, she would have to move him to another room. Rockwell agreed, and since he too would soon be going outside to hear the Governor's speech, he went to the room to get his hat.

117As he opened the door, all in the room were sitting quietly except for one man standing behind a chair talking. While in the act of dropping his hand from an uplifted position, the man said, "The deed is done before this time." Then he saw Rockwell and went silent.

117Ford and the others turned to look at the intruder, who in turn nodded, took his hat from the tree, and left.

117As he descended the stairs, Rockwell considered what the man had said and the reaction of those in the room to his hearing it-but it would be several hours before he would understand the full import of its meaning.

117Outside, the people were gathering to hear the Governor's address.

117Miner R. Deming held the rank of brigadier-general in the Hancock County militia and commanded the Carthage Riflemen. The general was also known as a Jack-Mormon. He disliked much of what he saw in Carthage and was often open about this dislike. It was for this reason, he felt, that the Governor had left him in charge of both companies in Carthage, the Riflemen and the old independent company of Carthage Greys.

117Soon, however, he found himself deserted by his own men-those who did not want to take part in the proposed assassination-and others of the Greys who even now were moving their families out of the county for fear that as an outcome all would be attacked by the Mormons.

117General Deming questioned the advisability of his staying in Carthage longer. His life had been threatened, and those troops upon whom he could rely had left him. What could he now as one man do? He mounted his horse and rode home to his farm a few miles outside of Carthage.

118Looking out the window of his hotel, Artois Hamilton was aware that the town of Carthage had suddenly quieted. His wife was aware of it too; and although they hadn't spoken much about the Mormon trouble, he knew she was mindful of what could happen to the Smiths. The talk in the hotel had been free and it had been loud. He looked over to his wife, and to his surprise she smiled.

118He walked out of the hotel and into the street.

4:00 p.m.

The depression of spirits that so often precedes calamitous events in the lives of men now permeated the second-floor bedroom at Carthage jail. Most noticeable was this with the Prophet. As the afternoon wore on he became less talkative, often retiring to the side where he would be lost to the group.

118Although no mention was made of it, each of the four men felt the ominous loss of their companions and their isolation of the past few hours.

118Markham had left for medicine and never returned. Wheelock and Mills, and later Fullmer, had gone to Nauvoo for witnesses. Jones had gone to Quincy. Babbitt had disappeared. Earlier they had said goodbye to Greene and Phelps. Their friend Southwick, the doctor from Texas, had not been heard from since leaving for a pass at noon. Their principal lawyer, Woods, had left for Nauvoo in the late morning, and his associate Reid had not been seen since the two's visit. Perhaps he, too, had gone to Nauvoo.

118Since arriving in Carthage, they had received a steady stream of visitors. Now suddenly there were none.

118The four sat listlessly about the room with their coats off. The afternoon heat was oppressive; they had opened the windows wide to receive such breeze as might be stirring.

119There had been a song recently introduced to Nauvoo, and now softly from his place near the table, John Taylor began singing the ballad.

THE POOR WAYFARING MAN OF GRIEF

119A poor wayfaring man of grief Had often crossed me on my way, Who sued so humbly for relief That I could never answer, Nay.

119I had not power to ask his name; Whither he went or whence he came; Yet there was something in his eye That won my love, I knew not why.

119Once, when my scanty meal was spread, He entered-not a word he spake! Just perishing for want of bread; I gave him all; he blessed it, brake,

119And ate, but gave me part again; Mine was an angel's portion then, For while I fed with eager haste, The crust was manna to my taste

119I spied him where a fountain burst, Clear from the rock-his strength was gone, The heedless water mock'd his thirst, He heard it, saw it hurrying on.

119I ran and raised the suff'rer up; Thrice from the stream he drain'd my cup, Dipp'd, and returned it running o'er; I drank and never thirsted more.

119'Twas night, the floods were out, it blew A winter hurricane aloof; I heard his voice, abroad, and flew To bid him welcome to my roof.

120I warmed, I clothed, I cheered my guest, I laid him on my couch to rest; Then made the earth my bed, and seem'd In Eden's garden while I dream'd.

120Stripp'd, wounded, beaten nigh to death, I found him by the highway side; I rous'd his pulse, brought back his breath, Revived his spirit, and supplied

120Wine, oil, refreshment-he was heal'd; I had myself a wound conceal'd; But from that hour forgot the smart, And peace bound up my broken heart.

120In pris'n I saw him next-condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemmed, And honored him 'mid shame and scorn.

120My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked, if I for him would die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, "I will!"

120Then in a moment to my view, The stranger started from disguise: The tokens in his hands I knew, The Savior stood before mine eyes.

120He spake-and my poor name he named- "Of me thou hast not been asham'd; These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

120When he had first begun to sing, Taylor did so with a thought to cheer the Prophet, but as he neared the end the pathetic words and the plaintive tune were all in all too much in accordance with their feelings.

120After a lapse of several minutes, Hyrum asked that he again sing the song, and Taylor replied, "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing."

121"Oh, never mind," returned Hyrum, "commence singing, and you will get the spirit of it."

121Taylor sang the song a second time.

121When Thomas Sharp had called for a show of support, William Daniels' hand did not go up. He was tired and would have returned to Warsaw with the first group if there had been reason to return or the distance not so great. With the march to Nauvoo out, he could see little personal gain in going to Carthage to kill two men he didn't know. And so he waited until Colonel Levi Williams, with Sharp, Aldrich, and Grover-the wagon with Calvin Cole and Jacob Davis trailing behind-had led the Warsaw boys into the distance.

121Presently he was alone, those bent on Carthage departing quickly and those returning to Warsaw shouldering their arms and dogging back across the prairie in small, strung-out groups.

121Perhaps it was that Carthage was now a nearby town, or perhaps it was the new focus of attention upon it; at any rate, Daniels had started for it and after walking for a few miles was surprised at not seeing somewhere ahead of him the Warsaw troops.

121Upon reaching the view of the city, he now caught sight of the Warsaw boys, and their course of march puzzled him-they were behind him and off to the north.

121As he approached the village, he could see the jail on the northwest edge of Carthage.

121It was moving toward the hour of five. Governor Ford, flanked on each side by the military, took the platform across the street from the Mansion House in Nauvoo. Spread before him were hundreds of the city populace. He drew himself upright and waited.

122There were the usual craning of necks, the shouts of "down in front," the shifting for a better position to see. When his audience was quiet, Ford began.

122For most of those assembled, it was their first opportunity to see and hear their Governor. But both what the chief executive said and how he said it offended them.

122Ford commenced by stating how and in what their functionaries had violated the law; he reviewed the reports circulating against them, and said that, whether these were true or false, they were generally believed by the people; he informed the citizens that if they attempted to right the situation by force, either openly or by secret organization, public force would destroy them and he as governor would be powerless to intervene.

122Said Ford: "A great crime has been done by destroying the Expositor press and placing the city under martial law, and a severe atonement must be made, so prepare your minds for the emergency. Another cause of excitement is the fact of your having so many firearms. The public is afraid you are going to use them against government. I know there is a great prejudice against you on account of your peculiar religion, but you ought to be praying Saints, not military Saints. Depend upon it, a little more misbehavior from the citizens, and the torch, which is already lighted, will be applied, and the city may be reduced to ashes, and extermination would inevitably follow; and it gives me great pain to think that there is danger of so many innocent women and children being exterminated. If anything of a serious character should befall the lives or property of the persons who are prosecuting your leaders, you will be held responsible."

122Ford reported that during the address "some impatience and resentment were manifested by the Mormons at the recital of the various reports enumerated concerning them, which they strenuously and indignantly denied to be true. They claimed to be a law-abiding people, and insisted that as they looked to the law alone for their protection, so were they careful themselves to observe its provisions."

123At the conclusion of his address, the Governor asked for a show of support, and, he reported, "the vote was unanimous."

123Of the last hour, Willard Richards remembered different things. The guard mount was changed at four, with eight new men coming up from the main body camped on the square a quarter of a mile away. Joseph talked with the new guard on the landing about his persecutors, and Richards remembered distinctly the Prophet mentioning Joseph H. Jackson and William and Wilson Law. Hyrum sat at the table and selected Josephus' Antiquity of the Jews from which he read aloud, and later, he and Richards conversed with one another until a few minutes past the hour of five. John Taylor, after singing the song a second time, stood at the edge of the east window and looked out across a nearby pasture where several horses were feeding.

123Periodically Joseph had expressed his wish to talk to the Saints-as if he had something important to tell them before he left them-and after he returned from the landing he remarked again of this desire.
