Gordon B. Hinckley, What of the Mormons? ( 1947)

The Mormons Today A CONTEMPORARY PICTURE

1

Who Are They?

MORMON is a nickname for a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Just as converts to the Church of Christ in the first century came to be called Christians, so in the nineteenth century those who professed belief in the Book of Mormon were called Mormons. The title has remained, and there has been little disposition to change it although it is gradually giving way to the name, Latter-day Saint.

This also calls for a word of explanation. "Saint" is to be interpreted not with the meaning that has evolved from the traditions and practices of Roman Catholicism, but rather in the general sense in which Paul used it when writing to those who had accepted membership in the early church. For the Mormons regard themselves as saints only in the sense that they are believers in Jesus Christ and members of his church.

Protestants or Catholics?

They are generally classed as Protestants, since they are not Catholics. Actually they are no closer to Protestantism than they are to Catholicism. Neither historically, nor on the basis of modern association, theology, or practice can they be grouped with either. The movement did not arise out of dissension with any Christian denomination. Nor did it result from

Stratford Ward, Salt Lake City

Wilshire Ward, Los Angeles

In the Nation's Capital

Representative Latter-day Saint meetinghouses, of which there are more than a thousand. These structures vary widely in architectural design, but each includes the same general facilities—chapel, classrooms, and recreation hall.

a schism within any religious society. Of its origin we shall learn in detail later. Suffice it to say that its theology, its organization, and its practices are in many respects entirely unique among today's Christian denominations.

It is an interesting anomaly in Christianity. Its adherents may be classed as modern in the extent and efficiency of their organization. Yet they maintain that there has been an apostasy from the church and principles of the New Testament to which we must return. In this they are fundamentalists.

Who Are These People?

They are educators, farmers, doctors, bankers, merchants, and followers of most other vocations. They are found in responsible positions of government, finance, and industry. Their names are among the faculties of many of America's large universities. An unusual percentage are listed in Who's Who in America. More than a hundred thousand of them served in the armed forces during World War II.

In a general sense they are as other men and women. They wear no distinguishing dress, but they do profess some distinguishing beliefs and have achieved some unique accomplishments.

Where Do They Live?

More than 1,300,000 of them are scattered over the world. Branches of the Church are found in every state in the Union, in most of the provinces of Canada, and in every county of England. They are found in Scotland and Ireland; in Germany, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Czechoslovakia, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Finland; in Mexico, Central America, Brazil, and Argentina; in Japan, Korea, the Pacific Islands, New Zealand, Australia, and South Africa.

Mormonism is fundamentally the same in Stockholm as in Salt Lake City. Its philosophy, its teachings, its local organization are similar the world over. As might be expected, however, the facilities of the Church are better developed and the work accomplished has been more outstanding in those areas where are found the largest number of members and where the work has been in progress for relatively long periods.

The majority of Church members live in the United States. More of them reside in Utah than in any other state, although there are extensive segments of Latter-day Saint population in Idaho, Arizona, California, and other western states, and substantial congregations are found in most of the large cities of the nation.

Over seventy percent of Utah's population is nominally Mormon, and better than sixty percent of Salt Lake City's people are registered on the membership records of the Church. For this reason, and because the intermountain area was originally colonized by the Mormons, Salt Lake City is classed as a Mormon city and Utah as a Mormon state. However, generally they are so regarded only by those outside the state. Residents, either Mormon or non-Mormon, seldom give thought to the matter. There is no apparent class distinction, and no evidence of religious bigotry. One of Salt Lake City's most highly respected mayors was a Jew, as was also one of the state's outstanding governors.

First Unitarian Church

St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral

Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine

Salt Lake City is a community of churches, without religious contention. Mormons, Catholics, Jews, Baptists and adherents of the other major faiths worship, play, and work side by side.

The major Christian denominations all have excellent churches and large congregations. For many years a Catholic broadcast has followed a Mormon program each Sunday evening over the city's largest radio station, and all other denominations have been afforded time on a population-ratio basis, entirely without cost. A controlling interest in the corporation operating the station is owned by the Mormon Church.

Of course all members of the Church cannot be classed as devout. As in other large organizations some are members in name only. Yet an unusually large number actively participate. It is something of a modern religious phenomenon to find more than a hundred large Mormon congregations meeting every Sunday in a city of fewer than two hundred thousand people.

In some localities so many attend church that it has become necessary to divide them into two or more fully organized groups, each with its own set of meetings, in order to accommodate them in the one available building. Several Mormon meeting houses accommodate three groups of members, with an average membership in each of about nine hundred. On Sunday each of these buildings is busy from early in the morning until late in the evening on a carefully planned schedule. Every night in the week, and most afternoons, it is also occupied with church activities. The members necessarily submit to considerable inconvenience under such crowded schedules, but they continue to come, and in increasing numbers. An extensive building program is now under way to relieve this condition.

How is the Church Organized?

In the larger centers of population each member of the Church belongs to a ward; in areas of sparse population to a branch. Each is simply an ecclesiastical unit similar to a parish, embracing all of the members within a particular geographical area.

A ward ordinarily comprises from 450 to 1200 members. In such places as Salt Lake City the ward district may include only three or four square blocks, while in a rural section it may extend over many square miles. Ordinarily each ward has its own church building, including chapel, recreation hall, and class rooms. However, as indicated above, in many cases in recent years, two or more wards have shared one plant.

A number of wards form a larger ecclesiastical unit known as a stake. A stake roughly corresponds to a diocese. There are in the Church about eighteen hundred wards grouped into more than two hundred stakes. Stakes are found throughout Utah, Idaho, Arizona, and in extensive areas of California, Nevada, Wyoming, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington. Also the wards in and around New York, Washington, D. C., Chicago, Detroit, Butte, Dallas, Houston, Jacksonville, and Columbus, S. C., are organized into stakes.

In areas where members are scattered, missions are organized. The missions are divided into districts, and the districts into branches.

What of the Mormon clergy? It is, to say the least, unusual by present day standards. There is no paid or professional ministry. Thirty-two general officers and the presidents of missions are given living

Utah State Capitol Building with Mormon Battalion Monument in Right Foreground

Airview of a Section of Salt Lake City

allowances. Add to this a few specialists and a staff of clerks who give their full working time to the Church. These constitute all who may be classified as paid personnel. The great bulk of work and responsibility is carried by the rank and file who receive no financial remuneration; who, in fact, contribute generously not only of their time and talent, but of their means as well.

Each ward is presided over by a bishop. He may be a lawyer, professor, merchant, or a follower of any other honorable vocation. He must be a man of integrity, industry, and devotion to the Church. He must have a good name in the community in which he lives. He carries responsibilities similar to those of a minister or priest in other churches. He arranges and conducts worship services, blesses the sick, sees that the poor are cared for, conducts funerals, performs civil marriage ceremonies, and discharges a hundred other duties involved in looking after the welfare of a large group of people.

How can he do this and yet earn a living for himself and family? To say the least, it is a heavy burden, generally gladly borne. But it would be impossible for one man to carry. Organization is the answer. Everyone in the Church who is active and old enough to do something, generally has a responsibility. In fact, he may have several. And usually the greatest enthusiasm for the cause is found among those who do the most. The organization which makes this possible and necessary will be discussed in a subsequent section.

To return to the question, Who are the Mormons?

They are ordinary workaday people, and at the same time a very unordinary group. They are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They are particularly interesting because in many parts of the world and under varieties of political, economic, and social conditions they have adjusted twentieth century living to those standards laid down by the Master twenty centuries ago.
