Gordon B. Hinckley, What of the Mormons? ( 1947)

2

What Do They Believe?

LATTER-DAY SAINTS incorporate in their religious code all of the ethical standards and basic doctrines of the New Testament. They teach the Golden Rule, the necessity for good works, faith, repentance, and baptism, virtue and honor, and the need for and efficacy of prayer. In this they may appear to be only one more sect among the multitude of Christian denominations.

Nevertheless, they have often been regarded as heretics. The formal creeds and confessions of the Roman and Protestant churches are not found in their theology. This is to be expected since Mormonism is not an offshoot from any present day church.

It begins with the teachings of the Bible. These it has implemented with what its adherents call modern revelation. The combination has given the movement its particular vigor and flavor.

God and Man

Primary among Mormon teaching is belief and faith in God the Father, in Jesus Christ his Son, and in the Holy Ghost. But the Mormon concept is not set forth in vague creeds. It is simple and straightforward.

God is in form like a man. He is personal. He speaks, and has spoken to man. He is exalted, and by human standards he is all-wise and all-powerful. But he is merciful and kind. He is the father of the spirits of all men, and he has a father's consideration for and interest in his children. His work and his glory lie in their eternal welfare.

Jesus Christ is his Son, begotten in the flesh. He lived, died, and was resurrected in a literal sense as the New Testament recounts. He was the Savior and Redeemer of men according to a plan formulated before the world was created. He yet lives, a being of distinct form and personality. The Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit, yet nonetheless an individual personality.

These three constitute the Godhead. The doctrine is explicit. It came about as the result of a remarkable experience which will be detailed later. The effect of this doctrine has been powerful, for those who have so believed have prayed to God as one near and personal.

What of man?

Man is in reality a child of God. Nothing in the universe is more important than the individual. His spirit was begotten of God; consequently all men are brothers in a very real sense. In the Mormon concept the phrase, "the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man," takes on a new and powerful meaning.

Man is God's greatest creation. For him the world was formed. His welfare is the Father's chief concern. But God does not make of man a pawn. He persuades and directs, but never forces. Man is free to choose his own way. There is none of the doctrine of predestination in Mormon theology. Free agency is a sacred gift, divinely bestowed. Here is the answer to the old question, "If God loves his children, why does he permit war and strife and kindred evils?" Because he holds inviolable the right given man to choose his way, between good and evil, between life and destruction.

Does God help those who seek him? Yes, but all blessings are predicated upon obedience to law. Man must therefore live up to divine principles to claim the blessings of God. Only those who seek him and seek to do his will have claim upon him.

How Long is Life?

Man is an eternal being. As an individual of spiritual substance, he lived before coming to earth. Wordsworth expressed this great truth when he wrote the immortal lines:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar; Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home.

Life upon the earth in a mortal body is but another step in a great, eternal march. Here we have opportunity for experience, for improvement, for growth. And on the basis of what we believe here we shall continue to live and grow in the life beyond the grave.

In the life to come we shall not be arbitrarily divided into two fixed groups—inhabitants of heaven and hell. Jesus stated, "In my Father's house are many mansions." There will be various grades and stations. There will be activity and learning. We shall know each other there as we know each other here. Our individuality will be retained. "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." "The glory of God is intelligence." These are Mormon aphorisms. Life is purposeful. It is progressive. It leads to Godhood.

There is nothing of reincarnation, nothing of Nirvana, nothing of a static heaven, nor a hell of hot flame in Latter-day Saint philosophy. Heaven lies in the growth that comes of improvement and achievement. It is the place where will be those who have achieved this goal by obedience to the commandments of God.

Priesthood

Priesthood in Mormonism has something of the same meaning as is attached to it by other churches—authority to act in the name of God. But among the Latter-day Saints it is not restricted to a few who have been trained in seminaries and universities.

Every man and boy over twelve years of age may hold the Priesthood provided he conforms to the standards of the Church. Some 271,000 of the million members hold the priesthood in its various offices.

There are two orders of Priesthood—the Aaronic and the Melchizedek. The Aaronic is concerned with the temporal affairs of the Church; the Melchizedek, which is a higher order embracing all of the authority of the Aaronic, is principally concerned with spiritual affairs.

Within each of these orders are various grades—Deacon, Teacher, and Priest in the Aaronic; Elder, Seventy, and High Priest in the Melchizedek. Boys are ordained deacons at twelve provided their lives comport with the principles of the gospel. As they grow older they are ordained to various offices, depending upon their living.

Each office carries with it particular responsibilities and powers. Among these are authority to baptize, to administer the sacrament, to preside over various groups, and in the highest instance to preside over the Church itself.

While this priesthood carries with it the authority to govern the Church and its members in their religious activities, the manner in which it may be exercised is definitely circumscribed. The law of the Church, believed to be divinely pronounced, reads: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy and without guile."

Here is set forth the spirit of government within the Church. There shall be no compulsion or autocracy. Those who stand in positions of leadership shall act in a spirit of love, persuading but not forcing, without hypocrisy and without guile.

Revelation

Fundamental in Mormon theology is the principle of modern revelation. "We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things." This is the official statement of the doctrine. Christians and Jews generally maintain that God revealed himself and directed chosen men in ancient times. Mormonism maintains that the need for divine guidance is as great in our modern, complex world as it was in the comparatively simple times of the Hebrews. It is true that fundamental truths set forth in the Old and New Testaments are as binding in our day as in the day they were pronounced. Yet our daily life poses problems unknown centuries ago. Moreover, some of the teachings of the Bible have been interpreted in so many different ways because the record is not clear, that many thoughtful people know not what to believe.

If God spoke anciently, is it unreasonable to believe that he can speak in our time? What man would think to deny God the right to express himself?

In essence, Mormonism claims to be a modern revelation of old principles divinely pronounced with new emphasis and completeness in our day.

What of the Bible?

The Bible is the word of God, written by men. It is basic in Mormon teaching. But the Latter-day Saints recognize that errors have crept into this sacred work because of the manner in which the book has come to us. Moreover, they regard it as not being complete as a guide. Scores of different types of church organization and conflicting interpretations on basic doctrines, which have led to the creation of hundreds of different sects, bear witness to the inadequacy of the Bible.

Supplementing the Bible, the Latter-day Saints have three other books. These with the Bible constitute the standard works of the Church. They are known as the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

The teachings found in them do not conflict with the teachings of the Bible. They confirm the divinity of the Hebrew scripture and greatly clarify many doctrines mentioned therein over which men have argued for centuries.

Marriage

To many people Mormonism has meant one thing only—polygamy. This has been the subject of lurid tales in all parts of the world. Once such stories were extremely popular. But as the facts have come to be known, such writings have largely disappeared.

The truth of the matter is this: Mormonism claims to be a restoration of God's work in all previous dispensations. The Old Testament teaches that the patriarchs—those men favored of God in ancient times—had more than one wife under divine sanction. In the course of the development of the Church in the nineteenth century, it was revealed to the leader of the Church that such a practice of marriage again should be entered into.

The announcement of this doctrine was a severe shock. Most of the converts to Mormonism were of Puritan New England stock. Shortly after Brigham Young heard of the doctrine he saw a funeral cortege passing down the street, and he is reported to have said that he would gladly trade places with the man in the coffin rather than face this doctrine.

Nevertheless, the leaders of the Church accepted it as a commandment from God. It was not an easy thing to do. Only those whose characters were of the highest, and who had proved themselves capable of maintaining more than one family, were permitted so to marry. Never at any time were more than three percent of the families of the Church polygamous. The practice was regarded strictly as a religious principle.

In the late Eighties, Congress passed various measures prohibiting the practice, and when the Supreme Court declared the law constitutional, the Church indicated its willingness to comply. Consistently it could do nothing else in view of its basic teaching on the necessity for obedience to the law of the land. That was in 1890. Since then officers of the Church have not performed plural marriages, and members who have entered into such relationships have been excommunicated. However, because of false information industriously circulated, many ridiculous notions of the practice have persisted. These have obscured the true picture of the Latter-day Saint doctrine of marriage.

Marriage in Mormon theology is a sacred contract, divinely ordained. Under the authority of the priesthood a man and woman are married not only for this life as legal husband and wife, but for eternity as well. Such marriage takes place only in sacred temples of which there are but eight in the Church now in use, and is performed only by a few men delegated with authority so to do. Bishops and other officers perform ordinary civil marriages as do ministers and priests of other churches.

The Church lays great stress on the sanctity of the home and teaches that children are a blessing from the Lord. There is no principle on which the Latter-day Saints lay greater emphasis than the sacredness of the marriage covenant. Adultery is next to murder in gravity in Mormon theology. Strict morality is taught, and the Church has used its means and facilities liberally to teach its youth the necessity for moral cleanliness and the blessings of happy marriage.

The Word of Wisdom

Mormon theology deals with such widely diversified subjects as the nature of heaven and the evils of alcohol. Actually, in the philosophy of this system the two are closely related. Our bodies are sacred. Man is created in the image of God. His strength is to be used for the betterment of his own condition as well as for the betterment of his associates and his surroundings. His body is the tabernacle of his spirit and will arise with him in the resurrection.

In brief, a sacred concept is attached to the human body. As such, it ill becomes any man or woman to injure or dissipate his or her health. In the light of this philosophy members of the Church are encouraged to refrain from alcohol, tobacco, and other deleterious substances which impair health and well-being. The effect of such teaching over a hundred years is demonstrated in comparative health statistics. Based on group averages the Mormons live longer and enjoy better health than the people of the United States as a whole and the people of other nations whose statistics have been compiled by the League of Nations.

Education

"A man cannot be saved in ignorance." Education is not only a desirable thing, according to Mormon theology, but it is necessary to eternal progress. That which we learn here we shall retain, and we shall continue to learn in the world to come. Truth is the thing to be sought for—truth in all fields. In the very early days of the Church the following injunction was given as a divine revelation:

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms.

Education in all of its implications is therefore a concern of the Church. Accordingly, it has used its resources liberally in fostering schools. Moreover, it has constantly urged its youth to higher achievement and usefulness through education.

This philosophy doubtless accounts in some measure for the high place achieved by the people of Utah in the field of public education. Utah outranks all other states. A recent studyfn indicates that while the state is in thirty-second place in the nation in its financial ability to support education, it leads in educational accomplishment, in educational efficiency, and in the extent of adult education. The compilers

Joseph Smith Memorial Building

Karl G. Maeser Memorial Building

Brigham Young University Provo, Utah

of this study conclude their findings with this statement: "This appears to be due almost wholly to the high value placed on education by the people of Utah. . . . Utah easily outclasses all other states in overall performances in education."

Studies of the Selective Service System have produced similar findings. A published survey concludes a discussion of the educational background of men entering the military service from different parts of the country with the statement: "At the other extreme was the mountain state of Utah with only 9.4 percent inductees and enlistees having completed less than 1 year of high school, 18.5 percent having completed at least 1 year of college and the median years of schools completed being 2 years of high school, or 1 above the national average."<#:2>

From the early years of its Utah development the Church has declared itself against the teaching of sectarian religion in public schools. But at the same time it has recognized the need for religious instruction along with regular day school education.

To meet this need it has established seminaries and religious institutes convenient to public high schools and universities. Here students are offered courses in the Old and New Testaments as well as in Church history and doctrine. There are now 189 seminaries maintained in connection with high schools in Utah and neighboring states, and eighteen religious institutes located near the campuses of western universities.

In addition to these facilities the Church maintains Brigham Young University at Provo, Utah, a fully accredited institution with an enrollment of seven thousand. It also maintains a junior college in the state of Idaho, and in northern Mexico it has a system of five grade-schools and one high school.

What about Money?

It may appear strange to discuss the Church's financial operations in a section dealing with its theology. But money is essential in the operation of a religious society as in any other organization, and the manner in which it is to be secured is set forth in the scripture as a religious principle.

There is no collection in Mormon meetings. The ancient law of the tithe is the financial law of the Church. Latter-day Saints believe and accept it as of divine pronouncement. Each member is expected to contribute one-tenth of his income for the support of the cause. This is taught as a principle of religion, as much so as any other.

However, there is no compulsion in this matter. A man is not excommunicated if he fails to pay his tithing. No record is published; the matter is kept in strict confidence between himself and his bishop, and no officer of the Church would consider divulging such information.

The tithing thus collected goes into the general funds of the Church, and is then distributed according to various needs. Among these are the erection and maintenance of educational facilities, temples and other church buildings, and kindred requirements.

The funds used for charity purposes come from a different source. The first Sunday of each month is known among the Mormons as Fast Day. All members are expected to refrain from two meals on this day and to contribute the cost of these meals for the relief of the poor. Every penny thus collected is so used, first among those of the locality in which it is collected. Then, if there is a surplus, it is turned into a general fund on which those wards which do not have sufficient funds may draw.

In addition to these means, some funds are collected for other purposes. To the outside observer the price of membership in the Church may appear high. But those who are active do not so consider it. Not only do they grow spiritually as a result of unselfish giving, but they can accept with good conscience all of the facilities which the Church has to offer in its extensive program.
