Gordon B. Hinckley, What of the Mormons? ( 1947)

3

What Is Their Program?

IN all its ramifications the Mormon organization appears to be a complex society. But to its members, as the Church affects their individual lives, it is both simple and effective.

Perhaps the best way to indicate the nature of its program is to note its effect upon what might be termed a sample Mormon family. Because this program is most highly developed in urban areas of fairly dense Latter-day Saint population, we shall take a family living in a Salt Lake City stake, although the same situation would hold equally true in any stake in a metropolitan area, and in most of the rural stakes. The names of the family and the ward and stake in which they live are fictional, but actual situations are described.

Let it be the Jones family. It consists of the father, the mother, and four children. Ralph is twenty-two, Betty is nineteen, Bob is fourteen, and Susan is eight. By profession Mr. Jones is a certified public accountant. He belongs to one of the city's civic clubs, and might be either a Democrat or a Republican. The family live in an attractive but modest home.

How Does the Church Affect Their Lives?

The Jones family belong to the Hill Heights Ward, which is one of eight wards in the Blue Ridge Stake. There are about eight hundred people in their ward. They call it their ward as familiarly as they speak of their home. They contributed toward the construction of the building, and each month they contribute toward its maintenance. They feel pride of ownership in it. And they feel at home because they go there often, not on Sundays only, but during the week as well.

Mr. Jones is a counselor in the bishopric of the ward. The bishopric consists of a bishop and two counselors. In modern business language Mr. Jones might be called a vice-president. He has been in this office for two years, and will remain for an indefinite period until he and his associates are released with a vote of thanks for their services. Then three other men will take their places.

The Sunday Program

On Sunday morning everyone in the Jones home gets ready for church. Mr. Jones and Bob, the fourteen-year-old boy, leave before the mother and girls. The eldest boy, Ralph, is away from home. We shall discuss him later.

At nine o'clock the father and Bob go to Priesthood Meeting. Bob is a deacon, the father is a high priest. Each belongs to a quorum, that is, a local group of members holding the same office in the Priesthood. At the opening of the meeting all of the men and boys meet together for song and prayer and any discussion of general interest. Following this they separate into quorum meetings.

On the particular Sunday of which we are now speaking, the bishop announces a matter of practical interest to all of the men and boys. He indicates that the concrete walks around the building are badly cracked, and that the shrubs and lawn also need special attention. Mormonism has always been concerned with the temporal affairs of life as well as with the spiritual, so that mention of such an item in a priesthood meeting does not appear out of place to those present.

The bishop indicates that the problem has been discussed by a committee, and that he and his associates recommend that these matters be given immediate attention. He advises that Brother Taylor [Mormons usually address each other as Brother] will make his truck and cement mixer available on Thursday evening if all who can do so will assist. In this way, the bishop points out, the work can be handled in one night.

The boys should come with rakes and spades to take care of the lawn and shrubs. The men will remove the old concrete, set the forms, and pour and trowel the new walks. The women of the Relief Society will provide sandwiches and punch.

The bishop asks for any comment after he has outlined the proposition. Two or three men express themselves to the effect that the work should be done and they feel that the Priesthood quorums should support the bishopric to see that it is done quickly. Then in keeping with Mormon procedure the proposition is put to a vote, and it is unanimously agreed that on the following Thursday the men and boys of the ward will gather at the meeting house prepared to work.

After this item of practical business, the meeting separates into quorums, where each group considers the welfare of its members, and studies a course of instruction prepared by a special committee of the Church. In these quorum meetings is found an expression of fraternity in its finest application. Under quorum sponsorship religious instruction is given, the social needs of members are met, and service projects are undertaken for the welfare of any unfortunate members or the widows and families of any deceased members of the quorum. This is a Sunday meeting, but its consequences are felt in a variety of circumstances throughout the week.

Sunday School follows the priesthood meeting. This gathering embraces all members of the Church from the very young to the aged. The entire Jones family attend. In their Sunday School twelve different classes are offered for various age groups, with a complete curriculum of religious study.

On Sunday afternoon Mr. Jones and the bishop go to the hospital to visit a member of the ward who is seriously ill. This is one of several hospitals maintained by the Church and open to patients of all denominations. By the authority of the Priesthood which they hold, these men lay their hands upon the head of the invalid and pronounce a blessing.

In the evening a worship service is held. Again all of the family attend. Betty and her mother both sing in the choir, and sometimes the father conducts the meeting. As a deacon, Bob, with other boys, passes the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to those in attendance.

Each Sunday there is a different speaker for this worship service. Sometimes members of the ward are called to address the congregation. On other occasions visiting speakers give the sermon. Usually there is a five-minute talk by one of the young people of the ward, and both Betty and Bob have had this opportunity.

Church on Week Days

On Monday evening the Jones family remain at home. In fact, Monday is known in the ward as Home Night. The authorities of the Church have recommended that all families spend at least one evening a week together to encourage and preserve family unity and fellowship. There are no conflicting ward meetings scheduled for this night.

Betty plays the piano and the family sing together. Each member of the family contributes something to the program. Following this they discuss plans for a trip during the coming summer. The mother has special refreshments prepared for this evening, after which they read together a chapter of scripture, sing a song, and kneel together in prayer before retiring.

On Tuesday afternoon Mrs. Jones goes to her Relief Society meeting. The Relief Society is the women's auxiliary organization of the Church. It is, in fact, America's oldest woman's organization of national scope, having been established in 1842.

The program of the meetings is varied. The first week of the month is devoted to the study of theology. The next week sewing and homemaking skills are taught. The third Tuesday is spent in a study of literature, and the fourth week is devoted to social science.

Following school on Tuesday afternoon Susan, the eight year old daughter, attends the Primary Association, a Church auxiliary for children. Here the younger members of the ward receive religious instruction, play games, and pursue various arts and crafts.

On Tuesday evening Betty and Bob attend MIA—Mutual Improvement Association. Bob is a Boy Scout, and he is proud of his church's achievement in this field. The Mormon Church has a larger percentage of its boys enrolled in Scouting than has any other religious organization in the United States.fn A Scout room is provided in the meeting house, and every boy is encouraged to become a Scout when he reaches eleven.

Betty meets with a group of her own age. They follow various courses of study, including drama, public speaking, dancing, and music.

On Wednesday evening Betty and her mother go to the ward meeting house for an hour and a half of choir practice, while Mr. Jones attends a meeting of the bishopric to discuss the many problems incident to the operation of the ward.

Thursday evening Mr. Jones and Bob go to work on the ward grounds. Mrs. Jones comes later to serve the refreshments. These men and boys constitute an interesting group, all dressed in old clothes and having a good time together. There is Nelson, the banker; Thomas, the dentist; Peterson, the smelter foreman; Barkley, the auto mechanic; Taylor, the contractor; Myers, who teaches philosophy; and many others, of various trades and professions. Supervising them is Brother Barnum, a little fellow with a big smile, whose regular trade is cement finishing. By

Grain Elevator, Welfare Square, Salt Lake City

Built by volunteer labor, and having a capacity of 318,000 bushels, this is one of the many facilities maintained under the Church Welfare Program for the production, preservation, and distribution of food, clothing, and other items.

nine-thirty that night the cement is poured, the grounds are cleaned up, the refreshments are gone, and everyone has had a pleasant time.

Friday is a big night for Betty. The Blue Ridge Stake is holding its Spring Prom. All wards of the stake unite six times yearly for such dances in a beautiful ballroom with an excellent orchestra. Looking at five hundred couples, the girls in formal dress, one would never guess this to be a church function. The only clue that might indicate its identity is an opening prayer, and the absence of drinking and smoking. There is an air of dignity and refinement. But there is nothing somber, nothing pious about these dancers. They are having a good time.

On Saturday afternoon Bob and his father go out to cultivate peas on the ward welfare project. With fifty others, they make short work of the cultivating. But there will be considerable work in the weeks to come, because this ward has an assignment to furnish, among other things, eight tons of shelled peas for the Church Welfare Program.

Other wards will have comparable assignments, all contributing toward the production of vast quantities of food, clothing, fuel, and other commodities to meet the needs of those in the Church requiring assistance. Production quotas are worked out by regional and general committees. All labor is on a voluntary basis, and the results are startling to the stranger.

Eighty-five percent of the needs of those requiring assistance are now produced under this program. The combined efforts of the Jones family and their thousands of associates in many areas make this possible.

Such might be a week in the life of this family, Sunday through Saturday. But the Church touches them in other ways also.

Betty attends the University, and after school or when she has a free hour she goes over to the "Institute." This is a religious center maintained by the Church near the campus. Here she enjoys social opportunity and takes a class in the New Testament taught by a man of recognized scholarship.

She might have gone to Brigham Young University at Provo, Utah, an accredited four year institution maintained by the Church, but she preferred the state university since she could live at home.

What about Ralph?

All of this discussion has omitted Ralph, the twenty-two year old member of the family. He is in England, serving on a mission for the Church. He spent two years in the army, including several months in Korea. Following his release the bishop talked to him about a mission. He had saved some money while in the army and was glad to go. When his own funds run out, his father will send him what he needs. If it should become necessary his priesthood quorum will also help.

Without compensation from the Church he has gone to preach the gospel for two years. Three thousand other young men and women are doing the same. When Ralph's mission is completed he will return home. Then he plans to finish law school.

Such, in brief outline, is the relationship of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the Jones family—and to the thousands of other families in many parts of the world who comprise its membership. Its program is designed to satisfy their spiritual needs, to afford them opportunity for mental and social growth, and to assist them economically should this become necessary. It aims to make them better citizens, better neighbors, better friends.

* Thirty-fourth Annual Report, Boy Scouts of America, p. 47.
