Gordon B. Hinckley, What of the Mormons? ( 1947)

4

What Is Their Organization?

I N basic organization the Church goes back to New Testament times. In efficiency of operation it has often been described as strictly modern. This is not a contradiction.

Mormons maintain that the fundamental organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the same as that which prevailed in the church established by the Savior.

Early in his ministry Jesus called twelve men whom he ordained apostles. To these he gave power to heal the sick, to raise the dead, to minister the ordinances of the gospel. "Freely ye have received, freely give," he enjoined them. Then they were sent forth to the cities of Israel to bear witness of him and his kingdom. Three among them—Peter, James, and John—stand out in the scriptures as the leaders, particularly after the death and resurrection of the Savior.

The Lord also appointed Seventy to assist in the work. These he sent out by pairs with authority to speak for him. Success crowned their ministry as becomes evident from the declaration that "they returned again with joy."

Following Jesus' death the work was carried beyond the confines of Israel to the cities of Syria, then to Asia Minor, and later to Greece and Rome. The

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

These men preside over the activities of the Church in all the world. Left to right: Stephen L Richards, First Counselor in the First Presidency; President David O. McKay; J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Second Counselor.

Church Administration Building, Salt Lake City

Center of the world-wide activities of the Church. Offices of the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and others of the General Authorities of the Church are all located here.

word was spread with such effect that Paul, some thirty years later, declared that the gospel had been preached to every creature under heaven.

As various branches of the Church were organized, bishops and elders were ordained to preside over them, and other offices in the priesthood were filled. Paul speaks specifically of apostles and prophets, bishops and elders, evangelists, priests, teachers, deacons, and pastors. He also makes clear the necessity for these various offices in their relationship one with another in furthering their common objective—"For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ."

The scripture makes clear another important point with reference to these officers of the Church. To his apostles Jesus said, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you." Paul amplifies this thought with the declaration that "no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." During those early years men in the Church were given office, not of their own choosing, but as they were selected and ordained by those who had been given power and authority of the Lord.

Latter-day Saints believe that this same organization with its basic offices has again been restored to the earth, and that men should fill those offices in the same spirit in which they were filled in ancient times. They believe that in this organization lie the keys and means of effective church operation.

General Officers

There are in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints three levels of organization—general, regional, and local. Presiding over its affairs in all the world is a council of three men called the First Presidency, consisting of a president and two counselors. Working with these leaders are members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles who are called particularly to be "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world." They form a traveling quorum regulating the world-wide activities of the organization. The President of the Church is chosen from the ranks of the Twelve.

Two other quorums and a patriarch, or evangelist, constitute the organization of the general authorities. One of these quorums is the First Council of the Seventy, consisting of seven men who preside over the various local quorums of the Seventy. These men are charged with the same responsibility with which Jesus charged the Seventy he called—to preach the gospel through missionary work.

A Presiding Bishopric of three men regulate the physical properties of the Church. Assisted by architects, landscape experts, engineers, and other trained men, they look after the widely scattered buildings and other facilities which represent an investment of millions of dollars.

But the Presiding Bishopric are not concerned only with such matters of a temporal nature. They are the heads of the Aaronic Priesthood. As such, they supervise the activities of the hundreds of quorums of boys and young men ordained to this priesthood.

In addition to these general officers are general boards standing at the head of the Welfare Program and the various auxiliary organizations. These bodies supervise the work of these agencies on a Church-wide level, setting policies, preparing courses of study, and directing activities through personal visits to the local groups. Those comprising these boards are qualified individuals carefully selected for their abilities.

The President of the Church is nominated from and by the Council of the Twelve Apostles, but he is voted upon by the membership. The same principle of common consent applies to all offices. No officer may serve without the consent of those over whom he presides. One of the established orders of business in all conferences is the "sustaining" of the officers of the organization.

Stake Officers

The regional organization is somewhat analogous to the general organization. A stake is presided over by a presidency of three men—a president and two counselors. These in turn are assisted by a council of twelve men. One of the functions of this council is to sit in judgment in cases involving the ex-communication of members. In such a Church trial six men speak against and six speak in defense of the accused. Even in cases of apostasy, the apostate's case is defended.

Stake boards supervise the work of the various auxiliary organizations on a regional basis. These boards are comprised of outstanding teachers and administrators in the various wards. By means of visits

Oahu Stake Tabernacle, Honolulu, Hawaii

Such stake tabernacles accommodate Church functions on a regional basis. Conferences, teacher training classes, music and drama festivals are among the activities for which these buildings are utilized.

to the wards and joint meetings with ward workers, they carry on a program of training in teaching procedures. In this way the ward workers are constantly aided in solving their problems and their teaching efficiency is increased.

Local Organization

As indicated in a previous chapter, the ward is the local unit of Church organization. Assisting the bishopric of three men is a large corps of officers and teachers. In the average ward this group consists of about two hundred individuals. Each individual has a definite responsibility. It would be impossible for the bishop and his two counselors to visit the homes of all members more often than once a year. The bishopric have, therefore, directly under them, persons called to work as ward teachers. These are men who visit each home at least once a month. They work in pairs, and each pair of teachers has only a few families to look after. They deliver any instruction the bishopric might wish conveyed, and they determine whether any family is in need of assistance. If there is financial distress or sickness, the ward teachers make an immediate report so that proper measures may be taken to see that the need is supplied.

Also each priesthood quorum has a presidency, secretary, and various committees to see that the work of the quorum goes forward, and that the requirements of the members are met.

In each of the auxiliary organizations there is likewise a presidency of three, with secretary, chorister, organist, and a corps of teachers.

Within the democratic processes of these organized groups lies the genius of Mormonism. Every member of the Church who is willing and able has something to do. And within these various church functions he has ample opportunity to use his talents and to be of service. Each has a responsibility, and in the discharge of that responsibility he studies and works. As he does so, his interest in the cause increases.

The result is an organization of highly qualified leaders. There is no monetary inducement to undertake such service. In fact, there must invariably be considerable sacrifice of time and means. Out of all this grows the true Christian ideal of service.

The men and women who perform the many obligations incident to Church responsibility are ordinary citizens. Their unusual capacity derives from their belief in the efficacy of the gospel of Jesus Christ and their willingness to work to make it succeed.
