Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 1.

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

GOSPEL DEFINED

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is the "glad tidings" or "good news" concerning the Savior, the Kingdom of God, and the salvation of man. [^1] It consists primarily of the teachings of Christ and of the apostles as recorded in the New Testament and Book of Mormon, and in revelations given through the holy prophets of God from the time the world began down to our day. These revelations and teachings are recorded in the holy scriptures.

Christians frequently use the word Gospel to designate their religion. Thought of in this light, the Gospel includes their theology. Fundamental in Christian theology are the doctrines of the eternal nature of man, the fall, and the atonement of Jesus the Christ; therefore, these are basic in the Gospel. [^2] In fact, the Gospel gives answers to the questions of where we came from, why we are here, and where we are going.

Again, we may define the Gospel of Jesus Christ as the plan of salvation. It is built upon the principles of eternal truth; in fact, it is the foundation of all truth. [^3] These truths are the standard by which God judges the actions of men. [^4] The Gospel is the power of redemption of all human beings. [^5] Paul, the famous Christian missionary, aptly stated his definition as follows:

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. [^6]

The Gospel also contains all of the covenants that God has made with His children from the time they were first placed on the earth to our day. Most of these covenants have been recorded in the holy scriptures. The Jews in Jesus' day referred to their sacred writings as "the Covenant." Later, after the Christians had produced a religious literature, they termed it the "New Covenant," and spoke of the Hebrew writings as the "Old Covenant." In the process of translating these sacred works into Latin, the names were changed by mistake to New and Old Testaments.

In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Savior made definite mention of the ancient nature of the covenant and informed the Prophet that He had revealed to him the same covenant (Gospel). To quote the words of the Son of Man: "Wherefore, I say unto you that I have sent unto you mine everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning." [^7] Today we speak of the covenant as the "new and everlasting covenant." Since the revelation on celestial marriage speaks of the "new and ever lasting covenant of marriage," some Mormons are of the opinion that "the new and everlasting covenant" means merely temple marriage. But it embraces much more than that. In fact, it includes all of the principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—all of the covenants that God has revealed to mortals or that He will ever reveal to them relative to their salvation. Thus the "new and everlasting covenant" and the Gospel of Jesus Christ are the same thing.

SCOPE OF THE GOSPEL

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is perhaps the most comprehensive subject that we can study. It embraces all truth. [^8] Through it, we learn not only of conditions associated with the human family as they now exist, but also of the pre-existence—of the organization of this world and of other worlds. Through the eternal principle of revelation, the great purposes of God have been revealed from age to age and shall continue to be revealed. Furthermore, it teaches us regarding glorious rewards that our Father in Heaven has in store in the world to come for those who obey the Gospel while in mortality.

The Gospel is not only founded on unvarying certainties, but since it embraces all truth it must of necessity include the knowledge of all sciences. It possesses the key to the true philosophy of life. Although we do not understand the entire plan of life and purposes of God in our universe, yet the Gospel of Jesus Christ lays the foundation for men to learn little by little the great universal plan of human life.

Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, and all the other presidents and leaders of the Church have maintained that there are no limits nor bounds to the truths embraced within the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For the purpose of showing the viewpoint of latter-day prophets, we present two quotations from their teachings which are typical of many others. President Brigham Young emphatically declared:

Our religion is simply the truth. It is all said in this one expression—it embraces all truth, wherever found, in all the works of God and man that are visible or invisible to mortal eyes. . . . Mormonism embraces all truth that is revealed and that is unrevealed, whether religious, political, scientific, or philosophical. . . .

[It] embraces every principle pertaining to life and salvation, for time and eternity, no matter who has it. If the infidel has got truth, it belongs to Mormonism. The truth and sound doctrine possessed by the sectarian world, and they have a great deal, all belongs to this Church. As for their morality, many of them are morally just as good as we are. All that is good, lovely, and praiseworthy belongs to this Church and Kingdom. Mormonism includes all truth. There is no truth but what belongs to the Gospel. It is life, eternal life; it is bliss; it is the fullness of all things in the Gods and in the eternities of the Gods. [^9]

President John Taylor expressed the same basic doctrine in the following words:

In regard to our religion, I will say that it embraces every principle of truth and intelligence pertaining to us as moral, intellectual, mortal and immortal beings, pertaining to this world and the world that is to come. We are open to truth of every kind, no matter whence it comes, where it originates, or who believes in it. Truth, when preceded by the little word "all," comprises everything that has ever existed or that ever will exist and be known by and among men in time and through the endless ages of eternity. [^10]

ETERNAL NATURE OF THE GOSPEL

"Truth abideth and hath no end." [^11] This was the pronouncement of Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Anything which has an end must of necessity have a beginning; therefore, truth had no beginning. It has always existed and it shall continue to exist eternally. Wherever there have been intelligences (i.e., the ego or life of men) in any world and at any stage of progression, such fundamental principles as good, evil, love, hate, choice (agency), will, faith, repentance, progression, and hundreds of similar verities have existed. They constitute the laws of God—the laws of eternal truth. Our Heavenly Parents have through aeons of time and a multitude of experiences gradually become acquainted with and applied in Their lives an untold number of these everlasting laws. As They learned these verities and how to operate them, these laws thereby became subject unto Elohim and henceforth were His laws—or, in other words, the Gospel of Jesus Christ. President John Taylor sustains and amplifies the foregoing doctrine in the following words:

The Gospel is a living, abiding, eternal and unchangeable principle that has existed co-equal with God, and always will exist, while time and eternity endure, wherever it is developed and made manifest. . . .

There is not a principle associated with the Gospel of the Son of God but what is eternal in its nature and consequences. . . . The principles of the Gospel being eternal, they were framed and originated with the Almighty in eternity before the world was, according to certain eternal laws, and hence the Gospel is called the Everlasting Gospel. . . . It reaches back into the eternities that are past; it exists in time and it stretches forward into the eternities to come, and everything connected with it is eternal. [^12]

LIGHT AND TRUTH

All the knowledge of truths that exist comes from the same source—God the Eternal Father and His Only Begotten Son—the Divine Fountain of Truth. The ancient Nephite prophets positively maintained that all that is good, all that is true, comes from this one source. [^13]

In revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord sustained the teachings of the Nephite prophets relative to their claim that all truths come from this one eternal source—the Godhead. The revelations declared that the power of God is "light and truth"; and it "proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space." It is "the light which is in all things: which giveth life to all things: which is the law by which all things are governed." [^14] This divine immanence of light and truth operates through the holy Priesthood and through the Holy Ghost. Thus through Jesus Christ and these eternal principles our eyes and our understandings are quickened and enlightened. In other words, we receive knowledge of truth; i.e., knowledge of "things as they are, as they were, and as they shall be."

Throughout this course of study, it is our purpose to present sufficient evidence to prove definitely that all truths come from the one divine source—the Godhead. Wherein religious teachings and practices in pagan and world religions resemble the true Gospel of Jesus Christ—although they may be perpetuated in adulterated and polluted forms—these teachings and practices came originally from the Divine Fountain of Truth.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 1

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: John 10:10; 11:25-26; Romans 6:23; Genesis 1:2. Moses 1:4, 8, 30-33, 39.
[^2] Book of Mormon: Alma 11; 12; 40; 41; 42; 1 Nephi 15:27-36; 2 Nephi 2:25; 9:4-9, 15, 18; Jacob 3:11; Mosiah 2:41; 16:7; Mormon 9:13-14. Doctrine and Covenants 93:36.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 6:13; 11:7; 14:7; 29:43-44; 93:36; 132:21-25. 1 Nephi 17:36; Alma 30:44; Deuteronomy 32:7-10.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 1:1-11, 24-42; 6:58; 2; 3:1-9; Abraham 4:5. 2 Nephi 9:4-9; Alma 40:22-25.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 328-333. Alma 11:45, 41; 12:13-16, 18; 40:26; 13:30; 1 Nephi 15:33-36; Jacob 3:11.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 166-167. Alma 11:44; 40:22-25; 2 Nephi 9:4-9; Helaman 14:16-19; Mormon 9:13-14.
[^7] John A. Widtsoe (Compiler), Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 147-152. Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 329.
[^8] Alma 11:40-45; Doctrine and Covenants 132:21-25.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants 14:7.
[^10] Ibid., 11:7.
[^11] Ibid., 29:43-44.
[^12] John 17:3.
[^13] Doctrine and Covenants 132:22-24; 2 Nephi 9:15; 18; Mosiah 2:41.
[^14] Ibid., 6:13.
