Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 2.

THE WORK AND GLORY OF GOD

GOD'S WORK AND GLORY

Over 3,000 years ago God showed Moses in a vision the worlds which He had created (organized). The ancient Prophet beheld the earth and its inhabitants in their entirety. Then he asked the Lord to tell him why He had made all of these things. In reply, God explained by what power He did His creative work; and He also made it clear to Moses that there was a divine purpose back of all that He did. To quote the words of the Lord to the ancient Israelite prophet:

By the word of my power have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I have created them, which is mine Only Begotten. [^1]

Then God concluded His explanation to Moses with the most significant and most marvelous statement regarding the work and glory of God to be found in religious literature. He declared:

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Another declaration which is almost equally as important as the one just cited was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith by revelation. It is:

"The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." [^2]

These two revelations throw a flood of light on the activities of the Godhead—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost—and all other intelligent beings, whether they be men or angels, that cooperate with the Gods.

One of the major functions of supreme beings is to prepare worlds for mortals to dwell on. If we meditate on the history of mankind in this world, we readily see that there were natural resources carefully prepared beforehand which have fitted in well with the needs of every type of civilization which has existed here. Our age is a mechanical age. We have coal, iron, electricity, and every other resource which we need, and they are supplied in abundance. Even the precious metals appear in what seem to be their proper proportions. The same facts hold true for agricultural societies, nomadic groups, and even savage tribes. They also had natural resources, generously supplied, to fit their needs. This evidence bears testimony to the fact that a divine intelligence carefully planned and organized the world for His children, where they might work toward immortality and eternal life. The word of God confirms this evidence, and the holy prophets have proclaimed it to be true. To quote Nephi: "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited: and he hath created his children that they should possess it." [^3]

We are informed in the two scriptures quoted that God's glory lies to a large degree in His ability to work, to create, to organize worlds. He has learned the eternal laws of truth (natural laws), and through controlling, regulating, and applying them as He sees fit, He has organized worlds as homes for His children. Through the power of the Priesthood—which was named after the Son of God—the Eternal Father creates worlds and accomplishes His divine designs.

God's glory is enhanced through His children's gaining eternal life. It is true that the larger the number of men who conform their lives to Gospel truths and thereby become glorified, the greater is the glory of their Heavenly Father. Naturally, a king who rules over a large kingdom of faithful subjects can accomplish more and has more power than one whose dominion is small. But we should not think for a moment that God has a selfish motive in glorifying mankind.

The life of the Eternal Father is the greatest in the universe, and that of the Only Begotten is comparable to the Father's. These two beings have experienced the deepest meaning of life and have attained the greatest intellectual and spiritual growth. God, being infinite in His knowledge and power, is also infinite in His love. Therefore, He is inviting us to join Him in the development of all human personalities. By cooperating with the Gods and the holy angels, all men may move in the direction of that Godlike life.

Since God is the all-wise One and the all-powerful One, the commandments and instructions that He gives to other intelligences are the wisest and the best that can be given. These commandments, when followed, bring about the greatest blessings, developing within man a more joyful, kindly, sinless and Godlike behavior. The things God tells His children to do we term the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is a plan, a philosophy, which when applied will make mankind more like their Heavenly Father.

It is also true that God is the completely unselfish One. His love is without bounds. Therefore He desires that which is highest and best, not for Himself alone, but for all of his children. What would be best for them, however, would also be best for Him. His glory, His power, and His joy will be enhanced by bringing mortal beings back into His presence and increasing their joy, power and glory. In other words, God will increase His glory by assisting His children to become as He is; thus His greatest work "is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

IMMORTALITY AND ETERNAL LIFE

There is a definite difference between "immortality" and "eternal life." We are called mortal beings because we are subject to death. But dwelling in each of us is a spirit which is not subject to death, and therefore is immortal. In the plan of salvation, which was instituted before man was placed upon the earth, provisions were made to bring about the resurrection of the physical body and reunite it with the spirit, never again to be divided nor to see corruption. [^4]

The Lord was referring to the resurrection of the physical body when He told Moses that His work was to bring to pass the "immortality of man." In this sense, resurrection and immortality are synonymous. The holy prophets of God understood this doctrine thoroughly and taught it to the people. For example, Amulek instructed the Nephites as follows:

I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death; even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. [^5]

The resurrection—or the bringing about of the immortality of man—was accomplished through the atonement of Jesus Christ. All men who have ever lived, regardless of how wicked or how righteous their lives have been, or who ever will live in this mortal world, will be made recipients of this great gift of the Savior's; that is, they will be resurrected and blessed with immortal existence. [^6] Death was overcome or destroyed by the Savior of mankind, and the law of resurrection put into operation. Following the resurrection, men and women shall never again die a physical death. In the words of Elder Joseph Fielding Smith:

Immortality is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ, to all men; by which they come forth in the resurrection to die no more, whether they have obeyed Him or rebelled against Him. This great gift is theirs; even the wicked receive it through the grace of Jesus Christ, and shall have the privilege of living forever, but they will have to pay the price of their sins in torment with the devil before they are redeemed. [^7]

Eternal life, however, is a special blessing granted to a relatively few people because of their obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. [^8] The word of the Lord to His children is as follows: "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God." [^9] "He that hath eternal life is rich." [^10] On another occasion the Lord explained both immortality and eternal life to the Prophet Joseph and definitely made it clear that they were entirely different things. He declared:

And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe; and they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not. [^11]

Just what is meant by eternal life? We read in the Gospel of John that "this is life eternal to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent." [^12] To know God is to have experienced His creative life to a large degree. Men must also know the full meaning of love, mercy, forgiveness, justice, intelligence, chastity and goodness in every respect by making those attributes part of their lives. In other words, they must through obedience to every word which comes from the mouth of their Heavenly Father learn to become like God. Regarding this subject, one of the eternal decrees of our Savior is as follows:

Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives. . . . If ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also. This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law. [^13]

Eternal life is the kind of life possessed by the Heavenly Father and His Only Begotten Son; therefore, those mortals who attain it shall dwell in the presence of the divine beings. In a revelation to the Church members, the Savior declared, "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation [eternal life]." [^14]

In fact, the whole purpose of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and our existence is that we might aspire toward the more abundant and eternal life which is pointed out to us through the Gospel. Jesus declared, "I came that they might have life and that they might have it more abundantly. . . . I am the resurrection and the life: And whosoever believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." [^15]

The purpose and meaning of life are to be found in life itself. Lehi, the great ancient American prophet, declared the purpose of life to be as follows: "Adam fell that men might be, and men are that they might have joy." [^16] The deepest expression of joy and the most abundant life can be found in the Celestial Kingdom, where God dwells. Thus the Lord declared to Enoch that He had given mankind the Gospel in order that he might "enjoy the words of eternal life in this world and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." [^17]

To summarize, immortality means to live forever and the immortality given to every man and woman by the Savior is resurrection. Each of us will resurrect our body which will be united with the spirit, never to be separated again nor to disintegrate. Eternal life, on the other hand, is the condition of life that those who live righteous lives will enjoy throughout the ages in the Kingdom of God. In fact, it means exaltation. He who receives the greatest portion of eternal life becomes a God.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 2

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Isaiah 14:12-19; Revelation 12:7-12; Matthew 7:13-29. Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 138, 354; Abraham 4:1-30.
[^2] Book of Mormon: 2 Nephi 2:17-18; 9:8-10; 24:12-19; Mosiah 3:17; 4:6-8; 18:13; Alma 12:25, 30, 32; 18:39; 40; 41; 42; 3 Nephi 27:5-25, 33. Doctrine and Covenants 88:34-47; 130:20-21; 132:5; Abraham 3:1-15.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 76:25-38; 29:36-41; 39:1-6; 63:5; 82:10; 89:18; 101:43; 130:19, 21; 132:37. John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, pp. 38-42.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price: Abraham 3:22-28; Moses 4:1-4; 6:26-29, 50-67; 7:11-12; 8:19-30. Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 166-167.
[^5] Lowell L. Bennion, The Religion of the Latter-day Saints, pp. 53-57, 82-86. Abraham 3:22-24.
[^6] B. H. Roberts, The Seventy's Course in Theology, Second Year, pp. 13-27. Ibid., 3:24.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 28-38, 49-54, 178-186. Ibid., Jeremiah 1:4-5; 2 Nephi 3:6, 15; 1 Nephi 11:13-21; Mosiah 3:8.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), The Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 348-350, 308, 324, 168, 264, 138, 331-332, 199, 16. Moses 4:1-6.
[^9] John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, pp. 19-42. Revelation 12:7-9.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 29:36-37.
[^11] Isaiah 14:12-13.
[^12] Smith, op. cit., pp. 324, 264, 168, 308.
[^13] Doctrine and Covenants 1:5-6.
[^14] Matthew 7:21.
[^15] Smith, op. cit., pp. 331-332, 199, 16.
[^16] 16. 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^17] 17. Moses 6:58.
