Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 6.

MAN'S QUEST FOR SALVATION

PURPOSE

It is our purpose in this chapter to mention briefly the principal world religions, because later on throughout this course of study we shall have many occasions to compare some of the doctrines of these religions, especially those which have been believed in universally, with the true Gospel teachings. We shall also devote even more detailed attention to the pagan religions of the Mediterranean world which were rivals of Christianity—the Mystery Religions. Our purpose is to get acquainted with these cults, because in many of the chapters that follow, the relationship of these religions to Christianity and the effect that their rituals had upon the true Gospel established by Jesus Christ shall receive our careful consideration. It was the blending and mixing of the beliefs and practices of these pagan rivals of Christianity which resulted in the great apostasy. As the course proceeds, we shall become better acquainted with this religious syncretism, or blending together of religious beliefs and practices during the early Christian centuries, the net result of which was Catholicism.

RELIGIONS AND DENOMINATIONS

Human beings, in their quest for salvation, have established and fostered numerous religious systems. Some of them were very crude, while others contained many true principles. Several of the major world religions throughout history have multiplied and divided themselves into a number of different sects or churches. For example, in the United States in 1936 there were 256 Christian denominations. [^1]

From the earliest times on, an untold number of pagan religions have flourished, some of which we have record of, while others have passed out of existence unrecorded. Dr. Frazer's voluminous work, The Golden Bough, gives many details of the story of paganism. Modern research and present-day writers have brought to light numerous facts regarding ancient religions.

The more thoroughly the extensive field of religious history is explored, the more evident it becomes that God is the center of human history and that one of the greatest endeavors of man has been his quest for salvation. A deity of some kind is an indispensable feature of religion and the very heart of each denomination. A pertinent fact in the history of religion is that what differentiates one particular religion from another is the interpretation the worshipers have had of God. Around their concept of the Deity they have in each religious denomination molded their human experiences, rituals, and creeds which appropriately fit their concept of the Supreme Being. Many of these beliefs and practices have been erroneous, however, while others have contained much truth. Thus human beings, in their quest for salvation, have practiced almost every conceivable type of ritual and have participated in a multitude of religious experiences.

WORLD'S MAJOR RELIGIONS

Robert Ernest Hume classifies the world's major religions into two groups—the dead and the living religions. [^2] He lists twelve historical religions that have gone out of existence and eleven others that are prominent in the world today. The names of what Dr. Hume terms "the world's living religions" and their approximate church membership today are as follows: Christianity, 557 millions; Confucianism, 250 millions; Mohammedanism, 230 millions; Hinduism, 217 millions; Buddhism, 137 millions; Taoism, 43 millions; Shintoism, 16 millions; Judaism, 11 millions; Sikhism, 3 millions; Jainism, 1 million, and Zoroastrianism, 0.1 million.

The birthplace of every one of the eleven living religions was Asia. The following list of these religions and their dates, arranged chronologically according to the date of their founders, are quoted from Dr. Hume's book. He points out that "for the two religions which had no personal founder, the date assigned is the approximate or traditional date of origin." [^3]

Hume makes the remark that "it is interesting to note that about the sixth century before Christ there was a period of unusual religious creativeness, when six of the world's living religions originated. That same century was a period of great importance to Judaism." [^4]

It is equally as interesting to Latter-day Saints to recall that in 600 B.C. God led a group of people from Jerusalem to America under the direction of two great prophets, Lehi and his son Nephi. Here for 1,000 years flourished a great nation of people who understood the Gospel of Jesus Christ probably as well as any group of God's children have done. Their history and their account of the Gospel are recorded in the Book of Mormon.

RELIGIOUS CONDITIONS DURING THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CENTURIES

Probably at no time in history have all classes of people been more interested in religion than were the people of the Mediterranean world during the early Christian centuries. The fact that people were conscious of the prevalence of evil and sin resulted in a hungering and yearning for religious satisfaction. The aim of the good man was "by means of a burning faith, by contempt for the world and its standards, by ecstasy, suffering and martyrdom, to be granted pardon for his unspeakable unworthiness, his immeasurable sins." [^5]

During the early centuries A.D., people were demanding redemption, forgiveness of sins, freedom from existing or imaginary evils, and assurance of immortality. Thus any religion which professed to be able to procure forgiveness of sins for its members, to ward off many earthly evils, to assure the initiated of a life after death, to bring them back into the presence of Deity, and, most desirable of all, to deify them, such a religion became popular with the vast majority of the populace. The prevalence of the belief in fate, demons, sorcery, magic and superstition made any religion which offered salvation from these evils very popular.

Yet in the face of the deep religious attitude which prevailed throughout the entire Mediterranean world, Rome had nothing to offer the people that could satisfy them. Her old state religion was sterile; in fact, it had decayed. The old Greek Homeric religion, which had for hundreds of years furnished certain spiritual satisfactions to thousands of people, was now dead. Most of the citizens now looked upon that religion as being composed of idle myths. Even Greek philosophy had disintegrated to the point that the majority of the populace no longer sought shelter under its withering wings.

But a new day had dawned. The great Roman empire, established by Augustus Caesar in 27 B.C., extended its strong arms over a vast area, and gave tolerance of thought and freedom of action to its subject peoples of a larger scale than humanity had heretofore enjoyed. Having no religion of her own that could be made vital in the lives of her subjects, Rome was forced to throw the entire empire open to any religion or group of religious which could offer satisfaction to the people. In the words of Samuel Dill, "the world was in the throes of a religious revolution and eagerly in quest of some fresh vision of the Divine, from whatever quarter it might dawn." [^6]

THE MYSTERY RELIGIONS

In which direction were the people to look for a religion that would fill their needs and give to them complete satisfaction? As Rome had nothing vital to offer, the populace turned to Christianity and the pagan cults of the Orient. Christ had just lived in the hilly country of Palestine and established the ancient Gospel on earth again. The Gospel was waiting for such men as Paul the apostle to take its glorious message to the inhabitants of Egypt, Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, and even Rome—the famous capital city.

But in addition to this virile religion, there were a number of vigorous cults in Asia Minor, Greece, Egypt, and even one which had migrated from far-off Persia, which offered salvation from the above-mentioned evils. They were known as the Mystery Religions. We shall also refer to them as the pagan rivals of Christianity. During the early centuries A.D. the mysteries spread throughout Italy and the Roman empire as the oncoming of a great wave, winning converts by the thousands.

Many factors, among which was emperor worship, contributed to the popularity of paganism during those early centuries. The fact that Christians refused to worship the Roman emperor as a god and also refused to worship any other individual except God the Eternal Father, while the Mystery Religions readily accepted the practice of worshiping the emperor and many other gods, gave paganism a distinct advantage over Christianity at first. Another important factor which served to make the Mystery Religions popular was the fact that these cults promised their devotees many of the things Christianity promised, such as the assurance of resurrection and a happy future life beyond the grave. They even promised that cult members could be exalted to godhood. They also had such doctrines as baptism, sacrament, atonement, sacrifices, and a belief in savior-gods. In fact, these pagan religions taught and practiced, in a distorted way, many doctrines which were directly related to the true Gospel of Jesus Christ. Even a casual glance at the doctrines of the Mystery Religions convinces one that they had come from the one common source of religious truths—the Gospel revelations given to Father Adam and the other holy prophets of God. Since many people failed to distinguish between the original and counterfeit brands of religion, the Mystery Religions became Christianity's strongest pagan rivals. The following quotation shows clearly this rivalry:

From Paul to Augustine . . . the fathers of the early church knew these cults as the strongest rivals that Christianity had, and with sour eloquence they testified to the popularity of the Mysteries among Gentile religionists. [^7]

The Mystery Religions are of special interest to us in this course of study, since they affected the teachings of the Christian Church more than any other groups, resulting in drastically altering the teachings which Jesus had given and thereby bringing about the great apostasy. We shall give a brief statement of several of the most important cults which played such a dominant role in the religious history of the early Christian period. According to Dr. Willoughby, "it is a curious circumstance that the very cults which were most widely and genuinely popular in the Graeco-Roman world are the least known in detail to religio-historical students today"; [^8] therefore, we should become better acquainted with them.

The Mysteries of Mithra originated in Persia about 1500 B.C. and migrated westward, arriving in Rome 66 B.C. For more than a hundred years prior to Paul's birth, the worship of Mithra was the most popular religion at Tarsus, the apostle's home town, and it remained so for centuries thereafter. During the early Christian period, Mithraism became the most popular religion in the entire Roman empire; in fact, it became the state religion. It retained that position of importance until 312 A.D., when Constantine legalized Christianity; and then, in 392 A.D., it received its death blow when Theodosius outlawed all pagan religions. If it had not been for these important events, and especially for the sheer superiority of Christianity, much of the world might be worshiping Mithra today instead of Jesus, so powerful did this pagan cult become.

Egypt supplied the Mediterranean world with two important cults, the Mysteries of Isis and Hermeticism. The former religion had its inception early in Egyptian history. It went through various periods of transition, and finally, in its Hellenized form, it got a foothold in Rome about 150 B.C. When Paul began his missionary work in Asia Minor, "he everywhere met with Isiac establishments that were already centuries old." This religion remained a power in the eastern Mediterranean world even to the last days of paganism, and it also won a place of importance in Italy. Hermeticism came into existence at least a century before Christ and reached its greatest popularity during the early Christian centuries. It also contributed its share to the religious complexity of the early Christian period.

Asia Minor's greatest contribution to paganism of the early Christian period was the Cybele-Attis (Great Mother) Mystery Religion. As early as the sixth century B.C. worshipers of this religion were practicing their orgies with a frenzy surpassing that of most other pagan devotees. During the Second Punic Wars (204 B.C.), the worship of the Great Mother was brought from Asia Minor to Rome by order of the Senate, with the hope that this goddess could help defeat Hannibal. Three years later the Carthaginian army was defeated and their city destroyed. The Great Mother had now won her place of prominence among the pagan cults. She retained that position until paganism came to an end.

Greece also supplied its Mystery cults to the Roman empire. The Eleusinian Mysteries were highly regarded at Athens long before the days of Socrates, and their influence was widespread throughout the Graeco-Roman world during the days of Jesus and thereafter. Cicero was of the opinion that "Athens had given nothing to the world more excellent or divine than the Eleusinian Mysteries." [^9]

Greece also had its Dionysian or Bacchus Mysteries, whose members worshiped their god through excessive drunkenness and wild orgies. A reformed type of Dionysian worship was Orphism, a cult well known to Plato. Both of these religions remained prominent during the early Christian period until 392 A.D.

There were several other Mystery Religions of lesser importance which flourished in the Mediterranean world as rivals of Christianity, but space will not permit a discussion of them.

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF MYSTERY RELIGIONS

By way of describing the Mystery Religions, one thing that was common to all of them was that they were secret organizations. That is their meaning of the word "mystery." Instead of being a religion of a state, a tribe, or a city into which people were born, these religions, like Christianity, were personal institutions into which individuals from any race could become initiated on condition of fulfillment of cult requirements. Membership was attained through initiation—a religious rebirth; thus the devotees felt a guarantee of personal salvation. These factors contributed to the popularity of the Mysteries during the early Christian age.

One of the most prominent features of a Mystery Religion was the great use it made of symbolism. Through the exhibition of statues of the cult deities, through public prayers, sacramental acts, myths and allegories, mystical experiences provoked the initiate to regeneration. He actually felt that he had been born anew. Some of the members brought about their religious experiences through drinking wine, dancing and violent whirling, bright lights, and other physically suggestive means. In the symbolism of the Mysteries, sometimes offensive to the early Christians and to people of our generation, these ancients were blindly grasping for the truths and realities of life.

There was a great variety of types of worship in the Mysteries, ranging from the most dissolute revelry to highly refined theology and rituals. Some rites were wild and barbaric, while others were meditative and refined. Thus, during the early Christian centuries, almost any type of individual could find things that appealed to him in one or another of these pagan cults. In fact, the worshipers, in their search for God and in their desire to gain salvation, participated in many weird religious practices. The main aim of the Mysteries was to appeal to the emotions. Through this appeal a psychic and mystic effect was produced which caused the participant to feel that he had experienced a new life.

CHRISTIANITY VS. PAGANISM

Christianity moved westward from the Orient and spread throughout the Roman empire as a strong competitor

of the Mystery Religions. It offered mankind all of the good things that the Mysteries promised, and in addition it also possessed the advantage of a superior code of ethics, a more definite and elaborate philosophy, and more refined ordinances and symbolism. Jesus of Nazareth had revealed to His followers the divine truths—the words and will of His Eternal Father—while the Mystery Religions were blindly seeking for those truths.

The world was in search of a Savior-God. Christianity supplied this in the divine historic person of Jesus Christ, while the Mystery Religions' savior-gods were but crude myths. The principles of Christian love and faith became a new force in religious life. Christianity during the early centuries possessed the ability to incorporate the social, ethical, and political aspects of life into religion, and to adjust to the needs of a changing world. Mystery cults lacked authoritative scriptures which Christianity possessed through its inheritance of the Old Testament and also its own writings, the New Testament. The latter gained the divine stamp equal in authenticity to the Hebrew scripture. No religion equaled the Church of the Master in offering moral content to humanity in time of the crises of life. Therefore, Christianity overcame all pagan rivals because of its superiority. The climax came when it received the support of the Roman government during the fourth century, and finally became the state religion in 392 A.D. But its ultimate triumph over paganism was not made without greatly altering the pure stream of Christian thought by the adoption of numerous heathenistic beliefs and practices.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: John 1:1-16; Acts 17:26-32; Romans 10:11-15; Galatians 3:23-29; James 1:13-15; Matthew 24:14; Mark 16:15-18. Justin Martyr, Apologia i, 66, cited in Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, p. 162.
[^2] Book of Mormon: I Nephi 17:35-40; 2 Nephi 28:29-30; 29:7-12; Mosiah 3:12-13; 16:6-11; Alma 29:8; 5:40-42; 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:15-18; 15:9; Ether 4:12; Moroni 7:12-14. Tertullian, De Praescriptione Haereticorum, 40, cited in Willoughby, Ibid., p. 160.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 76:1-10; 29:34-35; 131:20-21. Doctrine and Covenants 93:39.
[^4] Alfred W. Martin, Seven Great Bibles, pp. xviii, 1-277. Lewis Browne, This Believing World; James G. Frazer, The Golden Bough.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 218, 250-252. John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 79.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 36-40. Mosiah 3:12-13.
[^7] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, pp. 78-84. Alma 29:8.
[^8] John A. Widtsoe (Compiler), Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 2-6. I Nephi 17:35-40; 2 Nephi 28:29-30.
[^9] Hugh McCurdy Woodward, Humanity's Greatest Need, pp. 1-321. Ibid., 29:7-12.
