Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 7.

COMMON SOURCE OF RELIGIOUS TRUTHS

SIMILARITIES IN RELIGIOUS BELIEFS AND PRACTICES

The study of comparative religions during the past one hundred years has brought to light a surprising and significant succession of similarities in the beliefs and practices of the major world religions as well as the Mystery Religions which were briefly presented in the last chapter. Men, in their worship of God and in their quest for salvation, have maintained certain beliefs and have performed numerous ceremonials that are seen in many religions regardless of the country or the century to which the worshipers belong. The people of Greece, Italy, Egypt, Palestine, Mesopotamia, and India, as well as the aborigines of America and the inhabitants of far-off China, had similar rituals and creeds. Scholars have marveled over this "golden thread," this trace of similarity, which can be followed throughout the religious history of man.

Among the world-wide concepts are: a belief in a golden age in the past and a Utopia in the future; a belief in a Messiah and the virgin birth of "savior-gods"; a belief in the overruling power of Deity; a belief in demons, sin, rewards, punishments, and in the efficacy of baptism and of the eucharist or sacrament.

All religions believe in some sort of immortality. The claim to priesthood is universal. The concept of the existence of a divine plan for the guidance of men to happiness is world-old and world-wide. Most of the religious groups have taught the brotherhood of man, cooperation, and the golden rule. The belief that growth comes as a result of self-control and self-effort has been commonly held throughout the ages.

The cardinal qualities of moral life, such as justice, temperance, patience, purity, truthfulness and love, played a dominant role in all religions. Spiritual sentiments, such as reverence, awe, worship and faith, are common to all; and in the varieties of religions there exists a passionate yearning to become perfect. Even the substance of the Ten Commandments has been fundamental in the beliefs of many peoples.

THEORIES ACCOUNTING FOR RELIGIOUS SIMILARITIES

There is ample proof that such religious similarities as have been mentioned exist, and many more examples might be cited; but why do they exist? What are the theories which explain their presence?

DEVIL THEORY

So similar were many of the pagan practices to those of early Christianity that Justin Martyr, about 150 A.D., after describing the Lord's Supper as given in the Gospels, remarked: "The wicked devils have imitated [it] in the mysteries of Mithra, commanding the same thing to be done." [^1] Tertullian, another Christian teacher (160-220 A.D.), stated that "the devil, by the mysteries of his idols, imitates even the main part of the divine Mysteries. . . . He baptizes his worshipers in water and makes them believe that this purifies them from their crimes." [^2]

Thirteen hundred years later, Las Casas (1474-1566 A.D.), a Spanish Catholic missionary, observing that the ceremonies of the Indians closely resembled those of the Christians, concluded that the devil had arrived in America ahead of the Christians and implanted in the minds of the natives many teachings closely akin to Christianity. It has been a Gospel teaching proclaimed by Jesus and the holy prophets that the devil has exerted a powerful influence upon mortal beings in bringing about sin and apostasy and in counterfeiting the true principles and ordinances of the Gospel. But it is also true that the complete responsibility for apostasies and also for the world-wide religious similarities cannot be placed upon the devil. Lucifer and his followers have merely contributed their share—in conjunction with other fundamental causes—in bringing about those conditions. [^3]

INDEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT THEORY

Another theory which is very popular among writers today in explaining such religious similarities in different lands and among different peoples has been termed the "independent development theory." Those who advocate it maintain that religious beliefs and practices have arisen spontaneously and independently in various countries. They hold that religious rituals and beliefs developed gradually as men evolved from savagery to civilization. Certain scholars point out that similar myths, legends, and folklore exist among all primitive peoples; and that these and primitive magic arose as a result of "fear," presence of death, reproduction, and other experiences that deeply stir the feelings of man. [^4]

The theory of independent development also maintains that the founders of the various great world religions developed their creeds, beliefs and practices on their own foundation, independently of other religions. To quote:

The striking similarities that exist, despite independent origin, are explained by a "psychic unity that leads men independently . . . to arrive at the same destination." Some supporters of this theory speak of a "convergence" of human ideas towards the same conclusions. In short, the blind or chance operation of some mystic force explains the similarities appearing in the religious systems of the world. [^5]

This explanation is also used to account for the world-wide similarities in art, mechanics, crafts and literature. Those who advocate this theory claim that all similarities in the general culture of mankind had an independent origin in different parts of the world.

DIFFUSION THEORY

In contrast with the "independent development theory," a number of writers have maintained that the similarities in the religions and cultures of different peoples can be explained on the basis of having come from a common source or center and having been diffused throughout the world. Sir Edward Burnett Tylor and his followers are strong advocates of the "diffusion theory," having produced a large and convincing literature in its support. From the earliest times human beings have traveled by land and by sea very extensively, and through this intercourse their skills and learnings have passed from man to man and from land to land. There is an abundance of historical evidence to sustain the belief that ideas, handicrafts, arts, religious customs, and culture in general have been handed down from one generation to another and that races of people have borrowed all of these from each other.

In fact, one of the most important causes of the similarities of beliefs and rituals is this very fact, that people do hand down their customs to their children, and they in turn to their children. In such an important matter as religion, the fundamentals carry on from generation to generation. Also peoples of different countries in their social contacts borrow rituals from each other. During certain periods of history, conditions have been more favorable to the dispersal of human customs, beliefs and culture than during other periods. For example, the conquests of Alexander the Great and the spreading of Greek culture to foreign countries resulted in a mixture of Greek beliefs with those of the conquered nations. Historians speak of this activity as Hellenizing the world. Again the subsequent rise of the Roman empire was very conducive to the spread of ideas and the blending together of religious beliefs. This fusing and blending of theologies is termed "religious syncretism."

Mormons know that the Jaredites and the Nephites migrated to America, bringing with them from their former homes many social and religious customs and beliefs. Mohammedanism furnishes a good example of a religion spreading from Arabia throughout Asia and into parts of Europe and Africa. Christianity has been carried from one end of the world to the other. The diffusion of these latter two religions has taken place within historical times since the birth of Jesus of Nazareth; also the story of the former two peoples is clearly recorded in the Book of Mormon.

INDEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT AND DIFFUSION THEORIES EXPLAINED

All men and women born into the world are sons and daughters of God; therefore, they may all receive knowledge and guidance through His omnipresent Holy Spirit. One of the basic principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is revelation—God's will being communicated to man. Through various methods He gives mortals knowledge of light and truth. If the Lord should so desire, He could reveal the same truths to two men who lived in different parts of the world and who were completely inaccessible to each other. In fact, they could be separated also by hundreds of years of time. Mormons agree, therefore, that to a certain extent the theory of "independent development" can be accepted as partially accounting for the similarities in various religions.

This doctrine suggests that God has given to all peoples, regardless of their race, color or creed, the amount of religious truth that they were able to receive and willing to obey. The Nephite prophets maintained that the Lord has made known Gospel truths to every race of people according to their needs and ability to harmonize their lives with the divine will. In the words of King Benjamin: "And the Lord God hath sent his holy prophets among all the children of men, to declare these things to every kindred, nation, and tongue." [^6]

Alma stated that God is mindful of every people. He said: "For behold, the Lord does grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that He seeth fit that they should have." [^7]

Therefore, a certain amount of God's word was given in divers ways to the people of India, of Persia, of Babylon, of Arabia, of China, Greece, and Rome; and a great amount of it was given to the people of Palestine, to the inhabitants of ancient America, and to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

No prophet of God has ever presented these facts in a more beautiful and convincing way than did Nephi, the mighty preacher of old. To quote from his teachings and God's revelation to him:

Thus saith the Lord God: "I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; . . . Unto him that receiveth, I will give more; and from them that shall say, 'We have enough,' from them shall be taken away even that which they have. [^8] . . .

"Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

"Wherefore murmur ye because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together, the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

"Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible, ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written: For I commanded all men, both in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written, I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written.

"For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews, and they shall write; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites, and they shall write; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth, and they shall write it." [^9]

It seems, however, that historically the major portion of evidence favors the doctrine of diffusion from some central place of culture, beliefs, and customs as the principal explanation of the religious similarities among the various races of men. This belief is sustained by modern revelations given through Joseph Smith. The Prophet was informed that God revealed the plan of salvation to Father Adam, the first man. Gradually, as men drew further from their Heavenly Parents through sin and ignorance, the interpretation of Gospel truths was corrupted and changed; yet a resemblance to the original revelation persisted. At various times God renewed men's knowledge of truth by revelations to His prophets. Only those individuals or races who continued in harmony with Deity were able to draw divine verities from above. Thus the diffusion theory maintains that all religions had a common origin, that apostasies have diverted the truths, yet leaving enough verity in any religion to give it a resemblance to the teachings of the Master. This helps to account for the American Indians in 1492 having similar rituals and beliefs to the Christians, and in general, for the similarities in all religions.

In conclusion, therefore, the foregoing revelations quoted from the Nephite prophets definitely show that God has revealed His will to religious leaders all over the world. This gives us the key as to where the knowledge of truths came from in the support of the independent development theory. On the other hand, there has been one principal line of chosen people—beginning with Father Adam and running from him through Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and then on through the Israelite prophets—through which God has revealed His will most generously. From the teachings of this central line of righteous prophets truths have filtered outward throughout the world. This, therefore, sustains the diffusion theory.

Thus both the independent development and diffusion theories can be accepted as answers to the problem of why there are resemblances in world religions. Doubtless there has been an interplay of these two forces operating throughout history. According to Dr. John A. Widtsoe, Mormons accept each of these theories as partial answers to this problem. To quote Dr. Widtsoe's words: "These two contending and opposite theories—the independent development and the diffusion theories—have followers of equal scholastic standing. . . . Latter-day Saints agree with both of these theories, in part, and differ with them in part." [^10]

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTERS 7 AND 8

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 38-40.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 251.
[^3] Alma 5:40-42; Omni 1:25; Moroni 7:12-14.
[^4] Ether 4:12; Mosiah 16:6-11; Alma 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:15-18; 15:9.
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants 76:1-10.
[^6] John Henry Evans, The Heart of Mormonism, pp. 58-59.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 84:45-47; 84:6-13.
[^8] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 168-179, 162-174.
[^9] John 14:16-17.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 131:20-21.
