Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 8.

DIVINE FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL TRUTH

TRUTH COMES FROM GOD

All that is good in the entire world, or that has been or that will be, comes from one divine source—the Godhead. These heavenly beings constitute the Eternal Fountain of Law and Truth. The great scientists, the renowned philosophers, the famous poets and musicians, the teachers and prophets who have discovered truth and given it to humanity during any age of the world's history have received their inspiration from God. Thus Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Shakespeare, Galileo, Copernicus, Edison, Burbank, Tennyson, Emerson, Beethoven and others received their revelations of new truths from the same source. Even the leaders of the great movements, such as Christopher Columbus, Abraham Lincoln, Susan B. Anthony, and Dorothea Dix, were divinely inspired. Also the forefathers in writing the Constitution were guided by the hand of God. All the great religious teachers of the world, such as Buddha, Confucius, Mohammed, Zoroaster and Lao-Tze wherein they taught virtue and truth, received the same from the divine fountain of truth. The Protestant reformers also received inspiration from God in carrying forward their work preparatory for the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And it has been universally recognized in Christendom that the great prophets of the Old and New Testament periods were in close communion with the Supreme Being. The Latter-day Saints are of the opinion that no men who have lived in this world, with the exception of Jesus Christ, have drunk more deeply of the Fountain of Truth than did such individuals as Nephi, Alma the younger, and the Prophet Joseph Smith, especially the latter.

To go one step further, it is true that every man and woman receives a certain amount of guidance along the path of truth from the same source that the renowned leaders

have received their inspiration. We all draw upon the Divine Fountain of Truth; however, some draw more heavily than others. Thus all truth comes from God.

THIS BELIEF CONFIRMED BY PRESIDENT SMITH

President Joseph F. Smith maintained that all truths come to men through the mediation of Jesus Christ; therefore, he confirmed the foregoing doctrine. To quote his words:

Christ, therefore, being the foundation of truth, is no imitator. He taught the truth first; it was his before it was given to man. When he came to the earth he not only proclaimed new thought, but repeated some of the everlasting principles which had been heretofore only partly understood and enunciated by the wisest of men. And in so doing he enlarged in every instance upon the wisdom which they had originally received from him, because of his superior abilities and wisdom and his association with the Father and the Holy Ghost. He did not imitate men. They made known in their imperfect way what the inspiration of Jesus Christ had taught them, for they obtained their enlightenment first from him.

Christ taught the Gospel to Adam, and made known his truths to Abraham and the prophets. He was the inspirer of the ancient philosophers, Pagan and Israelite, as well as of the great characters of modern times. Columbus, in discovery; Washington, in the struggle for freedom; Lincoln, in emancipation and union; Bacon, in philosophy; Franklin, in statesmanship and diplomacy; Stephenson, in steam; Watts, in song; Edison, in electricity; and Joseph Smith, in theology and religion, found in Christ the source of their wisdom and the marvelous truths which they advocated.

Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, and all the reformers, were inspired in thoughts, words, and actions, to accomplish what they did for the amelioration, liberty and advancement of the human race. Their inspiration, as with that of the ancients, came from the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the one true and living God. This may also truthfully be said concerning the Revolutionary fathers of this nation, and all who have in the ages past contributed to the progress of civil and religious freedom. There is no light nor truth which did not come to them first from him. Men are mere repeaters of what he has taught them. He has voiced no thoughts originating with man.

The teachings of Jesus did not begin with his incarnation; for, like truth, he is eternal. He not only inspired the ancients from the beginning, but when he came to earth he reiterated eternal, original truth, and added gloriously to the revelations men had uttered. When he returned to the Father he still took, and does take, an interest in his children and people, by revealing to them new truths, and by inspiring their actions; and, as men grow in the knowledge of God, they shall become more and more like him unto the perfect day, when his knowledge shall cover the earth as the waters cover the deep. [^1]

THIS DOCTRINE ALSO SUSTAINED BY THE PROPHETS

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that "if there was anything great or good in the world, it comes from God." [^2] This is also the doctrine of the holy scriptures. The Nephite prophets were especially emphatic in their pronouncements that all good comes from the Deity, while its opposite comes from the devil. [^3] The Gospel of Christ, they taught, is the plan of salvation, Jesus being "the light and the life, and the truth of the world." [^4] Many similar statements appear in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that religions resemble each other in those particular points which are true because all truth emanates from the same source—the great Fountain of Law and Truth, of which God is the head, because He has throughout the ages lived righteously and always worked in harmony with law and truth.

RELIGIOUS TRUTHS REVEALED TO THE RIGHTEOUS

In modern revelations, Jesus definitely promised to reveal His will and numerous truths to the people who serve Him diligently by keeping His commandments. For example, such revelations as the following appear in the Doctrine and Covenants:

I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory. And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations; and their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven: and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught; for by my spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will; yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man. [^5]

Thus it is definite that in order to draw upon the fountain of truth one must live a righteous life. The more complete his obedience is to the principles of the Gospel, the thinner the veil between him and the unseen world becomes. In other words, man must be in tune in order to receive revelation. For example, one morning in 1829, before Joseph Smith went upstairs to continue his work of translating the Nephite records, he had a disagreement with his wife. Then he and Oliver Cowdery went to their work. The Prophet's scribe sat, with pen in hand, for the seer to repeat the words from the ancient record. Finally, after many long minutes had passed, Joseph said, "Oliver, something is wrong. All is dark. I can't see a thing." [^6]

Thereupon Joseph went out into the garden and remained about an hour praying. Then he returned to the house, where he and Emma made things right with each other. He was now spiritually in harmony with God and his mortal associates, and so he was able to resume his work as usual. This experience illustrates the absolute necessity of living righteously if we are to receive revelations from the Most High.

The fact that the Prophet Joseph Smith was in almost continuous communion with God, the veil always being very thin between himself and the unseen world, is positive proof of the perpetual righteousness of this great man. Therefore, those interpretations to the contrary of the Prophet's personality and character given by some anti-Mormon writers are grossly erroneous—in fact, wickedly false. Joseph Smith could not have continued to receive revelations from God and see and commune with heavenly beings up to the time of his death unless he was continuously living a pure life, both in thoughts and actions. And Latter-day Saints know that the American Prophet continued to commune with heavenly beings and that he received during his lifetime probably as many divine truths through revelation as any other mortal being ever received.

METHODS OF REVELATION

The members of the Godhead are forever reaching downward toward mortals and anxiously waiting for them to get in harmony so that they can receive knowledge of eternal truths. God has utilized divers channels through which to reveal His will to men. On certain occasions He has sent His Only Begotten Son to earth with messages to mortals and at other times angels have come. Through dreams and visions men have received light, and at times God has spoken directly from heaven to them. God has made available His Spirit and also that of the Holy Ghost to serve as guides toward all truths.

"The Holy Spirit is the power of intelligence, of wise direction, of development, of life. . . . Some measure of this power is given to all mankind."

The "force" of God's intelligence is permeating the universe, contacting and enlightening the intelligence of mortals. The foregoing doctrine is confirmed in modern revelation as follows:

For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ; and the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit, cometh unto God, even the Father. [^7]

The Holy Ghost, on the other hand, functions almost exclusively with those individuals who have been baptized and confirmed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^8] Before His death, the Savior told His apostles: "I will pray to the Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him." [^9] But even after members of the true Church receive the Holy Ghost, their righteousness determines the effectiveness with which this gift from God can operate through them.

It is encouraging to know that the Eternal Father and His Only Begotten not only see fit, but are very anxious for every nation to have all the truth that its development and nature will assimilate in harmonizing itself with law. The Eternal Beings have always revealed to men generously all the truth that they could live up to, and even more than most mortals have been able to obey.

LEARNING TRUTH THROUGH OBEDIENCE TO LAW

Mortals, aided by the Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost, have through obedience to law been able to discover many eternal truths. Thus great advancements have come all over the world in sciences, and through the prophets in religious concepts. In fact, since the Gospel of Jesus Christ was restored to earth, approximately one hundred years ago, light and truth have been shed forth upon mankind more generously than during the entire span of thousands of years of previous history. Even the terrific force contained in the atom has now been released by man and used for destructive purposes in bombing Japan. So tremendous is this power that man could easily destroy the world with it. Let us hope that this power may never be turned to evil, but Satan has taken over many of the discoveries and applied them in his service. On the other hand, man could harness this power for the purpose of doing the world's work. The amount of power in an atomic bomb staggers the limits of one's imagination. Some day, when all the laws of handling such an overwhelming force have been learned, this new agency of power can be used to replace or supplement all previously discovered sources of power, including electricity. Surely this atomic power will usher in a new age in science, industry, and social living. Once again the whole structure of human life will be revolutionized. God has once more placed in the hands of His children the knowledge of another of the great laws of His power.

Everything is governed eternally by law. "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world, upon which all blessings are predicted; and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to the law upon which it is predicated." [^10] This revelation refers to the laws of heaven, of earth, of nature, of science, of health and of brotherhood. They are God's spiritual laws. [^11] Jesus became a God and reached His great state of understanding through consistent effort and continuous obedience to all the Gospel truths and universal laws. Whenever men put themselves in proper condition and obey, they also obtain the knowledge of truth. The whole world is filled with the Spirit of truth, just as it is filled with sunshine, electricity and other universal substances and forces, waiting to touch the harmonizing chords of men's understanding so they will obey the law and thereby gain the knowledge and the blessing.

Throughout the entire course of human history, men have as a rule been trying to get in harmony with law. When mortals have strayed from the primeval Gospel truths known by Father Adam and thereby, through apostasy, dropped into a condition of barbarism, they greatly altered their modes of behavior and religious ceremonials for their salvation, both temporal and spiritual. They saved themselves to the extent that they placed themselves beyond the power of their enemies. Their chief enemy was ignorance—i.e., their inability to get in harmony with truth. There are laws governing various levels of actions. If barbarians could not harmonize their lives with the higher order—which would give them greater freedom, knowledge, and power—they adjusted themselves to many of the lower laws and received salvation on that level. If their rituals gave to their lives the deepest expression and greatest religious growth of which their natures were capable, then they were in harmony with the laws that fit their immediate salvation, but not in harmony with the higher laws of truth that bring the greatest development and make men Gods. The principal phase of this higher system of law is the Gospel plan of salvation.

As these groups of people who had lost many Gospel truths as a result of apostasies repented of many of their sins and thereby progressed, members of their groups were able to harmonize themselves with a greater number of laws. Their intelligent natures were touched more easily and more deeply by that eternal, universal truth which naturally increased their knowledge. Then their rituals took on a form more in consistency with that higher order revealed by Jesus Christ.

GOD'S RELATIONSHIP TO MAN'S PROGRESSION

We should keep in mind that throughout this whole process of human history and men's quest for salvation, God the Eternal Father and His Only Begotten Son have been forever reaching downward to mortals to assist them in their eternal struggle for progression toward Godhood. These Eternal Beings have been the center, the principal motivating force of human history. The Godhead is the Divine Fountain of Eternal Truth from which all enlightenment throughout history has come to all peoples. The Lord has used numerous avenues through which to reveal truth for the purpose of enlightening His children and making possible their progression. The channels most universally used are the Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost.

God has always been an impartial ruler; therefore, all of His blessings are based upon the worthiness of the recipients. Thus the law of compensation operates throughout the entire universe. The responsibility is upon mortals, aided by God, to work out their own salvation through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The righteous men are the ones who shall receive rewards.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Book of Mormon: 2 Nephi 5:8-23; Enos 1:29; Alma 29:45; Ether 8:1-26; 9:1-13. Moses 5:12-13; Alma 29:4-5.
[^2] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 5:12-40, 47-55. 2 Nephi 5:20-23; Enos 1:20. Note the contrast of the condition of the Nephites with that of the Lamanites, 2 Nephi 5:8-18.
[^3] Alma 5:40-42; Omni 1:25; Moroni 7:12-14.
[^4] Ether 4:12; Mosiah 16:6-11; Alma 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:15-18; 15:9.
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants 76:1-10.
[^6] John Henry Evans, The Heart of Mormonism, pp. 58-59.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 84:45-47; 84:6-13.
[^8] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 168-179, 162-174.
[^9] John 14:16-17.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 131:20-21.
[^11] Ibid., 29:34-35.
