Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 9

APOSTASIES AND HOW THEY OCCUR

APOSTASIES

An apostasy is a falling away, altering, or rejecting the divinely revealed will of God. It is the substitution of man-made creeds and practices for the truths of the plan of salvation. It is the loss of light and truth by any person or group of people. All nations, tribes or clans in the world today as well as throughout the entire course of human history, have had many truths in their culture by which they lived. Every individual, also, is guided by a certain amount of truth. But when a nation, a race of people, or an individual loses the divine verities which have formerly been guides to their lives, and especially when they lose the power of the Priesthood of the Most High God, apostasy prevails.

There have been numerous apostasies throughout the course of history. Sometimes they have occurred with whole groups of people and at other times only individuals have been affected. When the holy Priesthood and the Holy Ghost are withdrawn from man, he is left in darkness; and in many instances races of people have dropped into savagery as a result. The pages of human history describe long periods of deplorable conditions of savagery and barbarism where the sons and daughters of God were groping in darkness. How have human beings and races reached that state? What are the underlying causes of apostasies?

THROUGH SIN AND IGNORANCE

Sin (i. e., human beings' refusing to live the laws of truth) has always been one of the most prevalent causes of apostasy. The first falling away from the revealed Gospel plan recorded in the holy scriptures took place in the first human family. Many of Adam and Eve's children loved sin and the things of the world more than they loved God and the way of eternal life; therefore, they refused to accept the Gospel teachings given to them by the Lord through their parents. [^1]

When individuals or groups of people wilfully choose evil in preference to good, the Spirit of God is grieved and departs from them. They are then left to grope in darkness. Things which they have heretofore believed to be true they now doubt. The desire to study, learn truth, and progress becomes petrified within them. Degeneracy sets in, and soon they become a fallen people.

A good illustration in which this occurred to an extreme degree is found in the history of the Lamanites as presented in the Book of Mormon. Laman and Lemuel, with their families and friends, rebelled against God, against Lehi, against their brother Nephi, and against the eternal principles of truth. Within the short space of thirty years after the small colony left Jerusalem, complete degeneracy had set in. Nephi's description of the Lamanites at that time shows that they had degenerated almost to the level on which the more savage of the Indians were living when Columbus discovered America. [^2] Sin was the cause which brought this people into apostasy and darkness. Then their children from generation to generation were kept in that condition through a combination of ignorance and sin.

THROUGH RELIGIOUS SYNCRETISM

Apostasies have also been brought about in various ages of the world as a result of a people who had the true religion intermarrying and mixing their culture and religious concepts with those of other peoples. At certain times a small group of people, possessing the true Gospel, would partially convert a much larger group to their church, but the converts would tenaciously cling to many of their former pagan beliefs and practices. After they had affiliated with the true religion, their false concepts became mixed with the true Gospel doctrine, so that the next generation inherited a fusion of the two. Therefore, these gradual apostasies are brought about as a natural result of the social mixing of different races of people, or through a process of religious syncretism.

An excellent historical example of apostasy's being brought about primarily through religious syncretism is the merging together of Christian and pagan beliefs during the early Catholic period. The net result was neither paganism nor Christianity as Christ had originally established it. Both systems of religious thought, with the accompanying rituals and doctrines, were altered so extensively that historians refer to the social process that occurred during the early portion of the Middle Ages, and the net result of the process, as the Great Apostasy.

WORLD'S STREAM OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT

To further explain how apostasies from the divine plan of salvation have come about from Adam's day down to our time, and also to show why pagans have had so many beliefs resembling the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, we present the following explanation:

In the beginning the Lord revealed the plan of salvation to Father Adam. Later a renewal of that revelation was given to the holy prophets at various times during the different Gospel dispensations, according to the needs of the age and the ability of the prophets to harmonize their lives with the Divine Will.

This succession of Gospel dispensations can be likened to a great river of water flowing continuously from generation to generation from the time of the first revelation of God's will to man. As pointed out in the last chapter, the central Fountain of all Truth from which these waters flow is Jesus Christ and His divine Father.

Meandering outward from the main river, there have always been numerous streams and streamlets, disseminating truths among all peoples. But these streams also have continued to pick up a variety of materials as they ran along. The farther they traveled the more they became contaminated or polluted through the sins and ignorance of mortals and through man-made religious concepts. Thus partial apostasies from the eternal verities were brought about. In spite of these alterations in religious beliefs and practices, the streams of thought have always retained a semblance to the original revelation given to Adam.

Occasionally some of these small streams flowed back into the main river channel, thereby helping to pollute the original stream, bringing about a partial falling away from revealed truths. This necessitated a renewal of divine revelation.

At various times in history a great number of these polluted streams flowed back into the main river channel, adulterating almost completely the central supply of truth—or, in other words, instigating a rather pronounced apostasy from the Gospel of Jesus Christ. That is exactly what happened during the first four centuries of the Christian era. During the early centuries A.D., the Church established by Jesus rapidly became a depository of all the streams of thought—Hebrew and pagan—of the Graeco-Roman world which were flowing into the great river of truth, that is, into the teachings of the Man of Galilee. The alterations and modifications imposed on Christendom were numerous, especially as time moved forward from the days of Jesus and His apostles. Many of those changes will be discussed in this course of study.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 9

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Genesis 2:24; Daniel 7:13-14; 12:1-3; Matthew 19:5; Mark 10:7-8; Galatians 3:8. Alma 42:6-14; 12:22-24; Helaman 14:16; Doctrine and Covenants 29:41.
[^2] Book of Mormon: Alma 42:6-14; 12:22-34; 13:1-19; Helaman 14:16; 2 Nephi 2:21. Alma 12:22; 42:11; Moses 5:13.
