Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 10.

THE GOSPEL GIVEN TO FATHER ADAM

THE FALL—A SPIRITUAL DEATH

When Adam and Eve were first placed in the Garden of Eden they had intimate association with heavenly beings, because they were not yet mortals. They also understood the Gospel plan of salvation just as they had before being placed on the earth. When they partook of the forbidden fruit, however, a change came over them and they became mortal beings. Thereupon a veil was drawn over their minds, so they no longer remembered their pre-mortal experiences, nor could they recollect the Gospel principles and ordinances. Then God cast them out of Eden so they could go through the school of mortality. Therefore, after the fall our first parents were living in a temporal world and were cut off from the presence of God, who lives in a spiritual, celestial world.

The Nephite prophets spoke of this coming into mortality—or the banishment from the presence of God—as the first death, a spiritual death. Alma explained to the people that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from God's presence and were free to follow their own inclinations. Since men's spirits could never cease existing "and the fall had brought upon mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal; that is, they were cast off from the presence of the Lord; it was expedient that mankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual death." [^1] In other words, it was imperative that Adam and Eve receive the Gospel again.

NECESSITY OF DIVINE REVELATION

Under the conditions of mortality, unaided by a divine power or being, men did not have sufficient knowledge nor power to bring themselves back into the presence of God. The prophets also taught that as a result of Adam's fall "all mankind became a lost and fallen people," being "carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature." [^2] In fact, if men were never to receive revelations or aid from God, they would wander, as Lehi saw in a vision, "in a dark and dreary waste," without the possibility of escape from that depraved condition. But the Eternal Father and His Son Jesus, in their love and mercy, provided an escape from this condition of spiritual and temporal death. As has been pointed out, a plan of salvation was provided in heaven for mankind even before mortals were placed upon the earth. Alma explained the interest that God had in Adam and Eve after they had been driven from the Garden of Eden as follows:

[God] saw that it was expedient that men should know concerning the things whereof he had appointed unto them; therefore, he sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory. And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore, God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works. [^3]

ADAM RECEIVED THE GOSPEL

Father Adam, called by Daniel the Ancient of Days, and by the Lord, Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, received through divine revelations the Gospel of Jesus Christ—the same Gospel with the same principles and ordinances that we have today. [^4] The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that God "set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them." [^5] The Pearl of Great Price, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, with a lesser amount of evidence in the Bible, attest the foregoing statement to be positively true.

We shall now enumerate the various principles and ordinances that were revealed to Father Adam and discuss them briefly for the purpose of giving evidence that the first mortals received the same Gospel as was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and the same as has been in the world during any dispensation. However, as we proceed throughout this course of study, it will become necessary to discuss the various Gospel principles and ordinances in separate chapters as they fit into the story of the history of the Gospel through the ages. Therefore, a certain amount of repetition will be unavoidable. On each new topic, it will be necessary to begin with Adam's reception of that Gospel doctrine.

Among the first Gospel principles that God revealed to Adam and Eve was that of eternal marriage. When they were first placed on earth, "God blessed them and said unto them: 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it'." [^6] These instructions included the Gospel principles of rearing families, and—through the application of intelligence and industry—learning the laws of the universe and controlling them for the good of men. Men were to be the bread-winners, supporting their families "by the sweat of their faces," and women were to bear children in sorrow and suffering.

Among the other Gospel verities which the scriptures definitely point out as having been revealed to our first parents are faith, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost. The ancient records testify that our first parents obeyed these principles and ordinances of the Gospel. Father Adam thoroughly understood the doctrines of the fall, the atonement, free agency, and immortality. He even knew that the Savior's name would be Jesus Christ.

God used diverse methods to reveal divine verities to our first parents. At times "they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking to them"; and on other occasions angels appeared unto them to give them heavenly instructions. Little by little they learned the Gospel truths, receiving and understanding this information gradually in the same manner as we learn.

THE ADAMIC LANGUAGE

The ancient records also inform us that Adam and his posterity were taught through the spirit of inspiration to read and write. They, in turn, taught their children. The language that they used is known as the Adamic language. The ancient records speak of it as being "a language which was pure and undefiled." [^7] The record of Gospel teachings, revelations from God, and the genealogy of the people was kept in a book which they called the "Book of Remembrance." [^8] Copies of this holy record were handed down from generation to generation. Abraham, the father of the faithful, claimed to posses "the records of the fathers" running back from his day to the beginning of the creation.

PRIESTHOOD GIVEN TO ADAM

Adam also received the keys of the holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God directly from Jesus Christ, and he in turn bestowed it upon his posterity. [^9] Priesthood is probably the most important single item in the Gospel. Without it the ordinances could not be performed; neither could the true Church be established. Therefore, in the very beginning all the principles and ordinances of the Gospel were administered through the power of the Priesthood. Regarding this important subject, Joseph the Prophet proclaimed:

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed. . . . He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth and then in heaven. [^10]

The promise was made to Father Adam that "this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also." [^11] That promise was fulfilled when the Gospel of Jesus Christ was restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

PEARL OF GREAT PRICE ACCOUNT

The most complete account that we have in any of the scriptures of Adam's receiving the Gospel of Jesus Christ is found in the Pearl of Great Price. If that record contained nothing but that important information, it would still be of untold worth to us. For the purpose of becoming personally acquainted with this excellent account as recorded by the ancients, let us quote the story directly from that sacred scripture:

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: "Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord?" And Adam said unto him, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me."

And then the angel spake, saying: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son for evermore."

And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: "I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will." . . .

And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: "I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh." And he also said unto him: "If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you." . . .

And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves, and I have given unto you another law and commandment. Wherefore, teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Therefore, I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying: "That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory; for by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." . . .

And now, behold, I say unto you: "This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time." . . .

And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man.

And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: "Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever; and thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity. Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons." . . .

And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: "Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God."

And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient."

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. . . .

And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen. [^12]

JOSEPH SMITH'S VIEWPOINT

There are approximately a dozen revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants in which the Lord revealed to the Prophet of the last dispensation information about Father Adam. Through these declarations and other revelations which Joseph received from the Lord, the Prophet developed a strong and convincing doctrine on the Gospel of Jesus Christ being given to Adam, and from that point coming down through the various dispensations.

By direct revelation the Prophet learned that the Lord had sent forth angels to declare unto Adam and his posterity that they must repent, and through faith in the Only Begotten Son be redeemed and raised "in immortality unto eternal life." [^13] Following is an example of Joseph Smith's teachings on this subject:

Perhaps our friends will say that the Gospel and its ordinances were not known till the days of John, the son of Zacharias, in the days of Herod, the king of Judea. But we will here look at this point: For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fell. . . .

It will be noticed that, according to Paul, [^14] the Gospel was preached to Abraham. . . . So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served . . . to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption. . . .

We may conclude that though there were different dispensations, yet all things which God communicated to His people were calculated to draw their minds to the great object, and to teach them to rely upon God alone as the author of their salvation, as contained in His law.

From what we can draw from the scriptures relative to the teaching of heaven, we are induced to think that much instruction has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess now. [^15]

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S STATEMENT

In his terse way of speaking, Brigham Young declared:

God was once known on the earth among His children of mankind, as we know one another. Adam was as conversant with his Father, who placed him upon the earth, as we are conversant with our earthly parents. The Father frequently came to visit his son Adam, and talked and walked with him; and the children of Adam were more or less acquainted with Him, and the things that pertain to God and to heaven were as familiar among mankind in the first ages of their existence as our gardens are to our wives and children, or as the road to the western ocean is to the experienced traveler. From this source mankind have received their religious traditions. [^16]

CONCLUSIONS

Thus we see that the holy scriptures declare that God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ revealed the Gospel to Father Adam. The Lord confirmed this truth in revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith; and Latter-day Saints—from the Prophet's time to our day—have sustained that concept in their writings and teachings.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 10

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Genesis 4; 5; 6:1-7; 1 Corinthians 9:16-17; Ephesians 1:10; 3:1-5; Colossians 1:25-26; Revelation 12:7-8. Doctrine and Covenants 27:5, 13; 64:30, 37; 112:28ff.; 121:31; 128:18-21; 36:37.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 27:11-13; 78:16; 84:16; 88:112-115; 107:1-3; 128:20-21. I Corinthians 9:16-17; Ephesians 1:10; 3:1-5; Colossians 1:25-26.
[^3] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 4; 5; 6; 7; 8:1-7. Ephesians 1:10.
[^4] G. Homer Durham (Compiler), The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 95-103. Webster's New International Dictionary, Second Edition, Unabridged.
[^5] B. H. Roberts, The Seventy's Course of Theology, Second Year, "The Adamic Dispensation," pp.37-72; "Dispensation of the Gospel Committed to Enoch," pp. 73-85. The Popular and Critical Bible Encyclopaedia, vol. 1, p. 532.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 157-159, 167-168, 170-171. Revelation 12:7-8.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 60-72, 78-83. Doctrine and Covenants 27:11; 29:34-35.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man, pp. 67-72, 93, 178-182, 479-482. John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, pp. 287-290.
[^9] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, pp. 287-290. Ibid., 84:16; 78:16.
[^10] John A. Widtsoe (Compiler), Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 153-169. Ibid., 88:112-115; 128:21; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 167-168.
[^11] Smith, Ibid., p. 157.
[^12] Ibid., p. 168.
[^13] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 289-290.
[^14] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man, pp. 479-482.
[^15] Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 157, 158, 168-169.
[^16] Moses 5:1-59; 6:1-20; Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-56.
