Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 13.

GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS IN ANCIENT AMERICA

JAREDITE GOSPEL DISPENSATION

The Book of Ether gives a brief account of what we could term the Jaredite Gospel Dispensation. It began at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people when they were building the tower of Babel. The great prophet, who received many revelations from the Lord and who inaugurated this dispensation, was called in the ancient record the brother of Jared; but Joseph Smith tells us that his name was Mahonri Moriancumer. [^1]

So great was the faith of this ancient prophet that, when the Savior of the world stretched forth His hand to touch some stones in order that they might radiate light in response to a prayer uttered by Moriancumer, he saw the finger of the Lord. Jesus declared:

"Never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so, ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this?"

The prophet answered, "Nay, Lord, shew thyself unto me.". . .

And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord shewed himself unto him, and said, "Because thou knowest these things, ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I shew myself unto you. Behold I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters." [^2]

Then the Lord gave unto the brother of Jared a vision of the history of the world from its beginning to its end; "and there never were greater things made manifest, than that which was made manifest unto the brother of Jared." [^3]

God taught him many Gospel truths, and commanded him to write all that he had seen and heard and seal them up to be brought forth in our dispensation of the Gospel. The Lord declared that the writings which were sealed should come forth when the people had learned, accepted, and were living the teachings given in the Book of Mormon. Two-thirds of the record given to the Prophet Joseph Smith was sealed. The Prophet translated and published the other third. The Lord is trying us out on it to prepare us for the greater teachings contained in the sealed record. Some day the writings of the brother of Jared will go forth among the Gentiles and be read through the power of Christ from the housetops. This shall take place in that day when the people shall have faith in God, "even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in Me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God." [^4]

Moroni read what the brother of Jared wrote, and made the following comment: "Behold thou [O Lord] hath not made us mighty in writing like unto the brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things he wrote, were mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them." [^5]

In this marvelous way God inaugurated the Jaredite Gospel Dispensation. He commanded Moriancumer to take his brother, their families and friends, and go under His direction to a promised land (America). There He would make of them a great nation. Following is the promise made by the Lord to the Jaredites and the everlasting decree which he placed upon this country:

I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the land of the earth. And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth. . . .

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it, shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. . . . Whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fullness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fullness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore, he that doth possess it shall serve God, or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. [^6]

In accordance with the covenant that Jesus made with Mahonri Moriancumer and the eternal decree that He placed on America, the Jaredites migrated to America and built up a great nation which lasted approximately 2,000 years.

Throughout all of the Jaredite history, the Gospel of Jesus Christ was a standard by which the prophets of God endeavored to get the people to live. At times a marked degree of success was attained, and during other periods of their history wickedness prevailed.

During the 2,000 years, the Jaredite history went in cycles. When the people were in poverty they were industrious and righteous. The natural result of this type of life, however, was gradually to make them wealthy. Then, with an excessive amount of leisure time and worldly goods on their hands, they became very wicked, which resulted in war, famine, disease, and almost complete destruction of the people. Finally, when reduced to poverty, they began the cycle over again. One of these cycles resulted in such extreme wickedness that the whole race of people was destroyed in a war, leaving only two men—Coriantumr, the king, and Ether, a great prophet. The king wandered southward and discovered another race of people, the Mulekites, whom God had brought to this land. Ether recorded the history of his people and left the record, written on "twenty-four gold plates," on the battle-field. Later it was discovered by the Nephites, and they abridged it and incorporated it into the Book of Mormon. [^7]

NEPHITE GOSPEL DISPENSATION

The Lord instructed a prophet named Lehi, who lived in Jerusalem in 600 B.C., to take his family and migrate to America to replace the Jaredites, who had become ripe in iniquity and were shortly to destroy themselves by their last great war. God made the same promises and covenants with Lehi and Nephi regarding this land that He had made with the brother of Jared. [^8] Appropriate to the call to found a new Gospel dispensation, the Lord appeared to Lehi and to his son Nephi and revealed to them the plan of salvation. Time and time again these two prophets, especially Nephi, were visited by heavenly beings and taught the Gospel truths. Nephi saw a vision of the history of the world, comparable perhaps in many respects to the one witnessed by the brother of Jared. We have the record of Nephi's wonderful experience. [^9] In this way the Lord commenced the Nephite Gospel Dispensation.

This people, known as Nephites, descendants of these two prophets, inhabited America for a thousand years. Throughout the course of their history, the center of their civilization was religion. The people were ruled by their great prophets and teachers. Following Nephi, such men as Jacob, King Benjamin, King Mosiah II, the two Almas, Abinadi, Amulek, Ammon, Helaman, Nephi the Second, Samuel the Lamanite, Nephi the Third, Mormon and Moroni loom up in history as outstanding prophets of the true and living God.

If ever men were God-centered and had the religious motive as the one dominating and controlling purpose of existence, the Nephites were those men. To begin with, direct revelations from heaven, which intensified the religious drive, caused Lehi and his family and friends to leave Jerusalem and immigrate to the other side of the world. The Lord was the strength and support of these holy men in all that they did. The prophets and the word of the Lord were the guiding factors in the lives of the people. Through the course of their history they were fortunate in having in their midst a prophet or prophets.

Their story is recorded in the Book of Mormon, which record shows a very high interpretation of religious concepts running throughout the entire course of the 1,000 years from Lehi to Moroni. Each of the great leaders taught the Gospel with a depth of understanding. Their religious thinking did not go up and down in moral interpretations, as did the religious thought recorded in the Old Testament.

God declared on several occasions, and His statements are recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, that the Book of Mormon contains the true plan of salvation. Such statements as the following are found in modern revelation: "The Book of Mormon . . . contains the truth and the word of God." [^10] "[It] contains a record of a fallen people, and the fullness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also." [^11]

Practically all of the religious truths taught and practiced in any Gospel dispensation are given in a clear and forceful way in the Book of Mormon. In fact, many of the principles are presented more clearly in that record than in any of the other ancient scriptures. For example, the concept of the mission of the Messiah, the belief in immortality, an understanding of the Godhead, the true order of baptism, sacrament, and Mormon's famous discourse rejecting infant baptism are presented more vividly and forcefully than in the other ancient scriptures. [^12]

LAW OF MOSES AND THE GOSPEL

The Nephites came from Jerusalem and brought with them the practices of the Law of Moses; yet it seems that their religious life was governed during the first 600 years by a combination of the Law of Moses and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Beginning with Nephi, the actual founder of the institutions and leader of the people, the prophets boldly taught the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel—faith, repentance, baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost. Christ, Nephi claimed, had "commanded all men that they must repent and be baptized in His name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the Kingdom of God." [^13] The Prophet Abinadi boldly declared to wicked King Noah and his priests that the Law of Moses was not sufficient to save the people. [^14]

The fact that the Nephites offered sacrifices and observed other religious rituals under the direction of the Aaronic Priesthood, as did their progenitors the Jews, and that they performed the spiritual ordinances through the Melchizedek Priesthood, is another evidence that they lived under a combination of the Law of Moses and the Gospel before the coming of Christ. However, after the Son of Man was resurrected, He appeared unto the inhabitants of ancient America and taught them the same Gospel truths that He had given to the Jews while living in mortality, declaring: "Ye shall offer unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away. . . . And ye shall offer as a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." [^15]

CHURCH AND THE NEPHITES

It is important to know that the Book of Mormon gives evidence of the Nephites having had a well-established Church throughout most of their history, which functioned under the direction of the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^16] Nephi held that Priesthood and was a prophet, seer and revelator. He consecrated his brothers, Jacob and Joseph, to be priests and teachers. Jacob acted with much efficiency in this capacity. He taught the people the plan of salvation in almost as comprehensive a manner as did his brother Nephi.

The Nephites had built a temple in less than thirty years after leaving Jerusalem, and later they built many other temples. In this first structure, Nephi and Jacob taught the people the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It was also used as a place in which sacrifices were offered in compliance with their custom of observing the Law of Moses preparatory for the coming of the Savior.

Even in the days of Nephi his people took upon themselves the name of Christ when they were baptized. An especially significant statement regarding it appears in one of that prophet's discourses: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if you shall follow the Son, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ by baptism . . . behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost." [^17] Since the observance of the ordinance of baptism is requisite for entrance into the Church of Jesus Christ, it is quite probable that even at that early date the name of the Nephite Church was the Church of Christ.

Over 400 years later (147 B.C.), Alma established at the waters of Mormon in the land of Nephi a church named "the Church of Christ." [^18] Twenty-three years thereafter, King Benjamin held a great religious revival in front of the temple at Zarahemla. At this revival, the people experienced an unusual spiritual awakening. They entered into a covenant to serve God henceforth and took upon themselves the name of Christ. [^19] Each of these peoples acted independently of the other. Both groups had the Priesthood. Alma definitely named the Church he founded the "Church of Christ," while Benjamin gave his people the "name of Christ." The Church members were called Christians, which is a very significant fact, since it seems that the followers of Jesus on the eastern hemisphere were not called Christians until 46 A.D., at Antioch. [^20]

After the Savior's resurrection and appearance to the Nephites, the people were concerned as to what the official name of the Church should be. The Master appeared to the twelve disciples (apostles) and said: "Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? for by this name shall ye be called at the last days." [^21] Then He instructed them to take the name of the "Church of Christ."

JESUS' TEACHINGS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

The period following the personal appearances of Jesus to the Nephites as recorded in Third Nephi is one of the highlights in the religious history of man. This scripture contains the best account available of many of Jesus' teachings. Only a portion of the Master's instructions as found in the New Testament appear in the Book of Mormon, yet that which is given is more complete than similar material contained in the Hebrew scripture. It clarifies the New Testament teachings by giving additional information or by giving more accurately the exact words of the Master. [^22]

And what is even more unusual than the excellent way in which Jesus' teachings are recorded is the astounding effect that the Gospel had upon the lives of the people. A beautiful account is given of how the Nephites lived in perfect harmony and righteousness for 165 years after the resurrection of the Savior of the world. [^23]

CONCLUDING EVENTS

But there came a day when the people rejected the Savior, who is the God of this land, and indulged in all manner of sins. About 400 A.D. this chapter of human history closed when the Nephite race was destroyed by the Lamanites in a great war. Of this great people, only Moroni was left, and it became his task to complete the religious record and, 1,400 years later, restore it to the Prophet Joseph Smith as part of our dispensation.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 13

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Genesis 14:18-24; John 7:46; Matthew 7:28-29; Isaiah 24:5; Acts 3:20-21; Ephesians 1:10. John 7:46.
[^2] Book of Mormon: Alma 13:1-31; 1 Nephi 22:7-15; 2 Nephi 30:18. Matthew 7:28-29.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 27:13; 112:30-32; 128:18-21; 121:31; 136:37; 110. Isaiah 24:5
[^4] G. Homer Durham (Compiler), The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 106-107, 121-125. Frederic I. Carpenter, Ralph Waldo Emerson, pp. 79-80.
[^5] B. H. Roberts, The Seventy's Course in Theology, Second Year, pp. 107-232. Ibid., pp. 10-11.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 231-232, 193, 61, 264, 159, 171, 173, 228. Ibid., p. 88.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Restoration of All Things, pp. 11-46. Doctrine and Covenants 27:13.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 142-148. Ibid., 112:30-32.
[^9] 2 Nephi 30:18.
[^10] Acts 8:20-21.
[^11] Ephesians 1:10.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants 128:18-21; 121:81; 136:37; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 231-232, 193, 61, 264, 159, 171-173, 228; 2 Nephi 22:7-16.
[^13] 2 Nephi 9:23.
[^14] Mosiah 13:27-28, 33.
[^15] 3 Nephi chapters 9 to 30.
[^16] Alma 13:1-31.
[^17] 2 Nephi 31:13.
[^18] Mosiah 5:7-15.
[^19] Ibid., 18:1-29; 26:15-39; 27:1-37.
[^20] Alma 46:13-16; 48:10; Acts 11:26; Benjamin Willard Robinson, The Life of Paul, pp. 68-70, 221.
[^21] 3 Nephi 26:17-21; 27:1-33. Jesus' prediction was fulfilled on April 6, 1830, when the "Restored Church" was placed upon the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith and named the "Church of Christ," the official name coming by revelation (Doctrine and Covenants 21:1). Later, however, in order to distinguish the church in this Gospel dispensation from other dispensations, the Lord revealed to the Prophet that its name should be the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," (Doctrine and Covenants 115:3).
[^22] 3 Nephi 13:23-24; 23:6-14.
[^23] 4 Nephi 1:1-24.
