Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 14.

THE MERIDIAN AND FULLNESS OF TIMES

CHRISTIAN DISPENSATION

All of the holy prophets from Adam's time forward rejoiced in the knowledge that the Son of Man was eventually coming to earth to establish a Gospel dispensation in which He Himself was to set the pattern of life and point out the road to salvation. All truth and righteousness were to center in the life and the teachings of this one divine man—even Jesus Christ.

Nearly 2,000 years ago the Savior of mankind was announced into mortality by angels from heaven, accompanied by radiant light appropriate to His great mission. God the Father declared Him to be "my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." Even the skeptical Jews were caused to marvel and to remark, "Never man spake like this man." [^1] "The people were astonished at his doctrine: For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes." [^2] He communed with God daily and declared that He did nothing and said nothing except that which He had been commanded of the Father. Finally He sealed His teachings with His blood; after which He triumphed over death to a glorious resurrected immortality. Thereafter He appeared unto His apostles and others and assured man of a blessed life eternal on condition of obedience to the Gospel plan of salvation.

EXPLANATORY NOTE

The writer has purposely given only a brief statement regarding the Christian dispensation, which is one of the greatest in history since it was inaugurated by the Son of God. The reason for not giving a more complete presentation at this point is that throughout the entire book we shall refer to the conditions, teachings and practices of Christ, the apostles, and the other early Christians.

In fact, the New Testament contains the glorious teachings and a brief account of the life of the Man of Galilee. This book, therefore, will be our standard of judgment or the norm by which we measure the Gospel truths of all the dispensations.

THE GREAT APOSTASY AND THE REFORMATION

As has been previously mentioned, the glorious Gospel truths proclaimed by the Savior were corrupted by pagan teachings and practices to such an extent that Isaiah's prophesy was completely fulfilled wherein he declared: "The earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." [^3]

These facts became apparent to a number of good men, such as Martin Luther, John Calvin, William Tyndale, the Wesley brothers, and others, who inaugurated what is known as the Reformation. Through sincere and diligent efforts they attempted to restore the Gospel teachings and practices to what the Master had given. But none of them held the holy Priesthood of God, which was absolutely essential if they were officially to establish the true Church of Jesus Christ. Until a divine restoration of the Priesthood and many of the Gospel ordinances came from heaven, therefore, the best that any of the reformers could hope to do was to rectify the more obviously adulterated Christian practices. In their efforts to do this, they did not receive divine revelations from God on vital points of doctrine, nor did they receive a restoration of the Priesthood. As time passed the Christian teachers violently disagreed with each other on many points of doctrine, with the result that numerous Christian denominations came into existence. What was badly needed—in fact, positively essential—was the restoration of the Priesthood from heaven and a new revelation of God's will.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON'S OBSERVATIONS

During the early part of the nineteenth century and after the Protestant Reformation had run its course, the religious condition of Christendom was so deplorable that Ralph Waldo Emerson—one of America's most brilliant men—became displeased and resigned his position as a minister of the Unitarian Church. He became a teacher of philosophy. On July 15, 1838, he described to the senior class of the Divinity School at Harvard University the religious condition of Christendom:

It is my duty to say to you that the need was never greater for new revelation than now. From the views I have already expressed, you will infer the sad conviction, which I share, I believe, with numbers, of the universal decay and now almost death of faith in society. The soul is not preached. The Church seems to totter to its fall, almost all life extinct. On this occasion, any complaisance would be criminal which told you, whose faith and commission it is to preach faith in Christ, that the faith of Christ is preached. . . .

In how many churches, by how many prophets, tell me, is man made sensible that he is an infinite soul? . . . Where shall I hear words such as in older ages drew men to leave all and follow—father and mother, house and land, wife and child?. . . .

Men have come to speak of revelation as somewhat long age given and done, as if God were dead. The injury to faith throttles the preacher; and the godliest of institutions becomes an uncertain and inarticulate voice. [^4]

On another occasion Emerson declared: We are now so far from the road of truth, that religious teachers dispute and hate each other, and speculative men are esteemed unsound and frivolous. . . .

Our age is retrospective. It builds the sepulchres of the fathers. . . . The foregoing generations beheld God and nature face to face; we, through their eyes. Why should not we also enjoy an original relation to the universe? Why should not we have a poetry and philosophy of insight and not of tradition, and a religion by revelation to us, and invite us by the powers they supply, to action proportioned to nature, why should we grope among the dry bones of the past, or put the living generation into masquerade out of its faded wardrobe? [^5]

I look for the hour when the supreme Beauty which ravished the souls of those Eastern men, and chiefly of those Hebrews, and through their lips spoke oracles to all times, shall speak in the West also. . . . I look for the new Teacher that shall follow so far those shining laws that he shall see them come full circle; shall see the world to be the mirror of the soul; shall see the identity of the law of gravitation with purity of heart; and shall show that the Right, the Duty, is one thing with Science, with Beauty, and with Joy. [^6]

DISPENSATION OF THE FULLNESS OF TIMES

The gleams of prophetic light which flashed across Emerson's mind were shining forth with full radiance right at that time in another section of America. God the Eternal Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, had already spoken to that "new teacher"—the Prophet Joseph Smith—and had, through him, inaugurated another Gospel dispensation. The decree had gone forth from the heavens that the Gospel of Jesus Christ was given to this Prophet "never to be taken from earth again nor given to another people." The God of heaven and earth had proclaimed that:

Unto him [Joseph] I have committed the Keys of my Kingdom, and a dispensation of the Gospel for the last time; and for the fullness of times, in which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven and which are in earth. [^7]

To Joseph Smith and the other general authorities of the Church the Lord declared:

For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this Priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fullness of times. Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; for verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you. [^8]

It is evident from the scriptures that the dispensation of the Gospel in the latter days is to be one of restoration and restitution. Nephi predicted that "all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at that day be revealed." [^9] Peter declared that the Lord "shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." [^10] And Paul predicted "that in the dispensation of the fullness of times he [God] might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him." [^11]

So important is this dispensation in the grand scheme devised by the Father and the Son that these two heavenly beings appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820 and gloriously opened the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. Following this visitation, such heavenly beings as the angel Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Elijah, Moses, Elias, and others appeared unto the American Prophet and gave him the keys of their dispensations. In the words of Joseph:

Now, what do we hear in the Gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. . . . And the voice of Michael, the Archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their Priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!. . .

For it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fullness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fullness of times. [^12]

The Prophet Joseph Smith not only received the keys of the Priesthood from those in authority who held them last in each of the Gospel dispensations, but he also was given revelation upon revelation explaining the various principles and ordinances of the Gospel. Through this American Prophet, Jesus Christ again established His Church upon the earth and endowed it with all the power requisite for the salvation of the human family. He made it the depository of all true doctrines, principles and practices that have been revealed to men or that shall be revealed. Therefore, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only organization in the world which is officially recognized by God as having the power, authority, ordinances and doctrines requisite to bring men back into the presence of the Eternal Father and the Only Begotten Son and to exalt them with a glorious eternal life.

Therefore, the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times is the greatest of all, because into it will flow all other dispensations. It will be in this dispensation that Christ will come to reign for one thousand years.

As we move forward through the course of study we shall have occasion in a number of the chapters to discuss the various principles and ordinances of the Gospel and plan of salvation as practiced in former dispensations and as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in what God has termed the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 14

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Book of Mormon: 2 Nephi 9:4-10, 22; Alma 11:41-45; 18:34; 22; 3 Nephi 26:4-5; 1 Nephi 2:12; 17:36; Mosiah 2:20-23; 7:27. Moses 2:26-27; Genesis 1:27; Abraham 4:26-31.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 76:58; 131:2; 132:17-20, 37. Moses 3:4-5; Abraham 3:27; 4:5; Genesis 1:27; 2:5-9.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Restoration of All Things, pp. 56-64. Ether 3:14-16.
[^4] Joseph F. Smith, "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, vol. 13, pp. 75-81. Doctrine and Covenants 129:1-9.
[^5] John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, pp. 23-38, 61-65. Moses 3:7-9; Abraham 5:7-8; Genesis 2:7.
[^6] John A. Widtsoe, An Understandable Religion, pp. 10-28. Numbers 27:16.
[^7] Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, pp. 84-85, 106-112, 126, 191-194. Ibid., 16:22.
[^8] Psalm 82:6.
[^9] Ecclesiastes 12:7.
[^10] John 20:17.
[^11] Hebrews 12:9.
[^12] Romans 8:16-17.
