Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 15.

CHILDREN OF GOD

MEN THE OFFSPRING OF DEITY

A Gospel truth which is as old as the human race and which appears in the theologies of numerous religions throughout history is that all mortals are literally sons and daughters of God. They were His offspring in the spirit world. Although expressed in a variety of ways by the various religious teachers, there is an almost universal agreement that man has within himself a divine spark. A portion of man is spirit, which is eternal and closely related to Deity.

In addition to the concept that mortal beings are the spirit children of God there has been running through history as a golden thread the eternal verity that human beings were created and placed here upon this earth by a divine power or being, known to us as God the Eternal Father. Practically every religion throughout history has had its own version of the origin of man, and basically they have agreed on the two foregoing points, namely, that mortals are not only the spirit-children of God, but that He also placed them upon this earth.

ORIGIN OF CHILDREN OF GOD BELIEF

This golden thread of religious truth is accounted for on the ground that the Lord revealed to Father Adam, the first man, that Adam was a son of God, and thereby divine and eternal. He also informed our first parents that they were placed upon this earth by heavenly beings—God the Father and His Only Begotten Son. [^1]

According to a revelation given to Moses and revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the first creation of man was a "spiritual creation." The Lord declared: "And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." [^2] This eternal truth was confirmed by revelations to several of the ancient prophets. For example, more than 2,000 years before the Savior was born into mortality, He appeared to the brother of Jared and said: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ.... This body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit, will I appear unto my people in the flesh." [^3] This statement and a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph definitely tell us that spirit beings in appearance are like the Gods and also like earthly bodies. [^4]

Following the spiritual creation of God's children came the mortal organizing of their physical bodies. The story of the organizing of the first man is told in the scriptures as follows: "And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life [i. e., put into his physical body his spirit], and man became a living soul; . . . nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word." [^5] These divine revelations definitely proclaim that mortal man is composed of a spirit body, made of eternal spiritual matter, and a mortal body, made of the elements of the earth. Thus from this original revelation kindred ideas have spread throughout many religions, as we shall point out later.

BELIEF SUSTAINED BY OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETS

The Old Testament prophets thoroughly understood that all people of the earth are literally the sons and daughters of God the Eternal Father, since He begat their spirit bodies. The following statements confirming this viewpoint appear in the ancient Hebrew records: "Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation." [^6] "And they fell upon their faces, and said, 'O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation'." [^7]

Again we read, "I said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of the Most High." [^8] And the author of Ecclesiastes points out this constant truth: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." [^9]

TEACHINGS OF JESUS AND HIS APOSTLES

The Man of Galilee throughout His entire ministry proclaimed that mortals are the children of God. He taught His apostles to pray as follows: "Our Father which art in heaven"; and this was the pattern for all of us to follow. Shortly after the Master's resurrection, He said unto Mary Magdalene: "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." [^10]

The Savior taught this doctrine of the Fatherhood of God so thoroughly to His apostles that in their writings are found some of the most pertinent statements of this concept. Such declarations as the following are indicative of the belief and teachings of the early Christians:

Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live. [^11]

The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. [^12]

MORMONS' CONCEPT OF HEAVENLY PARENTS

When light burst forth from heaven in revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith, a more complete understanding of man—especially regarding his personal relationship to Deity—was received than could be found in all of the holy scriptures combined. The stupendous truth of the existence of a Heavenly Mother, as well as a Heavenly Father, became established facts in Mormon theology. A complete realization that we are the offspring of Heavenly Parents—that we were begotten and born into the spirit world and grew to maturity in that realm—became an integral part of Mormon philosophy. Those verities are basic in the Gospel plan of eternal progression.

The prophets of our dispensation have clearly explained the doctrine of heavenly parenthood. In the words of President Joseph F. Smith, and his counselors, John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund: "Man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of Heavenly Parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality." [^13] President Brigham Young read the two verses in Genesis 1:26-27, which declared that God created man, and then he told the congregation:

I believe that the declaration made in these scriptures is literally true. God has made His children like Himself to stand erect, and has endowed them with intelligence and power and dominion over all His works, and given them the same attributes which He Himself possesses. He created men, as we create our children; for there is no other process of creation in heaven or on the earth, in the earth, or under the earth, or in all the eternities, that is, that were, or that ever will be. [^14]

The crowning glory of exaltation received by every man and woman who obeys all of the Gospel principles and ordinances is centered directly in the doctrine of parenthood in the celestial degree of glory. This sublime doctrine will be discussed in the following chapter.

Eliza R. Snow Smith, in her famous poem, "O My Father," expressed beautifully the doctrine of a Father and Mother in heaven. In fact, she gives several pertinent truths regarding pre-mortal life, and a convincing hope of immortality and the future union with our Heavenly Parents in such a classical way that we shall quote her entire poem for the student's careful consideration:

O MY FATHER ELIZA R. SNOW SMITH O my Father, Thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place! When shall I regain Thy presence, And again behold Thy face? In Thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside; In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near Thy side. For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth, And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth, Yet ofttimes a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here"; And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere. I had learned to call Thee Father, Thru Thy Spirit from on high; But until the Key of Knowledge Was restored, I knew not why. In the heav'ns are parents single? No; the tho't makes reason stare! Truth is reason, truth eternal, Tells me I've a Mother there. When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you In your royal courts on high? Then at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come and dwell with you.

COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS' CONCEPT OF MAN

Not only have the prophets of God throughout the various dispensations declared that mortals are the children of Heavenly Parents and that God placed mankind into mortality; but the pagan religions preserved in their theologies kindred doctrine. The ancient Greek poets and philosophers, the Mystery Religions, and even the first settlers of the Mesopotamian Valley proclaimed these divine truths.

In Paul's famous speech at Athens, which was inspired by the inscription "To the Unknown God," the apostle to the Gentiles quoted the Greek poet Aratus—who had lived near Tarsus, Paul's birthplace—as having written: "For we are also his [God's] offspring." [^15]

In the Cybele—Attis cult, which originated in central Asia Minor, the supreme deity was known as the "Great Mother." She was believed to be the mother not only "of all the gods," but "of all men" as well. Several other cults which were pagan rivals of Christianity had beliefs similar to those of the Cybele—Attis cult, each of which maintained that men were the offspring of heavenly beings.

For example, the Mithraic religion, which had its rise in Persia as early as 1,500 B.C. and which eventually became the strongest pagan rival of Christianity, proclaimed the doctrine that man had a spirit which was composed of immortal substance and his physical body was of earthly materials. Cult members believed, as did Father Abraham, that the Gods placed human beings upon the earth and were their protectors.

The belief that each human being is composed of a physical body and a spirit—the latter composed of divine, eternal substance—is a concept that was held by practically all ancient peoples. This belief of the dualism of man was as universally held by Greeks as it was by the prophets and teachers of the Gospel during the various dispensations. It is nothing more than the pagan version of the spirit of man being a child of God and his body being made of earthly substance.

Pindar, the Greek poet, stressed the divine origin and nature of the human spirit in contradistinction to the mortality of the human body. He wrote: "While the body of all men is subject to over-mastering death, an image of life remains alive, for it alone comes from the gods." [^16]

The Stoic philosophers, some of whom Paul encountered at Athens, "believed that every man possessed within him a spark of the divine reason and so is in a sense akin to God." [^17]

Plato, the famous Greek Philosopher, represented Socrates, his master teacher, as saying shortly before his death: "There is a doctrine whispered in secret that a man [i.e., the spirit of man] is a prisoner who has no right to open the door and run away; that is a great mystery which I do not quite understand. Yet I, too, believe that the gods are our guardians and that we are a possession of theirs." [^18]

The Orphic mystery worshipers, pagan rivals of Christianity, believed that men were created originally from the ashes of the Titans who had been blasted to pieces by Zeus. The Titans were of the earth and were beings similar in their evil nature to devils. The Orphic myth claimed that just prior to their destruction, the Titans had eaten the god Dionysus. Since man was believed to have been created from the ashes of the Titans, he was a compound of two natures, one Dionysian and immortal, the other Titanic and mortal. This sharp contrast of dualism of spirit and body appears in many of the Orphic writings. Recorded on the Petelian tablets in southern Italy during the third century B.C., the spirit asserts its divine nature as follows: "I am a child of Earth and Starry Heaven; but my race is of Heaven." The following inscription appeared on another Orphic tablet: "Pure Queen of Them Below . . . I avow me that I am of your blessed race." [^19]

The foregoing Orphic doctrine was widespread throughout the Mediterranean world during the period of the rise of Christianity. The following inscription was found in a Sabine village, dating in the second century A. D.: "The soul is immortal, for it came from God. The body is the garment of the soul. Honor the God in me" [^20]

This Orphic inscription, which confirms the belief of the divine nature of man, was taken from the grave of an ancient Greek: "Hermes gathers me with the sons of the gods, and I have not drunk the water of Forgetfulness." [^21]

As previously mentioned, the belief that God created man is also universal. A good example of an ancient people having this concept is found on the Babylonian tablets. Marduk, the god of this people, is purported to have declared: "Blood will I create, and bone will I cause to be. I will set up man, indeed, man shall be his name. I will create man, even man. They (men) shall worship the gods; they (the gods) shall be appeased." [^22] The Sumerian-Babylonian tablets (the Sumerians being the oldest race of Mesopotamia) proclaimed that Marduk "formed mankind. The goddess Aruru, with him, made the seed of mankind." [^23] Doubtless these stories are corruptions of the Bible creation story.

CONCLUSIONS

Ample evidence has been given to demonstrate thoroughly that human beings throughout the entire history of the world have maintained not only that they were created by God, but that they were the spiritual children of Heavenly Parents. This blessed Gospel truth, which has been revealed to the holy prophets throughout the various dispensations, was disseminated among pagan peoples. Although it appears in their theologies in a degenerated form, yet they maintained enough of the original revelation to know that they were of divine origin, and hence by very nature eternal. This concept has been one of the most dynamic motivating forces in religious history.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTERS 15 AND 16

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 6:56
[^2] Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund, Improvement Era, vol. 18, p. 81
[^3] Orson Hyde, Journal of Discourses, vol. 1, p. 123.
[^4] Daniel H. Wells, Millennial Star, vol. 26, p. 786.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 345-346.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants 76:54-59; Moses 6:66-67.
[^7] Lorenzo Snow, Millennial Star, vol. 54, p. 404; LeRoi C. Snow, "Devotion to a Divine Inspiration," Improvement Era, vol. 22, (June, 1919), pp. 653-662.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants 98:1-17.
[^9] Ibid., 93:20.
[^10] Ibid., 132:37.
[^11] Joseph F. Smith, Improvement Era, vol. 12, p. 81.
[^12] John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, p. 61.
[^13] Charles W. Penrose, Millennial Star, vol. 23, pp. 180-181.
[^14] Abraham 4:5.
[^15] John 1:1-3.
[^16] Psalm 138:1.
[^17] Ibid., 95:3.
[^18] Ibid., 82:1, 6.
[^19] John 10:34-36.
[^20] 1 Corinthians 8:5-6.
[^21] Joseph Fielding Smith, op. cit., 371.
[^22] S. Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity, pp. 106-107.
[^23] Cited in Ibid., p. 106.
