Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 17.

THEN SHALL THEY BE GODS

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

Since, as pointed out in the last chapter, "men may become Gods," what are the requirements to reach such an exalted station? In what respects do Gods differ from other intelligent beings? How did the Eternal Father become God? And, finally, what road must mortals follow in order for them to become as He is? These are among the pertinent questions which arise when we think on the doctrine of our exaltation.

THE PERSONALITY OF GOD

We accept the fact that God is the Supreme Intelligent Being in the universe. He has the greatest knowledge, the most perfect will, and the most infinite power of any person within the realm of our understanding. To us, His love, His justice, His mercy, and His control over the universe are all infinite. We know that God absolutely transcends the finite understanding of mortals. He possesses all the virtues that mankind possesses in such an enhanced degree that when we attempt to define Him we fail, because He is infinitely greater than the most complete picture that mortals can give of Him.

HOW HE BECAME GOD

Yet, if we accept the great law of eternal progression, we must accept the fact that there was a time when Deity was much less powerful than He is today. Then how did He become glorified and exalted and attain His present status of Godhood? In the first place, aeons ago God undoubtedly took advantage of every opportunity to learn the laws of truth and as He became acquainted with each new verity He righteously obeyed it. From day to day He exerted His will vigorously, and as a result became thoroughly acquainted with the forces lying about Him. As he gained more knowledge through persistent effort and continuous industry, as well as through absolute obedience, His understanding of the universal laws continued to become more complete. Thus He grew in experience and continued to grow until He attained the status of Godhood. In other words, He became God by absolute obedience to all the eternal laws of the Gospel—by conforming His actions to all truth, and thereby became the author of eternal truth. Therefore, the road that the Eternal Father followed to Godhood was one of living at all times a dynamic, industrious, and completely righteous life. There is no other way to exaltation.

How MEN MAY BECOME GODS

Thus all men who ascend to the glorious status of Godhood can do so only by one method—by obedience to all the principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Fundamental in the process of obedience to truth is knowledge. We must first learn true principles before we are capable of intelligent obedience. The word of the Lord came to the latter-day Prophet as follows: "Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of truth." [^1] Also, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." [^2] And again the Lord declared, "Men are saved no faster than they gain knowledge." The Prophet Joseph described the process of going on toward Godhood as follows:

When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospel—you must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. [^3]

No prophet of record gave more complete and forceful explanations of the doctrine that men may become Gods than did the American Prophet, and, furthermore, he definitely pointed the course which men must follow. A small portion of his teachings is as follows:

Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power. . . .

They shall be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. What is it? To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? "Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself."

So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all of his children. [^4]

Thus we do not become Godlike in this world, nor Gods in the world to come, through any miraculous or sudden gift, but only through the slow process of natural growth brought about as a result of righteous living. Some people may think that when they die they will instantaneously get rid of all their bad habits and become purified. Such is not the case. We can become purified in this world, and the same holds true in the next life, only through repentance; that is, overcoming our faults and sins and replacing them with virtues. Charles W. Penrose sustains these thoughts in the following words: "Men become like God not by some supernatural or sudden change, either in this world or another, but by the natural development of the divinity within. Time, circumstances, and the necessary intelligence are all that are required." [^5]

KNOWING DEITY AN AVENUE TO GODHOOD

In chapter two we pointed out that "this is life eternal to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent." If to obtain eternal life means to enjoy the same type of life that God lives and to experience similar experiences, then those people who receive it to the fullest degree shall actually be Gods. To explain further, the principal avenue of learning is experience; therefore, we know best the things which we have had the most experience with. The person who drinks deeply of the fountain of such virtues as love, honesty, kindness, industry, chastity, cheerfulness, and all other things that are good, making those virtues part of his personality and eliminating all vice and sins from his thoughts and actions, is following the avenue to Godhood. Therefore, the most Godlike people know Deity best. Interpreted in this light, to know the Father and the Son is the avenue to Godhood.

PAGANS' CONCEPT OF KNOWING GOD

Even the doctrine of a knowledge of God as the avenue to Godhood made its way outward from the Divine Fountain of Truth into the heathenistic religions of the Mediterranean world. The teachings of the Hermetic pagan cult sound quite familiar to those who are acquainted with the doctrine taught by Jesus, by John the Beloved, by Paul, and by Joseph Smith the American Prophet. They have a close kinship to the true Gospel which came to earth through the holy prophets of God. For example, Hermes declared: "And this alone, even the knowledge (gnosis) of God, is man's salvation. This is the ascent to Olympus, and by this alone can a soul become good." [^6] This religion taught, as did the Prophet Alma, that man must experience a rebirth. The Hermetic rebirth involved nothing less than deification. "This is the good; this is the consummation for those who have got gnosis—they enter into God"; so declared the Hermetic teacher.

Cult members believed that such knowledge came about as a special mental or spiritual enlightment which came to them as a gift of God. (Compare this thought with John 14:16-18 6; 15:26; 16:13.) They also maintained that demons were forever present to lead the ungodly man into unrighteous desires and habits. "But to the holy and good, the pure and merciful who lived piously, the spirit was ever present to help them win the Father's love by their upright lives." [^7]

Note the close resemblances between the foregoing pagan teachings and those of the true Gospel. For example, the doctrine of the Holy Ghost and Spirit of God being forever present to guide the righteous man along the path of truth and light and to give him a testimony of the Gospel and divinity of Jesus the Christ is closely related to the Hermetic doctrine of spiritual enlightenment through the Spirit of God. Thus we see that the true doctrine of knowing the Lord as the pathway to Godhood was revealed to man as part of the knowledge of the divine plan of salvation; and, like many other Gospel truths, it was disseminated among pagan worshipers.

CELESTIAL MARRIAGE—THE CROWNING GOSPEL ORDINANCE

The crowning Gospel ordinance requisite for Godhood is celestial marriage. The doctrine of celestial marriage, as taught and practiced in the Church of Jesus Christ today, means temple marriage. It does not necessarily mean plural marriage, as some are prone to believe, although at times in Gospel history plural marriage has been included in the law of celestial marriage. The point of importance, however, is the fact that those who enter into this holy covenant of marriage do so in purity and continue to live worthily enough that they may be sealed by the "Holy Spirit of promise." Every Latter-day Saint should be so familiar with the doctrine of celestial marriage and value it so highly that there would be nothing in the world that could induce him to enter into the covenant of marriage on any other basis.

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Solomon, Moses, and—according to the Lord—"also many others of my servants from the beginning of creation until this time," have known and practiced the law of celestial marriage. [^8] Paul the apostle taught that "neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." [^9] Jesus, the Master of life and exaltation, declared:

He who made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said, "For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh." Wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. [^10]

Jesus' statement shows definitely that in the very beginning, when Adam and Eve were placed upon the earth, God gave unto them the law of celestial marriage. They were to love each other so devotedly and live in harmony with each other so perfectly—being true to each other in every respect through complete obedience to the principles of the Gospel—that they would become as one in thoughts, in purposes, and in all their activities. In this way man and woman would become one flesh. Divorce would be impossible if they lived completely the eternal plan of God.

This blessed Gospel doctrine was lost by mankind during the period of the apostasy following the Apostolic Age, and in its place a man-made system of marriage—"until death do ye part"—was established. In fact, a portion of the Christian world became so warped in their knowledge of truth that they accepted as church dogma the doctrine that marriage is evil or sinful. However, as part of the restoration of the Gospel to the Prophet Joseph Smith, God condemned that wicked and false dogma and re-revealed the true doctrine of the sacredness and eternal nature of the marriage covenant. This revelation is found in section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Following are the words of the Lord regarding the sanctity of marriage:

Verily, I say unto you, that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of god, for marriage is ordained of God unto man. Where-fore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; and that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made. [^11]

Marriage is not only a righteous institution, but obedience to this law is absolutely necessary in order to obtain the highest exaltation in the Kingdom of God. The word of the Lord came to the Prophet Joseph smith on this subject, as follows: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees: and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the Priesthood (meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage)." [^12] If men and women obey all the other laws of the Gospel except that of celestial marriage, they "are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory." The revelation continues as follows:

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. . . .

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this Priesthood [and if they commit no sin to break that seal]; they shall pass by the angels, and the Gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fullness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever: then shall they be Gods. [^13]

Later Joseph explained what the revelation meant by the statement, "Which glory shall be a fullness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever." He explained that the Gods were to be parents of spirit children just as our Heavenly Father and Heavenly Mother were the parents of the people of this earth. To quote his own words:

Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the Priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory. [^14]

Thus we see that celestial marriage is the crowning Gospel ordinance. If men and women have obeyed this holy ordinance and all the other principles of the Gospel, following the resurrection and the great judgment day, "then shall they be Gods."

PAGANS' CONCEPT OF CELESTIAL MARRIAGE

Since the Gospel ordinance of celestial marriage was revealed to Father Adam and was practiced by him, and by the other ancient prophets of God, we would naturally expect to find that doctrine in a modified form in some of the ancient pagan cults. [^15] Such is the case.

The eunuch-priests of the Great Mother pagan religion believed themselves to be gods as a result of the initiation into the priesthood of their cult. Each priest became the husband of the cult goddess—the Great Mother. As part of the initiation into the priesthood, a ceremony was performed in the marriage chamber of the temple in which the new priest became the bridegroom of the goddess. Thereafter he was often called "bridegroom," and a common name for him was Attis, who was the immortal god-husband of the Great Mother.

According to Clement of Alexandria, a Christian father, the laity, as well as the priests in this pagan cult, were also united to the Great Mother by a marriage ceremony. But it is probable that their godhood was postponed until they reached the other world. [^16]

CATHOLIC PRACTICE OF CELESTIAL MARRIAGE

During the early Christian period, the Catholic church, like its pagan rivals, also had a practice of marrying certain of its members to the Christian Savior-God. One of the orders of nuns had a ceremony performed which made the sisters in a mystical sense betrothed to Jesus. As a token of becoming the brides of the Son of God, the nuns who entered this order wore plain gold band rings. This custom dates to an early period in Christian history. For proof, the following is quoted from the Catholic Encyclopedia:

St. Ambrose (340-397) speaks as though it were a received custom for virgins consecrated to God to wear a ring in memory of their heavenly Spouse. . . . Wedding rings, or more strictly, rings given in the betrothal ceremony, seem to have been tolerated among Christians under the Roman Empire from quite an early period. The use of such rings was of course of older date than Christianity. [^17]

It seems that the interpretation placed upon the nuns' becoming the brides of Jesus which was held during the early Christian centuries was almost identical with that of the Galli (priests) becoming bridegrooms of the Great Mother. According to St. Jerome, who was a contemporary of St. Ambrose and did his writing toward the close of the fourth century A.D., certain nuns were actually and literally regarded as brides of Jesus and their mothers were referred to as mothers-in-law to God. Salomon Reinach, in his book Orpheus, gives the following explanation regarding St. Jerome, and then quotes this pertinent statement taken from one of the letters of this early Christian father:

St. Jerome, who was born in Dalmatia, revised the Latin translations of the Scriptures by order of Pope Damasus, and made use of his personal influence, which was as considerable as his talent, to win over the ladies of the Roman aristocracy to a conventual life. "Thou hast become the mother-in-law of God," he wrote to one of them, whose daughter had entered a nunnery, and was therefore the bride of God. [^18]

Even down to the present time the custom has persisted in the Catholic church to betroth nuns who enter certain orders to their heavenly spouse—Jesus. The modern interpretation of the Catholics, however, maintains that the betrothal ceremony entered into by the nuns does not marry them to Jesus in the sense that we regard marriage, but in some sort of mystical sense they become His brides for the purpose of carrying forward His work. This concept is a distinctly modified form of the true celestial marriage doctrine as given by the Lord to the holy prophets, but it is almost identical with the pagan belief in the Great Mother cult. This close similarity to paganism can be seen in the following statement made by Dr. Willoughby:

[The experiences of the Galli (priests) in becoming the bridegrooms of the Great Mother] were interpreted as a process of mystical union with the Great Goddess herself, and by means of certain obscure ritual acts there was developed a sense of intimate divine communion on the part of the devotee. . . . It made him realistically and mystically one with the goddess. [^19]

The evidence seems to indicate that the Catholic doctrine was borrowed directly from the pagan practice of marrying the priests to the Great Mother, and both the pagan and the Catholic practices are altered forms of the true doctrine of celestial marriage. The principal difference, however, is that the pagan deity was a woman, while the Christian God was a male. Therefore, in the Catholic practice, women became the brides of Jesus, while in the Great Mother religion men became the bridegrooms of their goddess.

CONCLUSIONS

Other examples of pagan conceptions of celestial marriage could be given, all of which indicate that the true Gospel doctrine persisted in paganism in a degenerated form. Originally it came from the common source of truth through the holy prophets, but men through the ages adulterated those truths. However, a semblance to the divine revelation persisted even to the present day in the Catholic practice. But God in His mercy has revealed again to man through the Prophet Joseph Smith the true eternal marriage covenant with a clear explanation of the blessings attached thereto.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 17

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Daniel 12:2; Ecclesiastes 12:7; Job 19:25-26; 1 Corinthians 15:1-58; Matthew 27:52-53; 2 Timothy 1:9-10. M. Lynn Bennion, "The Challenge of Immortality," Week Day Religious Education, IV:6 (Salt Lake City, March, 1940).
[^2] Book of Mormon: 2 Nephi 2:19-29; 9:1-44; Mosiah 16:1-12; Alma 11:34-46; 18:26-35; 34:1-16, 31-38; 40; 41; 42; Helaman 5:18-52; 3 Nephi 9:1-22; 11:1ff. Joseph Addison, cited in John Bartlett, editor, Familiar Quotations, p. 195.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 29:31-50; 76:16-119; 88:14-31; 93:29-33; 132:1-66. 2 Nephi 9:4; Job 19:25-26.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 350-360, 256, 181. Brigham H. Roberts, cited in Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 256.
[^5] John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, pp. 9-31. Smith, ibid., pp. 352-355.
[^6] Roberts, op. cit., p. 354.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 98:88; 181:7 181:7; 29:31-34; Smith, op. cit., pp. 350-356, contains in the footnote some excellent quotations from various authorities on matter's being indestructible.
[^8] Smith, ibid., pp. 342-360; Doctrine and Covenants 93:29-33, 36, 23-24; Roberts, Seventy's Course in Theology, (Second Year, 1908), pp. 7-32.
[^9] Roberts, "Immortality of Man," Improvement Era, vol. 10, pp. 406, 401-423, (Salt Lake City, April, 1907).
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 93:29.
[^11] Roberts, Era, op. cit., p. 107.
[^12] 2 Nephi 2:1-80; Doctrine and Covenants 88:5-80; 29:34-35; 130:20-21; 132:5;John A. Widtsoe, Rational Theology, pp. 1-44.
[^13] Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund, "The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, vol. 13, p. 80; Widtsoe, op. cit., pp. 27, 64-65.
[^14] Abraham 4:22-23.
[^15] Ibid., 3:18.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants 76:54-59, 62.
[^17] 2 Nephi 9:13.
[^18] Mosiah 16:10-11.
[^19] Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 126-127.
