Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 18.

THE IMMORTALITY OF MAN

UNIVERSAL BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY

There is in the breast of each of us no human hope stronger than that of continuing to live. Man, being a rational creature, has faith that there is a continuation of life hereafter in a world even more beautiful and glorious than this earth. To exist eternally is his dream.

History affirms that a belief in the immortality of man has always been universally accepted. From the savages of the jungles to the most highly civilized nations, men have maintained that, although death overtake them, they shall live on eternally. This concept has been one of the most dynamic motivating forces in religious thought and action from the advent of man upon the earth until the present day. It has been the very center around which theological creeds have been constructed. The master teachers of all the great world religions have given humanity a definite assurance of a life beyond the grave. It is this star of hope that has inspired humanity to study their philosophies and to adopt their plans of life. Something deeply rooted in human nature causes mankind to feel that he is composed of eternal substance—that he will live forever. In the words of M. Lynn Bennion:

"When god wants to carry a point with His children," says one writer, "He plants His arguments in their instincts." This, it seems to me, is what Jesus recognized when He described the issue of immortality in that singularly simple but suggestive statement, "If it were not so, I would have told you." By these statements the Master sought to place our confidence in the persistence of personality, not upon some dogmatic utterance, but upon the deepest instinct of humanity, which instinct, in the last analysis, is far better than head knowledge. [^1]

In his drama of ancient Rome, Joseph Addison (1672-1719 A.D.) had Cato—a devout student of Plato, the Greek philosopher, who fervently taught the doctrine of the immortality of man—say:

It must be so,—Plato, thou reasonest well! Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire, this longing after immortality? Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul back on herself, and startles at destruction? 'Tis the divinity that stirs within us; 'tis Heaven itself that points out an hereafter, and intimates eternity to man. Eternity! thou pleasing, dreadful thought! . . .

The soul, secure in her existence, smiles. . . . The stars shall fade away, the sun himself grow dim with age, and Nature sink in years; but thou (the soul) shalt flourish in immortal youth unhurt amidst the war of elements, the wreck of matter, and the crush of worlds. [^2]

THE PROPHETS' TEACHINGS OF IMMORTALITY

While the majority of God's children place their faith and hope of immortality upon feeling and reason, a few of His elect have had definite knowledge of the reality of a life after temporal death and of the ever-enduring qualities of human personality. Having received their information through divine revelation, those individuals can say with Jacob, or with Job, "Wherefore I know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die; nevertheless, in our bodies we shall see God." [^3]

The holy men of the Lord, such as the beloved Prophet Joseph Smith, who understood the unseen world beyond the veil of mortality, not only had a firm conviction that life is eternal, but had a comprehensive philosophy of the stages of progression that men pass through. Shortly before the Prophet's death he expounded in a masterful sermon the Mormon philosophy of progressive-eternalism. "As a teacher he reached the climax of his career in this discourse. After it there was but one thing more he could do—seal his testimony with his blood. This he did in less than three months." [^4]

Quoting directly from the Prophet's discourse: I have another subject to dwell upon, which is calculated to exalt man. . . . It is associated with the subject of the resurrection of the dead—namely, the soul—the mind of man—the immortal spirit. Where did it come from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so; the very idea lessens man in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine; I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world; for God has told me so. . . .

We say that God Himself is a self-existent being. Who told you so? Who told you that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principles? . . .

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal (co-eternal) with God Himself. I know that my testimony is true; hence, when I talk to these mourners, what have they lost? Their relatives and friends are only separated from their bodies for a short season; their spirits which existed with God have left the tabernacle of clay only for a little moment, as it were, and they now exist in a place where they converse together the same as we do on the earth.

I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. . . .

Intelligence is eternal and exists upon a self-existent principle. It is a spirit from age to age, and there is no creation about it. [^5]

ETERNAL NATURE OF MAN

Man "is a spirit from age to age," i.e., "an entity, a person, an individual." [^6] "It is now inconceivable that a particle of matter should either come into existence or lapse into non-existence." What exists now has always existed in one form or another, and will continue to exist eternally. "All spirit is matter," and it is also self-enduring. [^7]

Life, intelligence, mind, the "light of truth," or whatever name one gives to the center of the personality of man, is an uncreated, eternally existent, indestructible entity. [^8] "He—for that entity is a person—. . . is eternal as God is; co-existent, in fact, with God; of the same kind of substance or essence with Deity, though confessedly inferior in degree of intelligence and power of God." [^9] The Lord called this eternal entity an "intelligence," which quality is its chief characteristic. "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." [^10]

ETERNALLY EXISTENT INTELLIGENCES

Revelations were given by the Lord to the Prophet Joseph relative to several phases of the eternal progression of man. In the first stage, man was an eternally existent being termed an intelligence. In that sphere of existence each individual was naturally conscious. "He must have the power to distinguish himself from other things—the 'me' from the 'not me'. He must have power of deliberation, by which he sets over one thing against another; with power also to form a judgment that this or that is a better thing or state than this or that." [^11] In short, he must have the power of choosing one thing instead of another and acting upon that choice. In that realm, as in all other states of immortal existence, natural law, good and evil, love and hate, truth and error, and free agency exist. They are all eternal and closely connected with immortal man as he ascends the ladder of progression. [^12]

We do not know how long we lived in this first realm, but it must have been ages and ages. There came a time, however, when we completed our work in that realm and were permitted to go forward in the eternal process of progression.

THE SPIRIT WORLD

The next realm where man dwelt was the spirit world. According to Mormon concept eternally-existing intelligences were clothed with spirit bodies in the mansion of their Eternal Father. As was definitely pointed out in an earlier chapter, numerous sons and daughters were begotten and born of heavenly parents into that eternal family in the spirit world. In the likeness of God Himself, these spirit children were organized, possessing divine, eternal, and godlike attributes, inherited from their Heavenly Father and Mother. There in the spirit world they were reared to maturity, becoming grown spirit men and women prior to coming upon this earth. [^13]

Four thousand years ago, Father Abraham knew that God's children lived in the pre-mortal world and that they were eternal. He was shown in vision the spirit world and the intelligences which had been organized into spirit beings before this world was created. The Lord told Abraham that He had selected the most progressive, righteous, and highly developed spirits to become the rulers in mortality. Then God told the ancient prophet, "Abraham, thou art one of them; thou was chosen before thou wast born." [^14] The Lord also said unto Abraham:

If there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning, they exist before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal. [^15]

THE MORTAL PROBATION

Following his stay in the spirit world, man comes on earth in a probationary state preparatory to the eternal existence beyond the mortal confines of this world. Here he receives a physical body and undergoes the experiences of mortality. It is true that when we are born into mortality a veil is drawn over our minds, so that we have forgotten our pre-mortal life; yet we come here with the amount of potential development that we had attained in the spirit world. Since mortality is a continuation of a previous existence, children learn very rapidly during the early years of their mortal lives. This is largely an unfoldment of their pre-mortal development. At times it seems to each of us that we have a dim recollection of some bygone age or world, some previous experiences which we may have had. The poet Wordsworth beautifully expressed the foregoing divine doctrine when he wrote the following:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The soul that rises with us, our life's star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar; Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God who is our home. —Ode on the Intimations of Immortality.

POST-MORTAL LIFE

Eventually, however, mortal death comes upon all. The eternal spirit goes to the spirit world to await resurrection and judgment. In due time, all will rise from the grave and stand before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ. There they shall be assigned to the glory that they have merited according to the lives that they have lived while in mortality and the changes that they have wrought upon their characters while in paradise. Some will receive telestial glory; others, terrestrial, while those who are recorded in "the Lamb's book of life" will enter celestial glory. There some of them will become angels and others priests and kings, or, in other words, Gods. [^16]

Regardless of the degree of glory to which one attains, human personality will persist. In the words of Jacob, the Nephite prophet, following resurrection "all men become incorruptible and immortal, and they are living souls." [^17] Abinadi added the following thought: "Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption. . . . If they [personal beings] be good, to the resurrection of endless life and happiness; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of endless death." [^18]

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTERS 18 AND 19

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 5:9-11.
[^2] Daniel 12:2.
[^3] Isaiah 26:19.
[^4] Job 19:25-26; Doctrine and Covenants 121:10.
[^5] Ecclesiastes 12:7.
[^6] John 14:1-3.
[^7] Ibid., 17:5.
[^8] 1 Corinthians 15:1-58.
[^9] Berrett, Hunter, Welker, Fitzgerald, "Book of Mormon Concept of Immortality," A Guide to the Study of the Book of Mormon, pp. 79-90.
[^10] 2 Nephi 2:19-29.
[^11] Alma 11:45.
[^12] Cited in Hugh M. Woodward, Humanity's Greatest Need, p. 293.
[^13] Ibid., p. 294.
[^14] Ibid., p. 292.
[^15] A Guide to the Egyptian Collection in the British Museum, p. 139.
[^16] Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, p. 139.
[^17] Cited in ibid., p. 194.
[^18] M. Lynn Bennion, "The Challenge of Immortality," Week-Day Religious Education
