Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 21.

THE MESSIANIC HOPE

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

The next four lessons are devoted to the world-old and world-wide belief in a Savior-God, each discussing a different phase of this subject. This chapter presents the teachings of the prophets regarding the coming of a Savior, summarizing the most outstanding points that were known during the early Gospel dispensations.

Messiah is a Hebrew word (Mahsiah), which means "the expected king and deliverer." He was to be "the Anointed One" or "the Christ, the divinely sent Savior of the world." Therefore, the chapter title, "The Messianic Hope," means the belief held by the prophets from age to age that the Messiah (Savior) would come to redeem mankind from his fallen condition by teaching him the Gospel and breaking the bonds of death, thereby opening a pathway for mortals to come back into the presence of God.

ORIGIN OF THE MESSIANIC HOPE

As has been pointed out earlier in this book, the Eternal Father ordained His Only Begotten Son to be the Savior, even before men were placed upon the earth; therefore, the Messianic concept was instituted at the great council in heaven.

Since the heart of the plan of salvation is this Savior-God and the great work and mission He performed in providing for the redemption of mankind, one of the first and paramount Gospel truths revealed to mortals was the mission of the Messiah. The story of this revelation coming to Father Adam is beautifully told in the Pearl of Great Price. An angel of the Lord appeared unto him and said: "Why dost thou offer sacrifice unto the Lord?"

Adam replied, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me."

Then the heavenly messenger explained unto him that "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth," who would come into the world to redeem mankind from his fallen and mortal condition. Adam was also told that the name of God's Only Begotten Son was "the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ . . . the only name which shall be given under heaven whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men." [^1] Christ was to come to earth in the meridian of times to be a righteous Judge and the Savior that (to quote) "as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will" obey the Gospel truths. By way of summary and also prophesy, the ancient record declared:

And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost . . . and a decree sent forth that it should be in the world until the end thereof. [^2]

UNIVERSALITY OF THE MESSIANIC HOPE

Adam and Eve rejoiced in what they had learned concerning the Messiah and the great part He would play in the plan of salvation.

And they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. And Satan came among them, saying: "I am also a son of God"; and he commanded them saying: "Believe it not"; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual and devilish. [^3]

Even though the children of men began at that early date to fall away from the revealed Gospel truths, yet a belief in a Savior has never been lost by mortals. This thread of persistence of Gospel truths—although stretched at times almost to an infinitesimal thinness through evil, ignorance, and sins of man—has such tensile strength that it has never been broken; hence one finds human beings, pagan and Christian, reaching up towards God and relying on a Savior for assistance.

In addition to this persistence of the Messianic concept which has filtered outward and downward through the ages, God has renewed men's knowlege of the Savior through revelations to His holy prophets. This became necessary because at certain times during history many of the truths regarding the Messiah were changed or lost through apostasies. The Eternal Father has always been so anxious to give His children immortality and eternal life that He has used many avenues through which to inform them that Jesus is the Christ and that salvation can come only in and through His name, [^4] and these are basic facts in the Messianic hope.

Therefore, most of the races of the earth have had some sort of concept relative to a Redeemer who should save them from the evils of mortality. This information may have come to them as a social heritage from the days when Adam and his posterity understood the Gospel principles, or the ideas may have been borrowed from some other race of people who had received divine revelation, or it may have come directly to the prophets from the Lord.

THE MESSIANIC HOPE OF ENOCH AND THE JAREDITES

Throughout the entire history of the world the holy prophets of God have, one after another, received divine revelations regarding a Messiah—a Savior—who should come and redeem mankind from his fallen condition and make possible his entrance into the kingdom of God. Enoch saw in vision the principal events in the history of the world. For the purpose of showing the main points regarding Enoch's knowledge of the Messiah which he received directly from the Lord, we shall quote from this revelation, as follows:

Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying: "The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world." . . .

And the Lord said: "Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come"; for he saith—"I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall; wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy."

And it came to pass that Enoch cried unto the Lord, saying: "When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things."

And the Lord said unto Enoch: "Look"; and he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men; And he heard a loud voice, and the heavens were veiled, and all the creations of God mourned, and the Saints arose, and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man, with crowns of glory; And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder were preserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day. . . . And Enoch beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father. [^5]

Several hundred years after this event occurred, the brother of Jared was favored of the Lord with a vision similar to the one experienced by Enoch. In the course of the vision, the Savior appeared to him and said: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters." [^6] Then He told the brother of Jared of His future advent on earth and of His work for the salvation of man. Therefore, through this vision the Jaredites obtained a Messianic hope which remained a dominant doctrine in the religious history of this people for over 2,000 years.

MESSIANIC HOPE OF THE HEBREWS

The belief that a Savior, even the Christ, the Anointed One, would come to earth among the Hebrew people, was one of the strongest forces in the history of that race. As early as the time of Moses, the ancient lawgiver, this belief was cherished. Doubtless it was a heritage from earlier Gospel ages. The Lord, however, through this great prophet, instituted the Feast of the Passover and enlarged the people's vision of the mission of the Messiah. It is a significant fact that one of the principal purposes of this ancient Jewish feast was to remind the people of the future advent of the Messiah. In fact, the paschal lambs of the Feast of the Passover were symbolical of the Lamb of God, whose blood should be shed for the sins of man. Through revelation the Hebrews had been informed that at the time of Christ's death no bones would be broken in His body. Since the paschal lambs, being without spot or blemish, symbolized the purity and holiness of the Savior in His life, so in their death no bones were broken in their bodies.

Throughout the course of Old Testament history, many prophecies were made regarding the coming of the Savior. It was definitely understood that He would be a Jew and a descendant of King David. [^7] He would be born of a virgin; and His birthplace would be Bethlehem. [^8] Isaiah told the people that this Savior would be despised and rejected of men, afflicted and smitten.

As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a sheep that before its shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. . . . He poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors: yet he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. [^9]

The Old Testament prophet who left the most numerous statements regarding the Messiah was Isaiah. Many of his predictions, however, referred to the second coming of the Son of Man. As the Messianic hope of the Jews developed, there was a complete fusing together of the predictions relative to His first coming and those statements regarding the second coming and the millennial reign. For this reason, when the Man of Galilee came among the Jews, He failed to fulfill the prevalently accepted Jewish Messianic hope. [^10] Therefore, they rejected Him and crucified Him.

BIBLE AND BOOK OF MORMON MESSIANIC VIEWS COMPARED

The New Testament gives its readers a beautiful and enlightening story of Jesus while in mortality and His message of love and salvation; and the Nephite record gives a similar account obtained from Jesus following His resurrection. The fact is definite, however, that the Bible as a whole does not contain as comprehensive and detailed a picture of Christ's work before His birth into mortality nor as complete a picture of the plan of redemption as does the Book of Mormon.

NEPHITES' KNOWLEDGE OF THE MESSIAH

The Nephites had a very comprehensive and thorough knowledge regarding the Messiah. In fact, no people have left us a more complete record of the birth, life, mission, death, resurrection, and glorification of the Son of God than did these people; and it is important to know that their knowledge was almost as complete before Jesus lived in mortality as it was after that event. God began the Nephite Messianic hope by revealing to Lehi and also to his son Nephi numerous facts regarding the coming of the Christ. [^11] They learned that He was to be a universal Savior-God, and that He would redeem all mankind from their sins if they would obey His Gospel. Referring to his father's teachings, Nephi wrote:

Yea, even 600 years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews; even a Messiah; or in other words, a Savior of the world. And he also spake concerning the prophets, how great a number had testified of these things, concerning this Messiah, of whom he had spoken, or this Redeemer of the world. Wherefore all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be, save they should rely on this Redeemer. [^12]

God favored Nephi with one of the most marvelous visions that mortal man has experienced. In the course of that vision, Nephi saw a beautiful virgin and was informed that she would be the mortal mother of the Messiah. The virgin held a baby in her arms, and the angel said unto Nephi, "Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!" Then the prophet saw the Savior, the Redeemer of the world, go down to the river to be baptized of John. Following this, the entire ministry of the Master was shown to Nephi. He recorded his vision, and the main facts of Christ's life agree identically with the record made by the New Testament writers after Jesus had lived among the Jews. For the purpose of illustrating the definite knowledge that Nephi had regarding the mission of the Christ, the following is quoted:

And I beheld that he went forth ministering unto the people, in power and great glory; and the multitudes were gathered together to hear him; and I beheld that they cast him out from among them.

. . . And I looked and beheld the Lamb of God that he was taken by the people; yea, the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world; and I saw and bear record that he was lifted up upon the cross, and slain for the sins of the world. [^13]

Nearly 500 years after Nephi had experienced his vision the Lord enlarged the Messianic concept of those ancient Americans by sending an angel to King Benjamin. By quoting a portion of the message received by this prophet-king we can obtain a clearer understanding of the Nephites' knowledge of the Messiah. The angel said:

For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven, among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of disease. . . .

And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things, from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary.

And lo, he cometh unto his own, that salvation might come unto the children of men, even through faith on his name; and even after all this, they shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him. And he shall rise the third day from the dead; and behold, he standeth to judge the world. [^14]

These and many other glorious truths regarding the life, mission, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ and the eternal plan of salvation were revealed to the Nephite prophets. [^15] Their knowledge of the life and mission of the Savior is almost as complete as ours today, even after Christ has lived upon the earth. There is no indication in the Book of Mormon that the Nephites restricted their conception of the Christ to that of Savior of Jews and Nephites only. They at once and throughout their history acclaimed Him to be the universal Messiah of mankind—even Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 21

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Josiah E. Hickman, The Romance of the Book of Mormon, pp. 185-197. The term "Savior-God" denotes practically the same thing as that of a "Messiah," but we used the latter name in the last chapter because it was commonly known to the Hebrews.
[^2] Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, pp. 41-49, 69-74, 90, 114-118, 136-146, 169-171, 176-179. Kersey Graves, The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors, pp. 31-32.
[^3] Ibid., pp. 124-125. Observe the many similarities between Enoch's vision as quoted in the last chapter and the traditions of Prometheus and also keep in mind that Enoch lived probably 3,000 years before the traditional date of Prometheus.
[^4] Max Muller, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 80.
[^5] Graves, op. cit., pp. 116-117; Isaiah 7:14-15; Micah 5:2; 1 Nephi 11:11-36; Mosiah 3:1-12. Recall the prophesies made by Nephi, King Benjamin, Isaiah and other prophets reported in the last chapter regarding the virgin birth of Jesus and the beauty and purity of Mary, the mother of the Son of God.
[^6] Robert Ernest Hume, The World's Living Religions, p. 29.
[^7] Ibid., p. 29.
[^8] Cited in Graves, op. cit., 145, 152-155, 103.
[^9] Martinus, History of China: Halde, History of China.
[^10] Edward Carpenter. Pagan and Christian Creeds, pp. 203-204.
[^11] Ibid.; Josiah E. Hickman, The Romance of the Book of Mormon, pp. 185-197; Kingsborough, Mexican Antiquities, vol. 6.
[^12] Carpenter, op. cit., pp. 203-204.
[^13] Cited in Harold Willoughby's Pagan Regeneration, p. 170.
[^14] Ibid., p. 175.
[^15] Erman, Die Aegyptische Religion, pp. 96-97, cited in ibid., p. 175.
