Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 22.

THE BELIEF IN A SAVIOR-GOD [^1]

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

The purpose of this lesson is to show that practically every ancient world religion and pagan cult of importance believed in a savior-god, and that all of these savior-god beliefs had a definite relationship to the divine revelations received by Father Adam and the other prophets of God regarding Jesus the true Redeemer of mankind. In fact, the purpose of the following two chapters will be to show definitely that Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah and the only true Savior-God.

In order to be able to arrive at a correct interpretation, while studying this lesson it will be helpful to observe carefully the similarities of the pagan traditions of their savior-gods to the revelations of what transpired in connection with the life of the Only Begotten Son of God; because, as was pointed out in the last chapter, the prophets knew all of the principal details of Christ's life hundreds of years before He came to the earth.

UNIVERSALITY OF BELIEF IN A SAVIOR-GOD

The belief in a savior is another of those religious concepts that is world-old and world-wide. Human beings have always built their religious rituals around their concept of a redeemer—a humanized savior. Kersey Graves lists over thirty-five different individuals who were worshiped as savior-gods before the birth of Jesus of Nazareth. [^2] On the other hand, people in several different countries were anxiously waiting for the earthly advent of a divine deliverer at the time the Son of God was born in Bethlehem.

Seneca, Hesid, and other ancient writers left us accounts of the crucifixion of Prometheus—the Caucasus savior-god—and of his subsequent resurrection. The crucifixion is reported to have occurred on a cross near the Caspian Straits, about 547 B.C. "The cause for which he suffered was his love for the human race." The following claim is made:

[At the time of his crucifixion] the earth shook, the rocks were rent, the graves were opened, and in a storm, which seemed to threaten the dissolution of the universe, the solemn scene forever closed, and "Our Lord and Savior" Prometheus gave up the ghost. [^3]

Buddha (about 600 B.C.), in far-off India, is purported to have said: "Let all the sins that are in the world fall on me, that the world may be delivered," [^4] a promise made from the very beginning by Jesus Christ to all people who would repent.

"His [Buddha's] followers always speak of him as one with God from all eternity." His most common title was "the Savior of the World." He was also called "the Benevolent One," "the Dispenser of Grace," "The Source of Life," "the Light of the World," and "the True Light."

[Tradition claims that] his mother was a very pure, refined, pious and devout woman; never indulged in any impure thoughts, words or actions. She was so much esteemed for her virtues and for being the mother of a God, that an escort of ladies attended her wherever she went. The trees bowed before her as she passed through the forest, and flowers sprang up wherever her foot pressed the ground. She was saluted as "the Holy Virgin, Queen of heaven." [^5]

Regarding Buddha, Dr. Robert E. Hume concluded:

Not only has Buddha been deified, but he has been made a member of a Buddhist Trinity. It is one of the ironies of history that he whose main message and very last words before dying were a call to a self-reliant, ethical life, as over against dependence upon any kind of a Divine Being, should himself be subsequently worshiped with larger and more numerous images than exist of any other person in the history of the world. [^6]

It is obvious that the traditions regarding Krishna, a Hindu deity, were altered forms of the true revelations regarding the Messiah as given to the holy prophets. In fact, the very name Krishna seems to be merely another form of Christ. This god, it is claimed, "became incarnate for the protection of good men, for the destruction of evildoers, for the re-establishment of piety." [^7] Tradition has it that he came into the world as a result of "a divine immaculate conception," his mother being "overshadowed by the supreme god, Brahma." He met his death by crucifixion; and, furthermore, the Hindu tradition claims, that after having risen from the dead, he appeared to his disciples. To quote:

"He ascended to Voiacantha (heaven), to Brahma," the first person of the trinity (he himself being the second), and that as he ascended, "all men saw him, and exclaimed, 'Lo, Krishna's soul ascends to his native skies'." [^8]

The holy scriptures claim that Enoch, thousands of years B.C., knew that Christ would be crucified, resurrected, and then ascend to heaven, as was pointed out in the last chapter. Thus we find the original source of the pagan traditions of the crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension of savior-gods.

The ancient Chinese religious records contain a Messianic prophecy. It is as follows: "The Holy One, when he comes, will unite in himself all the virtues of heaven and earth. By his justice the world will be established in righteousness. He will labor and suffer much . . . and will finally offer up a sacrifice worthy of himself." [^9] The people of ancient China even had their savior-god. There came a time when they attached this prophecy to one of their holy men. "Tien, the Holy One—one with God and existing with Him from all eternity — died to save the world." [^10]

On the other side of the world, in Mexico, "Quetzalcoatl, the savior, was born of a virgin, was tempted, and fasted forty days, was done to death, and his second coming looked for so eagerly that when Cortez appeared, the Mexicans, poor things, greeted him as the returning God! In Peru and among the American Indians, north and south of the equator, similar legends are, or were, to be found." [^11] Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints know from the Book of Mormon history, that the savior-god beliefs held by the American Indians are actually altered forms of the Savior's appearances to the Nephites following His resurrection.

SAVIOR-GODS OF THE PAGAN RIVALS OF CHRISTIANITY

All of the pagan religions which were vital rivals of early Christianity—especially the Mystery cults—had their savior-gods. The Egyptian "Osiris was claimed to be the savior of the world, both in his life and death." [^12] His devotees believed that he had wrought many noble benefits for mankind while in life, and that through his death he had overcome the powers of darkness. Following his death he became the "Lord of the Underworld and Ruler of the Dead." [^13] As a result of his resurrection and the observance of the cult rituals, the worshipers were promised a glorious resurrection and that, if they so chose, they could become gods. "Many a man so privileged was specifically called 'Osiris' after his death." [^14] The following Egyptian text testifies to the future hope of the initiate: "As truly as Osiris lives, he also shall live; as truly as Osiris is not dead, shall he not die; as truly as Osiris is not annihilated, shall he not be annihilated." [^15] These are all pertinent beliefs in the ancient prophets' knowledge of the life and mission of the Son of God and the rewards received by the faithful saints.

The Egyptian mother-goddess, Isis, the "eternal saviour of the race of men," promised her worshipers:

Thou shalt live in blessedness; thou shalt live glorious under my protection. And when thou hast finished thy life-course and goest down to the underworld, even there in that lower world thou shalt see me shedding light in the gloom of Acheron and reigning in the inmost regions of Styx: thou thyself shalt inhabit the Elysian fields and shalt continually offer worship to me, ever gracious. [^16]

It so happened in this pagan cult that Isis acted in conjunction with Osiris as savior-gods, while in the true Gospel the Savior of the world and the Judge of the dead was a male God. This is further evidence of the alterations made in paganism.

It was believed that the Greek "Bacchus or Dionysus, born of the virgin Semele to be the liberator of mankind, was torn to pieces," died, resurrected, immortalized, and deified. [^17] After this "Dionysus functioned in Hellenistic cults as god of the underworld, and his devotees had the same expectation in relation to him that the ancient Getae had concerning Zalmoxis," i. e., "they believe themselves immortal; they think that they do not die, but that the dead go to join their god Zalmoxis." [^18]

It was claimed that Bacchus, Dionysus-Zagreus and Persephone—three savior-deities—were begotten by Zeus, the chief of the Greek gods, and born to mortal virgins. Obviously this belief was an adulterated version of Jesus Christ being the Only Begotten Son of God, a fact known and proclaimed by all the holy prophets beginning with Adam. Dionysus-Zagreus was purported to have been the son of Persephone, while Persephone was the daughter of Demeter. Following death, each of these three individuals were deified and became rulers of the dead and gods of the underworld, just as Jesus became judge and ruler of the next world. [^19]

According to the Cybele-Attis Myth, the Great Mother of the gods loved the youthful, virgin-born shepherd named Attis, who died a violent death. Thereupon the Great Mother buried him in a cave, mourned for her dead lover, and finally effected his resurrection. [^20] Thus Attis became deified and immortal. Priests of Attis told the worshipers, "Be of good cheer, you of the Mystery; your god is saved; for us also shall be salvation from ills." [^21]

Mithraism, the Mystery cult which promised during the early Christian centuries to make itself the universal religion, proclaimed Mithra to be a mediator between God and man and also a savior, just as Jesus of Nazareth was both Mediator and Savior. He was regarded by his devotees as a divine being, a humanized savior-god. [^22] After performing a number of unusual feats, according to tradition he ascended to heaven and became "the god of light, the upholder of truth and the enemy of error," and the judge of the dead. To quote:

As the beneficent god of light, Mithra was the dispenser of physical blessings. . . . He was the one who gave to man an abundance of material possessions, good health, and a numerous progeny. . . . Being the "ever-waking, ever-watchful" god, who, with his "hundred ears and hundred eyes," constantly watched the world, Mithra naturally became the guardian of truth and the preserver of good faith. . . .

The wrath of Mithra was as terrible as his blessings were rich and full; for he was the implacable foe of all evil who, "never sleeping, wakefully maintains the creation of Mazda." He was engaged in ceaseless combat with the spirits of evil, and to wicked men brought endless troubles. [^23]

Nowhere in ancient paganism was there a god who in his functions resembed more closely the true Savior of mankind than did Mithra. In fact, the entire religion of this ancient mythical god had numerous beliefs and practices resembling the Gospel of Jesus Christ. By the time Mithraism reached the Mediterranean world, its beliefs and practices were greatly adulterated; yet the evidence is extensive enough to show beyond question that this ancient religion was a modified form of the true Gospel and that its roots extended back into the divine revelations from heaven.

There were a number of pagan religions which flourished in Syria and Asia Minor during the early Christian period and with which Paul, the Christian apostle, had early familiarity and contacts that were intimate. Each of them had its savior-god. Fundamentally they were closely related to the Great Mother cult, prominent primarily throughout Asia Minor and Italy. In each of these pagan cults, a mother goddess fell in love with a virgin-born youth who met a violent death and then was resurrected by the goddess. Each of these youths became savior to his respective cult members, breaking the bands of death and bringing about resurrection. The mother-goddesses are adulterated forms of God the Eternal Father, while the virginborn youths are altered forms of Jesus Christ.

In Phoenicia the mother-goddess was named Ashtart and her consort was Eshmun. It was claimed that these two deities were simultaneously glorified and they had promised glorification to cult members.

Citizens of the Greek world were familiar with Aphrodite and Adonis, "the goddess of love and her impetuous young husband." Adonis, an ardent young hunter, was killed by a wild boar. The grief of his goddess lover brought about his resurrection; and thereafter cult members were promised that they also would rise from death. Obviously this was another drastically altered form of the true Savior doctrine.

The Syrian goddess Atargatis and her consort Hadad gained considerable prominence in the Roman world. Hadad, like many of the other pagan savior-gods, was said to have died a violent death to save mankind. An elaborate show of grief was a characteristic factor in the ritual of this cult. The prophet Zachariah was acquainted with the lamentations of Hadad. [^24]

The Babylonian goddess Ishtar, the deified personification of motherhood, was known to Bible writers as Ashtoreth. With her was associated a young and active deity called Tammuz. He was crucified, it was claimed, and afterwards resurrected and deified; and thereupon, becoming a savior, he promised similar blessings to cult members. [^25] As in the case of Attis, Adonis and Hadad, "lamentations formed an important part of his worship. In Ezekiel's day this practice was adopted by Jews even, and among the 'abominations' which the prophet saw perpetrated at the very gate of the Jerusalem temple was the weeping of women for Tammuz!" [^26] A poet has perpetuated the memory of this savior-god as follows:

Trust, ye saints, your Lord restored, Trust ye in your risen Lord; For the pains which Tammuz endured Our salvation have procured. [^27]

The traditional date of Tammuz is approximately 1160 B.C. The following statement was translated from a Greek text by Mr. Godwin: "Trust ye in God, for out of his loins salvation has come unto us." Julius Firmicus speaks of Tammuz as "rising from the dead for the salvation of the world." [^28]

SOURCE OF PAGANS' SAVIOR-GOD CONCEPTS

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints know through revelations from God to the holy prophets—especially to Joseph Smith—that all of the savior-gods of paganism and world religions contributed nothing toward bringing about the resurrection and eternal life of man. Jesus Christ was declared even before the foundation of the world to be the only name which would ever be given whereby mankind could ever gain immortality and exaltation. All of these other saviors were counterfeits.

Mormons also know, as has been pointed out definitely in this course of study, that shortly after God placed Adam and Eve on earth, He revealed to them the Gospel. Gradually, as mortals, drew farther away from their Heavenly Parents and their Savior through sin and ignorance, the truths were corrupted and changed; yet a likeness to the original revelations persisted. At various times throughout history the Lord renewed men's knowledge of the Gospel truths through revelations to His prophets. Only those individuals or peoples who continued in harmony with the Godhead were able to draw verities from above. Thus all religions containing eternal truths came from the one true religion that God taught Father Adam.

From these purer sources of truth—the hold prophets—ideas disseminated outward in every direction among pagan nations. Through a process of religious syncretism, or blending together of religious beliefs, savior-god concepts became common property of all peoples. These groups who remained more directly in tune with God through a succession of prophets—as did the Nephites and Hebrews—retained a more pure and unadulterated Messianic hope; while, on the other hand, it was natural for the pagan groups who had obtained information relative to the mission of the Redeemer to project the idea of the Savior (yet unborn) into one of their mythological characters with the claim that the Messiah had lived, died, and had been resurrected and immortalized, thereby assuring the devotees of a blessed life eternal.

Therefore, through apostasies—which have been brought about through borrowing and lending of religious practices and beliefs and adopting from time to time man-made creeds—the Gospel truths have been diverted, leaving only enough truth in paganism to give it a resemblance to the teachings of the Master. This accounts for the numerous savior-gods in history, the universality of the concept, and the world-wide presence of certain other religious doctrines and practices.

But it should not be assumed for a moment that just because many principal beliefs and practices found in Christianity today were present in most of the great religions of the world as well as in the minor pagan cults of antiquity that all religions are of equal moral and spiritual worth. The waters of truth sparkle divinely in the Church of Jesus Christ as they gush forth from the great Fountain of Truth—even Jesus Christ, "the light and life of the world"; while, on the other hand, the sluggish streams of paganism—adulterated and teeming with error—contain only glimmers of the original Gospel.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 22

Footnotes [^29]

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Matthew 2:1-23; 27:33-66; 28:1-20; Acts 7:54-60; 9:1-20. Kersey Graves, The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviours; Edward Carpenter, Pagan and Christian Creeds.
[^2] Book of Mormon: Helaman 14:1-8, 20-28; 3 Nephi 1:8-21; 8:3-25; 9:1-22; 11:1-17ff. Charles Gore, "Are the Gospels Trustworthy?" Jesus of Nazareth, pp. 175-211; Edgar J. Goodspeed, The Story of the New Testament, pp. 1-147; Ernest Findlay Scott, The Literature of the New Testament, pp. 1-300.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 76:20-24. Shirley Jackson Case, The Historicity of Jesus, pp. 1-300.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price: "The First Vision." Henry M. Battenhouse, New Testament History and Literature, pp. 176-177.
[^5] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, pp. 1-800. Angus, op. cit., pp. 309-311.
[^6] Berrett, Hunter, Welker, Fitzgerald, "Book of Mormon Concept of the Mission of Christ," A Guide to the Study of the Book of Mormon, pp. 62-78.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 76:20-24.
[^8] Helaman 14:1-8, 20-28.
[^9] 3 Nephi 1:8-21; 8:3-25; 9:1-22; 23:6-13.
[^10] Matthew 27:45-53.
[^11] Mosiah 16:9.
[^12] Graves. op. cit., p. 58.
[^13] Chalcidus, Comments on the Times of Plato, cited in Graves, op. cit., p. 37.
[^14] Abraham 3:1-22.
[^15] Faber, History of Idolatry, vol. 2, p. 92.
[^16] Matthew 2:2, 11.
[^17] Micah 5:2; Matthew 2:4-7.
[^18] Matthew 2:2, 11.
[^19] Moses 5:59.
[^20] These pagan traditions closely resemble the facts that the prophets had long taught about the true Messiah.
[^21] Angus, op. cit., p. 60; Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 127-128.
[^22] Willoughby, ibid., pp. 143-168; Franz Cumont, The Mysteries of Mithra.
[^23] Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 144-145.
[^24] Zachariah 12:11.
[^25] Graves, op. cit., p. 120.
[^26] Ezekiel 8:14; Willoughby. op. cit., p. 187.
[^27] Cited in ibid.
[^28] Cited in ibid., p. 121.
[^29] Gayley, op. cit., p. 51.
