Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 23.

THE ONE DIVINE SAVIOR-GOD

ATTEMPTS TO DISCREDIT THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST

Ever since it has been recognized that human beings in their search for God and their quest for salvation have had certain concepts and practices in common, regardless of the country or the century to which the worshipers belong, many Christians have lost faith in their religion. In fact, there has been a growing tendency during the past century for many people to reject the most vital Christian doctrines, such as the validity of divine inspiration or revelation in religion and the belief of the efficacy of the atonement of Jesus Christ.

A number of books and articles have been written with the avowed purpose of proving that Christianity is pagan in its origin, that Jesus is not the only Begotten Son of God, and that the account of His miraculous and holy conception is merely a myth on a par with those found in paganism. Some writers have gone so far as to maintain that the universal reality of the savior-god concept disproves the divine nature of Jesus Christ, making of Him not the Only Begotten of the Father, but a mythological character around whom were collected pagan myths, refined and recorded by early Christian writers. [^1]

DIVINITY OF JESUS CHRIST

The responsibility of the true Christian today is to weigh the evidences regarding the divinity and historicity of Jesus. The most reputable scholars of early Christian history maintain that the four gospels and the letters of Paul are reliable, trustworthy and relatively accurate history. [^2]

They agree as to the historicity of Jesus. In fact, the evidence presented by Dr. Shirley J. Case, dean of the Divinity School of the University of Chicago, effectively counteracts any and all negative arguments presented by radical critics claiming Jesus to be a mythological Christ. [^3] In the words of Henry M. Battenhouse, "There is one point on which Christian opinion is unanimous; it is that Jesus is indisputably the Christ." [^4]

Dr. Sidney Angus emphatically states:

Christainity had an unique advantage over all of its competitors, including even Judaism, in having an historic Person as Founder, whose Person was greater than His teachings. . . . No other religion could "placard" a real Being in flesh and blood who had lived so near to God and brought men into such intimate soul-satisfying union with the Father. . . . The Mystery Religions could offer only myths. [^5]

Mormons know beyond doubt through the evidence presented in their holy scriptures, especially the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, that Jesus is the Christ and the only name given whereby mankind can receive salvation.

Indeed, the revealed purpose of the Nephite record is to be another witness to the divinity and mission of Jesus. It sustains and amplifies the testimony of the Bible, and even confirms the hopes which arose in the breasts of the ancient pagans relative to the reality of God, the efficacy of the Savior, and an assurance of eternal life. . . . From Nephi to Moroni, the avowed purpose of each of the writers was to produce a work "to the convincing of the Jew and the Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting Himself unto all nations." [^6]

Not only did the prophets of old give testimony that Jesus is the only true Messiah, but new light came in modern times to the Prophet Joseph Smith. In his words:

We beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fullness; and saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants are begotten sons and daughters unto God. [^7]

Thus we see that there is only one divine Savior-God, even Jesus Christ.

SIGNS OF THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF THE SAVIOR

Christ's divinity was of such significance and His mission of such importance that His advent into mortality and His exodus from this life were heralded by unusual signs in nature. Five years before the birth of the Savior, Samuel, the Lamanite, stood on the wall of the city of Zarahemla and prophesied many things regarding the coming of the Messiah, among which were definite signs which should announce His birth and others which should indicate that He had died. In order that we might get the story first-hand we shall quote directly from the ancient Nephite record. The Prophet Samuel said:

I give unto you for a sign at the time of his coming; for behold, there shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that in the night before he cometh there shall be no darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto man as if it was day. Therefore there shall be one day and a night, and a day, as if it were one day, and there were no night. . . . And behold there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this shall be a sign unto you. . . .

But behold, as I said unto you concerning another sign, a sign of his death, behold, in that day that day that he shall suffer death, the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give his light unto you, and also the moon, and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land, even from the time that he shall suffer death, for the space of three days, to the time that he shall rise again from the dead. [^8]

Then he proceeded to describe to them the terrible storm that should occur with great violence at the time of the crucifixion of the Son of Man. And he prophesied that "many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many" at the time of the resurrection of the Savior of the world. Anyone who is familiar with the Book of Mormon story knows that these prophesies were all fulfilled exactly as they were spoken of by the mouth of God's prophet. [^9] Matthew also testified of darkness and a storm occurring in Palestine at the death of Jesus and of the resurrection of many saints immediately following the resurrection of the Master. [^10]

The unusual phenomenon of light in nature symbolized Christ's coming into mortality, and very appropriately symbolized His teachings and example to mankind while here. In the words of Alma: "He [Christ] is the light and life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." [^11]

The signs of the death of the Master, i.e., the engulfing of the world in darkness with the accompanying storm and earthquakes, symbolized very aptly the end of the life of Jesus and His immediate influence going out of the world, thereby leaving the world temporarily in darkness. This condition lasted in the Nephite country during the three days while the Lord's body was in the tomb, but when He was resurrected the darkness gave way to the light of another calm, beautiful day.

BELIEF IN THE STAR AS A SIGN

Pagans in various lands had as part of their traditions the belief that a new star appeared at the birth of several of their savior-gods. One writer stated: "Among the ancients there seems to have been a very general idea that the arrival of Gods and great personages who were expected to come, would be announced by a star. And the cases of Abraham, Caesar, Pythagoras, Yu, Krishna and Christ may be cited in proof of this declaration." [^12] Chalcidus, a second century A.D. writer, in his Comments on the Times of Plato, speaks of "a star which presaged neither disease nor death, but the descent of a God amongst men, and which is attested by Chaldean astronomers, who immediately hastened to adore the new-born Deity, and present him gifts." [^13]

We know from Abraham's experiences, as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, that the ancients had a very comprehensive understanding of the heavenly bodies; therefore, God was able to reveal many truths to them through the stars. [^14] Doubtless the original source of the sign of a new star was the revelations of God to His holy prophets.

As time passed, pagan traditions attached this sign to their heroes and savior-gods.

ZOROASTER'S PROPHECY AND THE WISE MEN

As early as Nephi's time, Zoroaster, the Persian prophet, is reputed to have predicted that a new star should appear in the heavens as a sign of the birth of the Savior of the world. In the words of this ancient religious teacher:

A virgin should conceive and bear a son, and a star would appear blazing at midday to signalize the occurrence. "When you behold the star," said he to his followers, "follow it whithersoever it leads you. Adore the mysterious child, offering him gifts with profound humility. He is indeed the Almighty Lord, which created the heavens. He is indeed your Lord and everlasting King." [^15]

The story told in the gospel of Matthew of the wise men (Magi) from the east who visited Palestine at the time of the birth of Jesus is evidence that the sign of a new star had been given to those of a foreign land. These Magi were probably recipients of Zoroaster's prophecy or they had been informed, through some other divine source of that particular sign's being given to announce the birth of the Christ-child. Upon their arrival in Jerusalem, they asked King Herod: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east and are come to worship him." [^16] They were instructed to go to Bethlehem, for the prophets had predicted that there the Messiah, the Son of God, would be born. [^17] When they arrived at Bethlehem "they saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and fell down, and worshiped him, and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, frankincense and myrrh." [^18] Thus the sign of a new star which had been revealed to the prophets guided the humble seekers to the home of the new-born King of kings; and, as Zoroaster had instructed, they did "adore the mysterious child, offering him gifts with profound humility." This baby was the one divine Savior-God.

CONCLUSIONS

The time will come when everyone who worshiped a savior-god other than Jesus the Christ will learn that the creed he followed contained only a semblance of the divine truths revealed through the holy prophets of God. He will realize that his savior-god was but a counterfeit of the true Messiah. But a vestige of truth from a common source connects him and all other searchers for life eternal with that original Messianic revelation given to Adam, the first man, in accordance with the decree of God, that Gospel truths "should be in the world until the end thereof." [^19] He will also learn that in order to gain eternal life in the celestial glory of God he must become a member and live the Gospel principles and ordinances of the true Church of the Master—which is the Chruch of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints, restored to earth through divine revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 23

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mark 6:3.
[^2] Luke 2:19.
[^3] Luke 2:51.
[^4] Matthew 3:15.
[^5] Luke 2:40.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants 93:12-13.
[^7] Ibid., 93:1-20.
[^8] Matthew 3:14.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants 130:20-22; 132:5.
[^10] Matthew 3:15.
[^11] Ibid., 3:16-17; Doctrine and Covenants 93:15; Mark 1:10-11.
[^12] John 1:29-34.
[^13] Isaiah 9:6-7; 15:5.
[^14] Luke 4:18-19; Isaiah 61:1-3.
[^15] Matthew 16:24-26.
[^16] Ibid., 5:4.
[^17] Ibid., 11:28-30.
[^18] Isaiah 53:1-12.
[^19] Luke 22:44; Doctrine and Covenants 19:16-18; Mosiah 8:7.
