Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 24.

JESUS AND THE SORROWS OF HUMANITY

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

The work that Jesus performed as the Savior of the world involved a number of different phases, but space will permit the discussion of only a few of the major points, one being the problem of suffering. Human suffering is as old and universal as mankind, and practically every religion has attempted to answer some of the problems growing out of the sorrows of humanity. Common to all religions is the belief that their savior-gods were required to suffer intensely in order that through their sacrifice the sorrows and suffering of mankind might be alleviated. In chapter twenty-two it was shown that intense suffering, a violent death, and a triumphant resurrection were beliefs connected with most of the pagan savior-gods. The purpose of this lesson is to show that such concepts had their origin in the revelations to the prophets that Jesus Christ would suffer, die, and be resurrected. The problem will be discussed, however, primarily from the standpoint of what actually happened in Jesus' life. An effort will be made to show that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah and answered the needs of humanity for a savior-god, who suffered and who by so doing helped all human beings in times of sorrow.

PROBLEM OF HUMAN SUFFERING

Jesus Christ, through His suffering and His teachings, put meaning into the sorrow and distress of humanity and marked out the course whereby mankind may gain immortality and eternal life.

Before the birth of the Savior the world was full of superstition, doubt, disease, distress, fear, sorrow and suffering. Where was man to go to receive comfort? Almost every avenue in human experience was searched in order to find comfort for sorrowing humanity. Sages arose in various countries and tried to give hope to man by answering the question: "Why do men suffer—the righteous as well as the wicked?" Some masterful Hebrew prophet skillfully presented numerous truths relative to the universal problem of human suffering when he told in a dramatic poem the experiences of God's righteous servant Job.

MORTAL DEVELOPMENT OF JESUS

The problem remained unsolved. The world waited to learn the purpose of suffering until there was born a babe in a little town in Palestine, who was taught by good Jewish parents to love his associates and to care for those in distress. At His birth angels from heaven sang, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men"; for this was the babe who had been selected before man was placed on earth to be the Savior, the Christ, the Redeemer of mankind. He was the one "like unto God the Father" who stood in the council of the Gods and volunteered to be the Savior of the world and to do at all times the will of the Father. He was the one to whose coming all the holy prophets since Adam's time had looked forward, and many of them had predicted the signs of His advent. No wonder heaven and earth joined in their expressions of joy and praise at His birth. Yet the great Augustus Caesar in Rome, the famous world's capital, did not realize that in the hilly country of Palestine was at that time a lowly Nazarene who was destined to mark out the course whereby millions would find comfort in their suffering. Nor did he know that this Christ-child would, through His life and teachings, point out to mankind the course to follow in order to have joy in this life and exaltation in the Kingdom of God, even eternal life and a similar glory to that enjoyed by our Heavenly Parents.

Jesus had no easy road to follow. At a very early age He was the main support of a widowed mother, four brothers, and at least two sisters. [^1] Day by day He worked in His carpenter shop to eke out an existence for His dependents. Thus as an artisan He belongs to the great army of world workers, which links Him in sympathy with all working people.

This boy's mind was ever alert. While He swung the adz in His carpenter shop He saw and felt the griefs of His associates. He heard the cry of the suffering multitudes. The pains of humanity became His pains, its joys His joys. Into His life He wove the deepest feelings for mankind.

Just how widely the information of Jesus being the long-looked-for Messiah was scattered throughout Nazareth and other sections of Galilee during His childhood is not definitely known, but the evidence presented in the New Testament, although scanty, seems to indicate that Mary very wisely kept all such information within the limits of the family circle while she prudently taught the Christ-child those things that would prepare Him for His divine mission. In fact, the reports in the scriptures of the birth of Jesus, the visitation of the angels to the shepherds, followed by the shepherds' coming to the stable in Bethlehem to see the holy child, are summarized in this significant remark: "But Mary kept all of these things and pondered them in her heart." [^2] Even the unusual events which occurred at the Jerusalem temple when the Savior was 12 years old are reported as follows: "But his mother kept all these sayings in her heart." [^3] Thus unhampered by public prejudice and in a natural way Jesus was permitted to grow and develop just as any other boy develops—learning to do by doing. The same laws we must obey the Master Himself obeyed, since God has declared that obedience to all the laws is required of him who "fulfills all righteousness." [^4]

The only statement that the holy scriptures make regarding Jesus' life from the time He was 12 until He became a man definitely proclaim that He grew not only physically, but also mentally and spiritually. Following are the exact words given in the scriptures: "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." [^5] Gradual growth and development, then, mark the story of His life, as recorded in the New Testament, until He was 30 years old.

In Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants a description is given of Christ's pre-mortal, mortal and post-mortal life. The portion of that revelation which deals with His experiences in mortality seems to sustain the thesis of a gradual growth and unfolding of His personality. To quote:

He [Jesus] received not of the fullness at the first, but received grace for grace; and he received not of the fullness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fullness. [^6]

John continued the description of Jesus' natural development up to the occasion of His baptism and the announcement of His Messiahship by the Eternal Father. Then John said:

And I, John, bear record that he received a fullness of the glory of the Father; And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. [^7]

SUMMARY STATEMENT

By way of summary, then, this Man of Galilee went through the school of life in a natural way, learning and developing by work and obedience and through spiritual contacts with heavenly forces. Finally such a complete unfolding of character and personality—and of His premortal development and glory—took place that He became the most perfect type of manhood that has ever existed in this world. God was here on earth dwelling among mortals. In such perfect likeness was He to the Father that He was able to say, "Those who have seen me have seen my Father." Since Jesus was a humanized Savior-God as well as a divine being, He was in a position to establish a pattern of life which mortals could, through diligence, attain. If the Savior had been entirely immortal, then mortals would feel that there would be no need of trying to follow His pattern of life, since such perfection could not be attained by a mortal.

JESUS THE TRUE MESSIAH

One day Jesus went down to the Jordan River, where an unusual man was teaching the doctrine of repentance and baptism. When He made application for baptism with this prophet and teacher, "John forbad him, saying, 'I have need to be baptized of thee and comest thou to me?' " [^8] But Jesus understood that even He, the Savior, must obey all laws if He received all blessings; [^9] and so He replied: "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." [^10] Then John immersed the Master in the water.

And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: And lo, a voice from heaven, saying: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased!" [^11]

John the Baptist testified that the descending of the Spirit of God like a dove on Jesus was a special sign given to him to let him know the Messiah. To quote:

The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, 'After me cometh a man which is preferred before me'; for he was before me. And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water."

And John bare record, saying, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, 'Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.' And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God." [^12]

JESUS AND THE JEWISH MESSIANIC HOPE

In all history no other announcement had the significance of this one by the Father that He, Jesus of Nazareth, was His Only Begotten Son—the long-looked-for Messiah or Christ, the Savior of the World. What! He, Jesus, the Son, the Messiah? Imagine the problems that immediately presented themselves to Him. How was He to proceed in order to fulfill the Jewish Messianic hope? The Jews were looking for a temporal ruler who would sit upon a throne in power and glory and make all other nations subject to Him and the Jewish nation. Their Messianic hope at that time consisted of a mixture of the prophecies which related to Jesus' first coming and those of His second coming, plus some erroneous hopes. Such Hebrew prophecies as the following played a major role in their Messianic hope:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder. . . . Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth and forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. [^13]

And there was given him dominion, and glory and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

To sit upon a throne and rule the Jewish nation and subject peoples might have been at first thought a pleasing idea. Yet, Jesus immediately realized that His whole development and training were directly opposed to such a career. Never in His life had He dreamed of controlling armies and men. To be clad in fine linen, dyed with the purple of Syrian vats, shod with the gold of Ophir, were not in accord with His inherent tastes. How could He fulfill the Jewish Messianic hope? There must be some course of action that the Messiah could follow other than that prevailing among the Jews.

JESUS CHOOSES HIS COURSE

Jesus made his way to the wilderness. For forty days and forty nights He stayed there fasting, meditating, and praying. One course would bring Him honor, power, gold and silver, houses and lands, pomp and armies, worldly glory and praise of men. The other would lead Him to the homes of the poor, the needy and sick, the lowly and despised, and finally to persecution and to Calvary.

Having completely withstood the alluring temptations of the devil and having been ministered to by angels, Christ came forth from the wilderness victorious. He knew that His course lay not with armies, powers and kingdoms, but with the afflicted and despised. He was to taste of life's bitterness. He was to stoop below all in order that He might rise above all. In the synagogue at Nazareth, shortly after returning from the wilderness, He announced His course by reading the following quotations from Isaiah:

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. [^14]

Was He prepared for this life of sorrow and to be a great teacher? No other man by consistent, natural development, by obedience to law, by suffering and walking the path of mortals, has so completely prepared himself for such a work as had this Nazarene, now proclaimed Jesus the Christ, the Son of the true and living God. So thoroughly and completely had been His training, so rationally had He followed the laws of the creation—the eternal plan of salvation—that He stood as a perfect prototype of God the Father. And coupled with all this was His glorious pre-mortal development and His earthly divinity by being the Only Begotten Son. Here was a man who could naturally fit Himself into the very hearts and lives of millions of people—yes, all humanity.

HOPE GIVEN TO SUFFERING HUMANITY

This Man-God was now Master of the proper course to follow. He was able to give moral content to the sorrows and perplexities of humanity better than could any other teacher who had ever lived. He put into suffering a meaning, a purpose, through His promises of rewards for diligent efforts and a glorious exaltation in His Father's kingdom for those who obeyed the Gospel teachings. In fact, no other message ever given has contained the hope, the encouragement, and the light of true direction that are found in the Sermon on the Mount and in Jesus' other teachings. Christ gave to the world not only a satisfying message for its sorrows by His teachings; but both by example and precept He marked out a course of self-sacrifice and of detachment from the vanities of the world that was not rivaled by any of the contemporary religions. The Master declared:

If a man wishes to come after me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross and follow me. Whoever wishes to save his life shall destroy it, but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospel's, shall save it. For what shall a man be profited if he shall gain the whole world and loseth his soul? [^15] Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. [^16]

He also said:

Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your soul. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. [^17]

What a hopeless place the world was for millions before Christ attached such a meaning to sorrow! Almost any religious teacher can succeed in times of joy and happiness. But in times of sorrow, if he can offer no satisfying message, his teachings are doomed to decay. Humanity will seek consolation elsewhere. Christ, the Lord and Master of life eternal, touched the hearts of millions by His teachings, and by His actions established serenity in suffering that could not fail to make His plan of salvation universal. Here was a Savior that appealed to the masses—a really divine human, a suffering God. Many a Christian has taken hope when he was burdened with grief by merely thinking of the supreme example set by Jesus Christ.

JESUS A SUFFERING SAVIOR

Indeed, a distinctive phase of Christ's life is that of suffering and grief. The Prophet Isaiah described Him aptly:

He is despised, and rejected of men; a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. . . . He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. . . . He was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. [^18]

His bitter tears and agony in Gethsemane and His intense pain on Calvary were so severe that no other mortal could have borne them. His mental and spiritual suffering were so severe that while He was praying to the

Father in the garden of Gethsemane "His sweat became as it were great drops of blood falling down upon the ground." [^19]

This intense suffering in Gethsemane can be accounted for by the fact that Christ was going through His last great contest with Lucifer, the son of the morning. [^20] In some mystical way He was taking upon Himself the sins of the world and preparing for victory over that last great enemy—death and the grave. The Son of Man revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the following facts:

For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. [^21]

THE DIVINE SAVIOR-GOD

At the time Christ died on Calvary the world was in search of a symbol and a savior-god who could feel its agony and know its distress. The pagan religions—especially the Mystery Religions—tried to picture their deities as humanized, sympathetic gods, but their teachings were doomed to failure, because their deities were merely myths. Jesus supplied the need for a suffering God by being crucified for the sins of the world.

In contrast to the pagan savior-gods, the Man of Galilee was a real historical character. He was a perfect man and was required to suffer greatly; therefore, those who are not perfect can take consolation when they are called upon to suffer even if they do not know all of the reasons why. But we do know that there was a purpose in Jesus' excessive suffering. He was to become the Judge, the Ruler, and Lord of this earth. By no method other than by passing through the experiences of life could He be trained so thoroughly for the work of a sympathetic, loving, impartial judge. Christ, in order to gain a fullness of joy and exaltation, must partake of the experiences of this life—both the bitter and the sweet. He was the Son of God, "yet he learned obedience by the things he suffered." [^22]

In no other way could He have become the author of eternal salvation unto all who would obey His teachings.

CHRIST ASSURES MAN OF IMMORTALITY

The Savior not only taught a satisfying theology and suffered and died, but He rose from the grave and thereby became the "first fruits of the resurrection." He arose into a glorious immortality. [^23] His was a victory over death and sin. Through this victory over the grave, He assured all men a similar triumph—a promise of immortality—and, upon condition of obedience to the Gospel, eternal life. Nothing within the range of human experience has had such a tremendous effect upon friends of the deceased as has the assurance of immortality. [^24] Tears have been wiped away and aching hearts have been healed through the assurance the Master gave us that all shall live again and associate with friends and loved ones eternally. The assurance of immortality is the most potent force in religious history. A complete understanding of sorrow and healing of griefs of humanity could never have been realized just through the life and death of Jesus of Nazareth, but the final essential was resurrection. Herein lies the power and beauty of the Christian message. A God who had power over death—who assured men of immortality—was the only Savior-God who could give meaning to the sorrows of humanity. This was accomplished by Jesus Christ and it marks the climax of the atonement.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Moses 6:58-59.
[^2] Genesis 9:4.
[^3] Leviticus 17:10-16; 19:26; Deuteronomy 12:16, 23; 1 Samuel 14:32-33; Acts 15:20, 29.
[^4] Alma 34:9-12.
[^5] Alma 12:20-87; 42:2-10; 2 Nephi 2:1-30; 9:1-10.
[^6] Alma 12:25, 29-30.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 76:69.
[^8] Alma 34:1-16, 36.
[^9] Ibid., 12:28-30.
[^10] Moses 6:57-67; 5:57.
[^11] John 11:25-26.
[^12] Ibid., 8:28-29.
[^13] Moses 5:5-9; 6:56; 3 Nephi 9:15-22.
[^14] Moses, op. cit.
[^15] Leviticus 3:8, 13; 4:17-18; 7:2; 8:15.
[^16] Ibid., 8:30; Exodus 24:5-8; Hebrews 9:18-21.
[^17] Leviticus 16:14-15; Exodus 12:7-30.
[^18] Amos 5:21-24, 4:4f.
[^19] Micah 6:1-8; Jeremiah 6:19-21; 7:21-24.
[^20] Hosea 6:6; Isaiah 58:1-7.
[^21] Mosiah 3:7.
[^22] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 613.
[^23] Doctrine and Covenants 19:16-18; Luke 22:39-44; Mosiah 3:7.
[^24] Doctrine and Covenants 136:39b.
