Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 26.

PAGAN BELIEFS OF ATONEMENT THROUGH SACRIFICE

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

As was pointed out in the last lesson, the doctrine of atonement through sacrifice relative to the sacrifice of Jesus and the shedding of His blood is pertinent in the plan of salvation. This doctrine—first revealed to Father Adam and later to the holy prophets during the various Gospel dispensations—found its way outward throughout the world and downward through the ages as a golden thread of truth. As it was disseminated outward from the original source, alterations from the true concept occurred. Therefore, a great variety of beliefs—some true and others false—have been held relative to the efficacy of sacrifice and of blood in cleansing man from sin and in helping to assure him immortal and eternal life. However, these various concepts and practices are rooted in the Messianic revelations given to the first mortal and to the other holy prophets of the Lord. They come from the common source of truth, which is the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In this chapter the beliefs and practices of paganism wherein the worshipers ate and drank blood and were baptized in it, and shed the blood of human beings as well as that of animals for the purpose of atonement and bringing about their salvation, will be presented. The purpose will be to show that those pagan rites are adulterated forms of the true Gospel doctrine of atonement and shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ. Valid historical evidence will be given.

PAGAN CONCEPTS OF ATONEMENT

At the time Christianity was spreading throughout the world—yes, and from the date of the first apostasy from the true Gospel in the days of Adam to the final triumph of Christianity over paganism in 392 A.D.—the majority of the heathenistic religions attributed a pronounced saving efficacy to blood. Some cults, in order to utilize its potent, life-giving qualities, washed or sprinkled their devotees with it. [^1] Each one of the candidates who was being initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries purified himself and a sucking pig by immersion in the waters of the sea. Then the pig was sacrificed and the blood sprinkled on the initiate. [^2]

Some pagans even drank blood for the purpose of effecting a rebirth or regeneration. A part of the initiation ceremony in the ancient Orphic religion was for the initiates to eat the raw flesh and drink the blood of the sacrificial bull in which they believed their god Zagreus to be ritualistically incarnate. After once partaking of this "red and bleeding feast" they henceforth abstained from eating meat. [^3]

The worshipers of Dionysus, a pagan cult of Paul's day, believed that their god, during the period of their festivals, was temporarily resident in animals. The kind of animal in which Dionysus dwelt varied according to locality. The people of a goat-raising district looked upon Dionysus as a goat and those of a cattle district as a bull. He was also pictured as a kid, a fawn, or a deer.

All of the initiates participated in the devouring of these animals. Firmicus Maternus, a writer of the early Christian period, stated that at his time, in Crete the populace would "rend a living bull with their teeth, and they simulate madness of soul as they shriek through the secret places of the forests with discordant clamors." [^4] Euripides (480-406 B.C.), one of the greatest Greek dramatists, wrote a play entitled "The Bacchae," in which he described the practices in the Dionysian Mysteries. Part of his description reads as follows:

The joy of the red quick fountain, The flood of the hill-goat torn. (They) quaff the goat's delicious blood, A strange, a rich, a savage food. [^5]

Euripides gives a vivid account of an attack of the female worshipers upon a herd of cattle. To quote:

Down swooped they then Upon our pasturing kine with swordless hand, Then had you seen your mother with her hands Rend a deep uddered heifer bellowing loud: And others tore the calves in crimson shreds. Ribs had you seen and cloven hoofs far hurled This way and that, and flakes of flesh that hung And dripped all blood bedabbled, 'neath the pines. Bulls chafing, lowering fiercely along the horn Erewhile, were tripped and hurled upon the earth Dragged down by countless clutching maiden hands. More swiftly was the flesh that lapped their bones Stripped, than you could have closed your kingly eyes. [^6]

The point of significance in this barbaric ceremonial was that the worshipers believed that their god was present temporarily in the animal victim. In order for them to enter into a direct and realistic communion with him, they must devour and assimilate the god before he escaped. Especially was the warm blood of the animal sacred blood because it contained the divine life of Dionysus. In fact, the worshipers believed that dripping, raw, quivering flesh was where the divine life was to be found. They made haste, therefore, in drinking the blood and eating the flesh before the divinity resident therein had time to escape.

Just as Jesus' blood was shed for the atonement of mankind these ancient pagans believed that by eating the blood of their god, Dionysus (the animal victim), they, too, would receive divine grace and forgiveness for their sins.

Another altered form of the sacrifice of the Son of God—especially as interpreted by the ancient pagans—was that of human and animal sacrifices. The majority of those heathenistic religions offered sacrifices of victims ranging from their most beautiful youths and most perfect babies to that of divers animals. The concept underlying the practice was that the Divine Ruler required the shedding of blood to extricate man from sin and win for him heavenly grace. Therefore, they believed that on certain important occasions God could be appeased only through the sacrificing of their most perfect child. Pagan influences at certain times caused even God's chosen people, Israel, to offer their little children as an oblation for sin. Naturally such an apostate practice was strenuously opposed by the holy prophets. [^7]

What was the origin of such a ghastly rite? It is probable that the offering of youths and maidens is an adoption of the ideas underlying the atonement of Jesus Christ. Just as the Eternal Father willingly gave His Only Begotten Son to expiate penitent mortals, so were pagans convinced that they must sacrifice their children to atone for their transgressions. Hence the true and original concept dates back to the first Messianic revelation given to Father Adam.

TAUROBOLIUM AND CRIOBOLIUM

Another very pertinent religious practice which claimed saving grace for the devotees comparable to the atonement of the Man of Galilee was that of taurobolium (bath in bull's blood), and its variant, criobolium (bath in ram's blood). The Great Mother Mysteries and Mithraism promised salvation to proselytes who cleansed themselves in the sacred blood of the bull or ram.

Prudentius, a Christian poet who is purported to have been an eyewitness to the rite, recorded a description of it. [^8] His description of taurobolium gives us an understanding of how the pagans performed this rite during the second, third and fourth centuries A.D. Wearing a golden crown and with his body wreathed with flowers, the one being initiated descended into a trench which was covered with a platform of perforated planks. A magnificent bull, decorated with gold and flowers, was led on the platform and there stabbed to death with the consecrated spear. "It's hot reeking blood poured in torrents through the apertures, and was received with devout eagerness by the expectant worshiper" below. [^9] He "receives the falling drops on his head, clothes and body. He leans backward to have his cheeks, his ears, his lips, and his nostrils wetted. He pours the liquid over his eyes and does not even spare his palate, for he moistens his tongue with blood and drinks it eagerly"; [^10] so runs the description given by an eyewitness.

After this baptism, the neophyte emerged drenched, dripping, and scarlet from head to foot. He was greeted by the spectators as one who "had been born again to a divine life for eternity." The bath in blood was "believed to purify him from the sins and evils of his old life and make him a new man, or rather a divinized human." [^11]

There were many similarities between this pagan practice and the Christian's concept of baptism and atonement of Christ. For example, the initiate's going down into the trench and coming forth again very aptly symbolized death and rebirth, and the efficacy attached to the blood of the holy bull or ram was believed to have as much saving effect as Christian baptism and the atonement of Jesus. In the words of Dr. Samuel Dill:

In taurobolium there was developed a ritual in which, coarse and materialistic as it was, paganism made, in however imperfect a form, its nearest approach to the religion of the Cross. [^12]

The fundamental concept in taurobolium and criobolium had a kinship to the divine revelation on baptism and atonement as given to Adam, wherein the Lord said:

Ye must . . . be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory; for . . . by the blood ye are sanctified. [^13]

"WASHED IN THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB"

J. M. Robertson came to the following conclusion:

In the procedure of taurobolia and criobolia, which grew very popular in the Roman world, we have the literal and original meaning of that phrase "washed in the blood of the lamb"; the doctrine being that resurrection and eternal life were secured by drenching or sprinkling with the actual blood of a sacrificial bull or ram. [^14]

It is true that in washing with ram's blood the pagans did put a very literal and realistic interpretation on the foregoing phrase, but the evidence contained in the Book of Mormon is positive to the effect that in taurobolium and criobolium we do not find the origin of the statement "washed in the blood of the lamb." That phrase did not originate with either the pagans nor the Nephites. Both groups inherited it from an earlier source—from the doctrine of atonement instituted before man was placed upon the earth. In fact:

Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying, "The righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world." [^15]

The Book of Mormon makes clear two important points, i. e., that the phrase "washed in the blood of the Lamb" is extremely old, and that the prophets who lived in ancient America understood its true meaning. The Jaredites who came to America shortly following the flood were familiar with it. Ether, their last prophet, predicted that a "New Jerusalem" would be built upon this the American continent, and those who should inhabit the Utopian city are "they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb." [^16] According to the prophets, the Old Jerusalem should eventually undergo a transformation and also become a holy city filled with righteousness. At that time those who reside in that city are "they [who] have been washed in the blood of the Lamb." [^17]

Another race of people who inhabited ancient America taught the same doctrine. Nephi (600 B. C.), in speaking of the redeemed, said: "Their garments are made white in his blood"; [^18] while Alma (nearly 500 years later) proclaimed the same concept. [^19]

The foregoing phraseology, therefore, was merely figurative language, as the Nephites did not believe or teach that there would be a literal washing of human beings in Christ's blood. The meaning behind that phrase was that the people who, through faith, repentance, baptism, confirmation, and righteous living, merited celestial glory were the ones who were "washed in the blood of the Lamb." They are the ones who shall be found numbered in the membership of the Church of the Firstborn, and they shall dwell in the Kingdom of God as priests, kings and holy angels. In reference to the wicked, Alma declared:

I say unto you, ye will know at that day [Judgment day] that ye cannot be saved; for there can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers who should come to redeem his people from their sins. [^20]

When the Master visited the Nephites following His resurrection, He confirmed Alma's doctrine in the following important remark, making clear how one can be washed in the blood of Lamb: "No unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest, save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." [^21]

Therefore, in conclusion it is very evident that the basis of the ancient practice of offering sacrifices—both of animals and of human beings—and that of all types of blood atonement doctrines and practices was the infinite and eternal sacrifice and the shedding of the blood of the Only Begotten Son of God, who was indeed the Christ and the one true Savior of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Book of Mormon: 1 Nephi 10:9-10; 11:27; 2 Nephi 9:23-24; 31:4-21; Mosiah 18:4-22; 21:35; 25:15-18; 26:22-23; Alma 4:4-5; 5:3; 6:1-2; 7:14-15; 8:10; 15:13-14; 32:16; 49:30; 62:45-56; Helaman 3:24; 5:17-19; 16:3-4; 3 Nephi 1:23; 7:26; 9:20; 11:10-41; 12:1-2; 18:5, 11-14, 30; 19:12-18; 21:6; 23:5; 26:17-21; 27:1, 20; 28:18; 30:2; 4 Nephi 1:1; Mormon 3:2-3; 9:22-25; Ether 4:18-19; Moroni 6:1; 7:34; 8:1-30. Doctrine and Covenants 132:5; 130:20-21.
[^2] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 6:49-67; 7:10-11; 8:19-25. Moses 6:49-67; John 3:1-8.
[^3] Matthew 7:14; 3 Nephi 14:13; 27:33.
[^4] 2 Nephi 31:4-21.
[^5] Moses 6:51, 63-67.
[^6] John 3:1-8.
[^7] Moses 5:6-15, 58-59.
[^8] Ibid., 7:10-11.
[^9] Ibid., 8:19, 23-24.
[^10] Shirley J. Case, The Evolution of Early Christianity, p. 340.
[^11] Arthur C. McGiffert, The Apostolic Age, p. 59.
[^12] Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, vol. 1, pp. 273-274; Edersheim states that "In Kerith., 92, 'the baptism' of Israel is proved from Exodus 24:5-8, since every sprinkling of blood was supposed to be preceded by immersion."
[^13] 2 Nephi 9:23-24; Mark 16:15-16; Matthew 28:19-20.
[^14] Moroni 8:11-12.
[^15] 2 Nephi 31:4-31.
[^16] Mosiah 18:5-22.
[^17] 3 Nephi 11:21-41; 19:10-16.
[^18] Ether 4:18-19.
[^19] Moroni 8:1-30.
[^20] Ibid., 8:11-12.
[^21] Ibid., 8:14.
