Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 27.

THE TRUE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM

BAPTISM INSTITUTED

One must look heavenward to find the origin of baptism and also to ascertain the origin of the other principles and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For the earliest revelations of the plan of salvation to mortals one should look to Father Adam—the first man of our race.

Since the Gospel was instituted by God and not by man, its requirements are just as constant and exacting in their composition and operation as are the laws of health or other laws of nature. If any alteration takes place, it can be made only by the Almighty Author of the laws. The Lord has said:

All who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. [^1]

The ancient religious records possessed by our generation are so brief that it is impossible to reconstruct in detail the Gospel as lived in the Adamic and other early dispensations. There is, however, enough information preserved to give conclusive evidence that baptism is one of the most vital ordinances of the plan of salvation and that it is positively a requisite—fixed and unalterable—for those who enter into the kingdom of God. [^2] "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life," [^3] and "the gate by which ye should enter is repentance, and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost." [^4]

By heavenly messengers, Adam was taught the doctrine concerning this ordinance. He heard the voice of God saying:

"If thou wilt turn unto me and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." . . .

And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water.

And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man. And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: "Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost. This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and for ever. . . . Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons." [^5]

Thus through faith, repentance, baptism and confirmation, Adam received a spiritual rebirth and was initiated into the Kingdom of God. [^6] He taught the principle of baptism to his children and they in turn to their children. [^7] In this way the knowledge and the practice of this holy ordinance was carried on among the children of men from generation to generation as a golden thread to which they must cling in order to bring about their own redemption.

BAPTISM TAUGHT BY ENOCH AND NOAH

We learn from the Pearl of Great Price that Enoch, hundreds of years after Adam's day, administered the same order of baptism to his people that had been practiced by his ancestors. He is the prophet who gives us the account of Adam's receiving this holy ordinance. To quote a divine revelation to Enoch:

The Lord said unto me: "Go to this people, and say unto them—Repent, lest I come out and smite them with a curse, and they die." And He gave unto me a commandment that I should baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, which is full of grace and truth, and of the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and the Son. [^8]

Noah, the mighty preacher and great-grandson of Enoch, received a Gospel dispensation, and God commanded him to teach and practice the ordinance of baptism.

And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch.

And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words. . . . Noah continued his preaching unto the people, saying: "Hearken, and give heed unto my words; believe and repent of your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest; and if ye do not this the floods will come in upon you"; nevertheless they hearkened not. [^9]

FROM NOAH TO JESUS

After the flood, Noah and his family continued to walk in righteousness before the Lord. Surely that great patriarch and his posterity continued the practice of baptism. This is evidenced by the fact that when Christ came into the world, baptism was a common practice of the Jews and the numerous pagan religions.

However, through apostasy a number of vital changes were made from time to time in the ordinance of baptism. One finds in ancient and modern religions numerous ways in which baptism has been interpreted and practiced. Where these variances from the original pattern occur, they are man-made and represent a falling away from the true Gospel ordinance.

BAPTISM AND THE JEWS

When one considers the prevalence of the practice of baptism throughout the Mediterranean world for several hundred years B.C. and on throughout the Christian period, he is surprised not to find the mention of this ordinance in the Old Testament. Was the Hebrew religion the one exception of a prominent religion that did not practice this rite? Or has the record of that particular Gospel doctrine failed to be preserved in Jewish literature for our generation?

Dr. Shirley Jackson Case and other prominent students of religion maintain that at the time of the birth of our Lord in Bethlehem "baptism was already practiced by Jews." [^10] In the words of Dr. Arthur C. McGiffert, who has been one of America's foremost scholars in this field:

Baptism was entirely in line with the common Jewish rite of purification, and as a symbolical representation of cleansing from the sins or crimes of which they repented, it must seem the most natural thing in the world to them . . . and was never thought of as involving any disloyalty to Judaism, or any departure from its traditional principles. [^11]

Dr. Alfred Edersheim states that the Jewish law required:

That those who had contracted Levitical defilement were to immerse before offering sacrifice. Again, it was prescribed that such Gentiles as became "proselytes of righteousness," or "proselytes of the Covenant," were to be admitted to the full participation in the privilege of Israel by the three-fold rites of circumcision, baptism and sacrifice—the immersion being, as it were, the acknowledgement and symbolic removal of moral defilement, corresponding to that of Levitical uncleanness. [^12]

NEPHITE TEACHINGS OF BAPTISM

Those students of Jewish religion who maintain that the Hebrews baptized corroborate evidence given in the Book of Mormon. Jacob, the son of Lehi, shortly after their arrival in America from Jerusalem, gave to the small colony of Israelite exiles the following definite instructions relative to this ordinance:

And he [Christ] commandeth all men that they must repent and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it. [^13]

Jacob's discussion and the writings of the other Nephite historians are so definite and explicit that we are sure that Lehi and his family were familiar with the details of the ordinance of baptism very shortly after leaving Jerusalem—probably before leaving. Whether they received their information entirely through special revelation or from the brass plates—the Hebrew scripture similar to our Old Testament, which they had brought with them from Jerusalem—is not discussed by Jacob or by any other Nephite writer.

But the record does state that Nephi was privileged to see in a vision the coming of Christ and His subsequent baptism.

The plainness and positiveness with which Nephi and Jacob instructed their associates relative to baptism—without once suggesting that their information came entirely as a new revelation—seems to sustain the viewpoint that baptism was practiced by the Jews prior to the time of Lehi's departure from Jerusalem, and the Nephites were but continuing a religious practice well understood by the people.

The Book of Mormon points out definitely that baptism is an ordinance of initiation, rebirth and regeneration, that the mode to be used is immersion, that in order to baptize one must hold the Priesthood, and that baptism should be administered only to those who have faith and a desire to become members of the Church of Christ, for "behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins." [^14] A point of significance is that throughout the entire history of the Nephites, whenever their records discuss baptism it is evident that these ancient Americans had the same interpretation of this holy ordinance as did Adam, Enoch and Noah and as was taught by the early Christians and also by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today. All the details relative to this ordinance which have been revealed to the holy prophets from Adam's day, with the exception of baptism for the dead, are found as teachings of the Book of Mormon prophets. For example, Nephi declared:

And now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfill all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water. . . .

But notwithstanding he being holy, he sheweth unto the children of men, that according to the flesh, he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments. . . . And he said unto the children of men, "Follow thou me." Wherefore, my beloved brethren can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father? And the Father said, "Repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my beloved Son."

And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying, "He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do." [^15]

Over four hundred years after Nephi's time, Alma baptized his converts by immersion in the waters of Mormon, thereby making them members of the Church of Christ. A detailed description is given in the Book of Mormon of this event. [^16]

Approximately one hundred and fifty years later the resurrected Lord visited the Nephites. He instructed them definitely concerning baptism. The procedure to follow is more clearly presented herein than in any of the other ancient scriptures, and so we shall quote it:

The Lord said unto him [Nephi III], "I give unto yon power that ye shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven."

And again the Lord called others, and said unto them likewise; and he gave unto them power to baptize. And he said unto them, "On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no disputations among you.

"Verily I say unto you, that whose repenteth of his sins through your words, and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them: behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them. And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying:

" 'Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.'

"And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water." [^17]

Descriptions are given of their following the Master's instructions.

The message of the Book of Mormon, to use the words of the Lord to Moroni, the last of the Nephite prophets, is as follows:

Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my Gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not, shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in my name. And blessed is he that is found faithful unto my name, at the last day, for he shall be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the world. [^18]

NEPHITES ADULTERATE THE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM

But when the Nephite nation dropped into wickedness and apostasy near the close of their history, they adulterated the doctrine of baptism by introducing the unholy practice of infant baptism in their church, just as the Christian church in Rome did, as we shall point out later. It is of interest to note that the doctrine of infant baptism was introduced among both peoples during the same period of history.

Mormon, the famous Nephite prophet and general in whose honor the Nephite record has been named, wrote a letter to his son, Moroni, to help counteract this evil and apostate belief of baptizing babies which had arisen among his people. [^19] This letter is one of the most forceful documents condemning infant baptism that has ever been written by a prophet of God. Before writing his letter, Mormon received a revelation from the Lord regarding this subject in which the Savior declared that "little children are alive in Christ even from the foundation of the world; . . . [therefore, they] need no repentance, neither baptism." [^20] Thus Mormon forcefully condemned the unholy doctrine of infant baptism and taught as follows:

Behold I say unto you that "he that supposeth that little children need baptism, is in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell." [^21]

CONCLUSIONS

Enough evidence has been given to show that from the beginning to the end of Nephite history the prophets of this race had a clear and detailed understanding of the holy ordinance of baptism. It has also been shown that baptism was a vital Gospel ordinance first revealed to Father Adam and later to the holy prophets in each dispensation, and that it is definitely requisite for the salvation of mankind. In fact, it is the gateway by which one may enter into the Kingdom of God.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 27

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Matthew 3:1-17; 28:19-20; Mark 16:15-16; 1:4; 10:13-16; Luke 3:3; 7:28-30; John 3:1-15, 23; Acts 2:37-38; 8:12, 38-39; 10:34-35, 47-48; 16:25-33; 22:10-16; Galatians 3:27; Hebrews 6:1-2; Romans 6:3-5; Colossians 2:12; 1 Peter 3:21; Revelation 20:12. John 3:3-5.
[^2] Handbook of the Restoration, pp. 115-121, 534-552. Romans 6:3-5.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Restoration of All Things, pp. 206-225. Colossians 2:12.
[^4] James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, pp. 122-160. John 3:23; Matthew 3:5-6.
[^5] Matthew 3:16.
[^6] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 139-161; for a fuller discussion of this subject see James L. Barker's "The Protestors of Christendom," Improvement Era, XLI (Salt Lake City, April, 1938), p. 218ff.
[^7] Talmage, op. cit., p. 160.
[^8] Cited in ibid.
[^9] Smith, The Message of the New Testament, p. 48; Justin Martyr, Dialogue With Trypho, Xiv, 1.
[^10] Matthew 3:11; Hebrews 6:1-16; John 3:5; Acts 2:38-39.
[^11] Acts 8:16-17.
[^12] Ibid., 16:19-34; 2:1-3.
[^13] Ibid., 8:35-39.
[^14] Matthew 28:19.
[^15] Mark 16:15-16.
[^16] Acts 2:37-39.
[^17] James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy, pp. 118-119; Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 6, p. 17.
[^18] Barker, op. cit., pp. 218-219.
[^19] Talmage, op. cit., p. 118.
[^20] Williston Walker, A History of the Christian Church, p. 373.
[^21] Ibid., p. 96; James C. Gibbons, The Faith of Our Fathers, p. 277-279.
