Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 29.

PAGAN INFLUENCES ON CHRISTIAN BAPTISM

PAGAN RIVALS OF CHRISTIANITY

Whence came all of these changes discussed in the last chapter from the true order of baptism as established by Jesus Christ? What was the intellectual and social heritage of these thousands of proselytes who came into the Christian church during the first four centuries A.D., which brought about this apostasy?

The complete answer to these questions can be found only in a study of all the religions and philosophies that contributed to the complex religious pattern of the Mediterranean world in which Christianity was planted. This is a gigantic task, as the world at that time was literally filled with pagan philosophies and religions — principally those known as Mystery Religions. [^1] In the words of Harold Willoughby:

Broadly speaking, the religious situation in the Graeco-Roman world was as varied and complex and syncretistic as Mediterranean society itself was at this period. All people included as citizens or provincials within the limits of the empire and all previous ages of religious experience in the Mediterranean area made some characteristic contribution to the religious life of Roman times. [^2]

Never was the world more completely given over to religious syncretism—that is, mixing of religious beliefs—than during the early Christian era. Many peoples had been brought together and their cultures intermingled and fused. [^3]

During this period of intensified religious feeling, thousands and thousands of pagans became followers of Jesus. Especially after 392 A.D. (the date at which Christianity became the only legal religion of the Roman Empire), former pagans flocked into the Catholic church. They brought with them many of their heathenistic rituals, beliefs, and practices. This process of religious syncretism was accelerated by the Roman government's outlawing all pagan religions and forcing them out of existence. Thus numerous pagans were forced into Christianity without their being really converted to the teachings of the Master. This increased the amount of heathenistic beliefs and practices which flowed into Christianity, thereby becoming an integral part of Catholicism. Christianity of the fifth century, then, was the product of many streams of thought—Jewish, pagan, and the teachings of the Man of Galilee. Its principles, ordinances and practices differed vitally from the true Gospel. An apostasy from the plan of salvation as established by Jesus had taken place.

Two facts of great importance can be observed in a study of the religions of the Mediterranean world during the early centuries A. D. First, much of the golden thread of truth—greatly altered—persisted in the pagan religions from bygone days when their ancestors were followers of the divinely revealed Gospel principles; second, the pagan religions affected Christianity immensely, bringing about what writers have termed the "Great Apostasy."

PAGAN BAPTISM PRACTICES

Hundreds of years B.C. and on down through the Christian centuries until paganism was outlawed, baptism was almost universally practiced by the numerous pagan religions. The Mystery Religions washed away the sins of their converts and initiated them into their various religious cults by baptism. Rebirth, regeneration, and all the other promises made to the Christian proselyte were also made to the believer in paganism by one or another of the prevalent heathenistic religions.

For the purpose of throwing light on the alterations of the Christian doctrine of baptism, a brief presentation of the various pagan baptism concepts which contributed to the religious pattern of the Roman Empire is given here. A scrutiny of the Christian doctrine of baptism at the close of the fourth century A.D. reveals the fact that it was composed of a portion of the baptismal practices of each of its pagan rivals mixed with the doctrine of baptism instituted by Jesus.

IMMERSION AND SPRINKLING

The worshipers of Demeter and Persephone in the Eleusinian Mysteries baptized their candidates both by sprinkling and immersion. At stated times, only once or twice each year, proselytes were initiated. This practice came into Christendom. Origen, a Christian father, quotes Celsus, an Eleusinian worshiper, as giving two formulas of invitation to those who were to become cult members. To quote:

Those who invite people to other Mysteries make proclamation thus: "Everyone who has clean hands and intelligible speech," others again thus: "He who is pure from all pollution, and whose soul is conscious of no evil and who has lived well and justly." Such is the proclamation made by those who promise purification from sins. [^4]

It is evident that in this pagan rival of Christianity the candidate must be in a repentant condition and must be one who had lived an acceptable life. The ancient records tell us that Nero, the wicked and notorious Roman emperor, "dared not attend the Eleusinian Mysteries, at the initiation of which impious and wicked persons are warned by the voice of the herald from approaching the rites." [^5] Two other Roman emperors, Marcus Aurelius and Commodus, were numbered among the illustrious mystae.

In this pagan religion, the immersion always took place in the sea, as salt waves were believed to possess a greater cleansing virtue than fresh water. "Sea waves wash away all sin," said Euripides (480-406 B.C.). Little pigs were also cleansed by immersion preparatory to being sacrificed. Then the blood from these animals was sprinkled on each of the initiates, an act closely resembling an ancient Hebrew religious custom. [^6] The Bible states that "Moses took the blood [of sacrificial animals] and sprinkled it on the people, and said, 'Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words'." [^7]

The golden thread of religion maintained itself in this pagan cult in such a proportion that Tertullian (160-220 A.D.), a Christian, wrote:

At the Eleusinian Mysteries men are baptized and they assume that the effect of this is their regeneration and the remission of the penalties due to their perjuries. [^8]

Tertullian, the Christian lawyer, recognized that the members of the Great Mysteries at Eleusis believed that through baptism they experienced a new birth, but he argued the superior validity of the Christian rite and experience. He definitely pointed out the absolute necessity of baptism being performed by one holding the holy Priesthood or authority from God, which Catholics claimed to possess. He argued thus:

If the mere nature of water, in that it is the appropriate material for washing away, leads men to flatter themselves with a belief in the omens of purification, how much more truly will waters render that service through the authority of God, by whom all their matter has been constituted?

Well, but the nations, who are strangers to all understanding of spiritual powers, ascribe to their idols the imbuing of waters with the self-same efficacy [as Christian baptism]. But they cheat themselves with waters that are widowed. For washing is the channel through which they are initiated into the sacred rites of some notorious Isis or Mithra. [^9]

Mithraism entered Rome 63 B.C. and in a little over one hundred years spread from one end of the empire to the other. It maintained itself for three centuries as the most powerful religion of the Roman world. Many years before Christ, and throughout the early Christian centuries, worshipers of this Persian god baptized their proselytes. The mode used was either sprinkling with holy water or complete immersion. [^10] During the early centuries A.D., immersion was the only mode of baptism accepted and practiced by Christians, but later both immersion and sprinkling were used, an obvious adoption of Mithraic practices. Even today in the Catholic church either method of baptizing is acceptable, but sprinkling is preferable. [^11]

Dr. Willoughby concluded: "Mithraic baptism, like the later Christian rite, promised purification from guilt and the washing away of sins. Christian Fathers noted the similarity and were quick to charge the devil with plagiarism at this point." [^12]

In the words of Tertullian:

The devil, whose business is to pervert the truth, mimics the exact circumstances of the divine sacraments in the mysteries of idols. He himself baptizes some, that is to say, his believers and followers; he promises forgiveness of sins in the sacred fount, and thus initiates them into the religion of Mithra. [^13]

A more probable reason for the marked resemblance in the Mithraic and the Christian concept of baptism than that offered by Tertullian is that Mithraism had retained from earlier times many of the threads of Gospel truths stemming from the original common source. It is evident that not only did these pagan religions affect Christianity, but Gospel teachings from earlier ages had left their imprint on paganism.

DIET OF "MILK MINGLED WITH HONEY"

A distinctly pagan practice that came into Christianity during the early centuries was the feeding of the baptized worshipers on a diet of milk mingled with honey. [^14] This practice, no doubt, came from the Great Mother Mysteries and from Mithraism, two of the most prominent pagan rivals of Christianity. The former gave to the newly initiated "nourishment of milk as if he were being reborn"; [^15] while honey was applied to both the hands and tongue of the initiates of Mithraism for the purpose of nourishing the new spiritual life of those who had recently been baptized.

According to Porphyry, an ancient writer, the Mithraic devotees believed that honey was a celestial substance produced under the influence of the moon and was the food of the gods themselves. [^16] It was the custom among these pagans to put honey into the mouths of new-born babies—so, the Mithraic spiritually new-born were also fed on this substance. It was believed to contain properties capable of nourishing the spiritual life of the initiate and of keeping him from blemishes of sin. The Catholic church adopted this practice of giving a mixture of milk and honey to the newly baptized church members; thus we find the origin of the Christian practice of giving their initiates, following baptism, milk mingled with honey.

BAPTIZED CONVERTS ROBED IN WHITE

As early as the fifth century B.C. and on through the early Christian era, the pagan worshipers in the Orphic cult wore garments of pure white after being baptized, symbolical of purification. The following statement in the writings of Euripides is indicative of this practice: "Robed in pure white, I have borne me clean from man's vile birth and coffined clay." [^17] By the beginning of the third century A.D., the worshipers of Jesus had adopted this pagan practice of dressing the newly baptized devotees in white clothing symbolical of inward purity and innocence—of a regeneration and spiritual rebirth. [^18]

ARDUOUS PREPARATORY TRAINING AND ISIAC BAPTISM

Probably the most significant contribution of the worshipers of Isis, the Egyptian goddess, to Christianity was the long and arduous preparatory training which was required of initiates into this cult, which practice later was adopted by the Catholic church under the name of catechumenate. [^19]

The Isiac Mysteries originated as early as 3000 B.C. Many years before the birth of Jesus members of this cult practiced baptism. In the words of Dr. Willoughby:

When Paul began his missionary work in these regions [Syria, Asia Minor and Greece], he everywhere met with Isiac establishments that were already centuries old. . . . Even to the last days of paganism, Isis remained a power in the eastern Mediterranean world. [^20]

Lucius Apuleius, an ancient pagan, left us an account of his own initiation into the Isiac religion. Harold Willoughby discusses the Isiac baptism and Lucius' experience as follows:

The great priest produced "out of the secret place of the temple certain books written with unknown characters . . . whereby they were wholly strange and impossible to be read by profane people," and thence he interpreted to Lucius "such things as were necessary to the use and preparation of his order." At the propitious time after the impartation of this instruction, Lucius, attended by a company of initiates, was brought to the place of baptism, and there "demanding pardon of the gods," the priest baptized him and "purified his body according to custom." Christian writers knew of this Isiac baptism and made plain that a powerful efficacy was credited to it—indeed the selfsame effect of purification from sin and spiritual regeneration that Christians attributed to their baptismal rite. [^21]

In the thought of the Isiac community, the waters of baptism were identified with the life-giving waters of the sacred Nile. . . . So for the initiate these sacred waters had a life-giving power, and Isiac baptism was in effect regarded as a regenerative rite that meant new life to the one who experienced it. [^22]

The ceremony of initiation into the Isiac Mysteries was extremely elaborate. Since this religion was widespread throughout the Mediterranean world before Paul proclaimed the teachings of the Master to the Gentiles, it was natural for the Christians, little by little, to adopt much of the Isiac elaborate ceremonialism, part of which was the custom of having sponsors in connection with baptism. [^23] The latter practice was adopted by the Catholic church when infant baptism became its most prevalent mode.

ROOTS OF THE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM

The fact that the practice of baptism is so universal and that there are so many resemblances in the rite as observed by the ancient pagan religions and the true ordinance as revealed to the holy prophets is evidence that the roots of this ritual extend to the distant day when the ordinance was revealed to the first man. Throughout the ages, whenever the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been on the earth, God has established again the holy ordinance of baptism in its purity. Through apostasies, however, men have time and time again adulterated the truth. Yet baptism has retained a semblance to the ordinance as established before man was placed upon the earth; that is, baptism was instituted to be the gateway by which mortals must pass if they enter into the kingdom of God.

SUPPLEMENTARY READING—CHAPTER 29

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 18:9-26, 42-47; 20:29; 33:11; 35:5-6; 49:8, 13; 58:48. Moses 5:8, 14-15.
[^2] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 5:8-15; 6:22-67. Ibid., 6:26, 29.
[^3] Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, pp. 45, 101, 131-132, 159-164, 196-224, 209-211. Mosiah 27:24-32; Alma 36:5, 18-36.
[^4] Alma 7:14.
[^5] Romans 6:3-11; Galatians 3:24-29; 2:19-21.
[^6] Moses 6:59-60; John 5:5-8.
[^7] Baptism in blood was discussed in an earlier chapter.
[^8] Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, p. 209.
[^9] Corpus Hermeticum, cited in Willoughby, ibid., p. 211.
[^10] Samuel Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity, pp. 81-83.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 95-100; Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 45, 101, 131-132, 159-161, 196-224.
[^12] Bibliotheque Nationale, Supp., Gr. 574. See Dieterich, Eine Mithrasliturgie, cited in Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 163-164.
[^13] Willoughby, ibid.
[^14] Corpus Hermeticum, cited in Angus, op. cit., pp. 95-100.
[^15] Sallustius, Philosophus, cited in Edward Carpenter, Pagan and Christian Creeds, pp. 44-45.
[^16] Porphyry, De Antro Nympharum, p. 15.
[^17] Euripides, Fragments, p. 475; cited in Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 102-103.
[^18] John L. Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History, vol. 1, p. 262.
[^19] James L. Barker, "The Protestors of Christendom," Improvement Era, XLI (Salt Lake City, April, 1938), p. 219; Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 169-194.
[^20] Ibid., p. 180.
[^21] Tertullian, De Buptismo, 5; Cf. Firmicus Maternus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum, 2.
[^22] Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 187-188. Osiris was the "savior-god" in the Mysteries of Isis.
[^23] Williston Walker, A History of the Christian Church, p. 96.
