Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 30.

REPENTANCE AND REBIRTH

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

It is the purpose of this lesson to show that from Adam's day forward the prophets of God, as well as pagan teachers, have proclaimed the doctrine of repentance, stressing the idea that man must experience a spiritual rebirth—i. e., a complete change in his habits and attitudes of life—and that he must acknowledge this rebirth through compliance with the ordinance of baptism. In the preceding lessons we metioned that the mode of baptism was symbolical of rebirth, but the purpose of this chapter is to center directly on the doctrines of repentance, rebirth or regeneration.

REPENTANCE AND REBIRTH

The voice of God has come to man in all ages calling him to repentance; in fact, the very basis of the Gospel message is that all men must repent or they cannot see the kingdom of God. In the very beginning God gave the following commandment to Father Adam:

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son for evermore. . . .

And the Lord God called upon men by the Holy Ghost everywhere and commanded them that they should repent; and as many as believed in the Son, and repented of their sins, should be saved; and as many as believed not and repented not, should be damned; and the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore they must be fulfilled. [^1]

This doctrine was confirmed to Enoch by God's speaking directly to him from heaven, saying:

Enoch, my son, prophesy unto this people, and say unto them—Repent. . . . And this is a decree, which I have sent forth in the beginning of the world, from my own mouth, from the foundation thereof, and by the mouths of my servants, thy fathers, have I decreed it, even as it shall be sent forth in the world, unto the end thereof. [^2]

REPENTANCE, BAPTISM AND REBIRTH

By repentance the holy prophets meant for man to overcome all of his sins and change his life wherein it was evil to that of spiritual righteousness. Thus repentance is actually a spiritual rebirth or regeneration. Baptism, however, is the Gospel ordinance of rebirth which the man who has repented accepts as a token of his spiritual regeneration; but in order for the baptism to be effective in opening the door into the kingdom of God, it must be accompanied by true repentance.

Whenever the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been on the earth the concept of death to the old life and birth into a new spiritual life accompanying repentance and baptism has been held as one of the cardinal tenets. [^3] The Master's statement to Nicodemus—"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God"—is familiar to everyone. Alma taught the Nephites the same Gospel truth. In his own words:

Ye must repent and be born again: for the Spirit saith, if ye are not born again, ye cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore come and be baptized unto repentance, that ye may be washed from your sins. [^4]

In Titus it is written, "According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration." Paul the apostle expressed the Christian doctrine of rebirth in his letter to the Saints in Rome as follows:

Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. [^5]

The Gospel has always required of mankind not only to accept the outward act of being baptized, but actually to cast aside all sins of the flesh and be born unto Christ into a new life of the spirit—a life of absolute righteousness. The ultimate goal of being reborn and attaining an inheritance in the kingdom of God will be reached by following the solemn injunction of the Master of life and salvation wherein He said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

CONSTANTS IN BAPTISM PRACTICES

As has been pointed out, the ordinance of baptism has been practiced in a variety of ways and with various interpretations placed upon it by the different religions throughout history; but there are certain constants in baptism which have maintained themselves in pagan as well as in Christian religions. These indicate one central source from which they were derived. The roots of these constants extend to the following pregnant statements made by the Lord to Father Adam:

Inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. [^6]

It has been the practice in many of the ancient as well as modern religions to baptize converts for the avowed purpose of helping to bring about in the worshipers a regeneration or rebirth. Three types of baptisms have been popular—that of water, of Spirit, and of blood. [^7] Although interpreted and expressed in a variety of ways by different religions, yet the doctrine on which they are constructed has a kinship to the three points in baptism and atonement emphasized in the foregoing revelation to Adam.

PAGANS' CONCEPT OF REPENTANCE AND REBIRTH

Many of the teachings in paganism remind one of the true Gospel doctrines of repentance and rebirth taught by Jesus and the holy prophets. For example, in order to attain the rebirth in Hermeticism the convert must replace the following "evil inclinations of the flesh" with the "powers of God": "knowledge of God to replace ignorance, joy instead of sorrow, self-control in place of intemperance, continence where sensuality was, righteousness in lieu of injustice, generosity to drive avarice away, truth instead of error, and the more abstract qualities of goodness, life, and light to take the place of all the other brutish torments." [^8]

The Hermetic prophet, like John the Baptist, summoned men to "Repent and be baptized!" The following call to repentance is quoted from one of the Hermetic sermons:

O people, men born of earth, who have given yourselves up to drunkenness and sleep in your ignorance of God; awake to soberness, cease to be sodden with strong drink and lulled in sleep devoid of reason. . . . O men, why have you given yourselves up to death, when you have been granted power to partake of immortality? Repent, you who have journeyed with error, and joined company with ignorance; rid yourselves of darkness, and lay hold on light; partake of immortality, forsaking corruption. [^9]

PAGANS' CONCEPT OF BAPTISM AND REBIRTH

Practically every pagan religion that was a vital rival of early Christianity practiced baptism as one of its rites of initiation; [^10] and the doctrine behind this ordinance was death to the old life and regeneration or rebirth into a new life—a spiritual life. [^11] It connoted a purging of all past sins of the flesh and a birth into a life of the spirit—a life of immortality—just as the Christian doctrine of baptism did. The fundamentals of the concept were inherited from the true plan of salvation.

"There can be no salvation without regeneration," was emphatically asserted in the Hermetic pagan literature. Plato remarked that "To die is to be initiated." Many different religious practices were employed by the ancient pagans to engender a rebirth in the worshipers. Every serious-minded neophyte, in being baptized into the Mystery Religions during early Christian centuries passed through the solemn ceremony believing that thereby he became twice born—a new creature. This concept of rebirth and regeneration was paramount in paganism as early as the sixth century B.C. and remained so until Christianity absorbed the heathenistic cults during the fourth and fifth centuries A.D. Note the definiteness of this concept as expressed in the following Mithraic literature translated from a papyrus scroll preserved in Egypt from the first century A.D. The opening prayer of the liturgy begins:

"O! First spirit of the spirit that is within me! . . . May it please thee to translate me, who am trammelled by the nature which underlies me, to an immortal genesis . . . that I may be born again in spirit." At other points in the documents are recorded: "Though I was born a mortal from a mortal mother . . . having been sanctified by sacred ceremonies I am about to gaze with immortal eyes on the immortal aeon. . . . O Lord! Having been born again, I pass away, being exalted the while, as thou hast established the law and ordained the sacrament." [^12]

Dr. Willoughby thinks that "few if any ancient [pagan] texts contain a clearer" statement of the "religious experience of rebirth to immortal life than does this Mithraic liturgy. By itself alone it is startling testimony to the prominence of the idea in Gentile religious circles. . . . It is certain that the devotees of Mithra viewed initiation as a rebirth to immortality." [^13] It should be kept in mind that rebirth as promised in Mithraism was to be achieved at least in part through the rite of baptism.

From the teachings of the pagan rival of Christianity known as Hermeticism, in which the rebirth idea was paramount, the following is quoted:

"No one can be saved without regeneration." . . . The author of the new birth is "the Son of God," "the One Man" . . . Spiritual rebirth is an escape from the delusions of the body in order by "the essential birth" to become "divine and Son of the One." By the will of God the new birth is accomplished by which the "begotten" of God becomes "divine" and "Son." [^14]

From what has been presented, it is apparent that in their doctrines of repentance and spiritual rebirth, ancient paganism retained many similarities to the original revelations received from heaven.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 30

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 49:11-13; 19:41-43; 39:6; 68:25-27; 84:27, 74; 76:51-52; 33:11; 128; 13:1-6; 55:2; 107:20; 20:37, 71-73, 68, 41. Pearl of Great Price, p. 56; Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 67-70; Doctrine and Covenants 13.
[^2] Handbook of the Restoration, pp. 115-127, 164-169, 534-552. Pearl of Great Price, ibid.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 12, 148, 192, 198-201, 260-266, 310, 314, 360-361. Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 198.
[^4] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 148-152. Doctrine and Covenants 49:11-13, 19-31.
[^5] Ibid., 39:6.
[^6] Ibid., 68:25-27.
[^7] Ibid., 84:74.
[^8] Ibid., 13; 84:27; 55:2; 107:20.
[^9] Ibid., 76:51-54; 33:11; 128:12; 20:68.
[^10] Ibid., 20:37, 71-74.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants 124:29-39.
[^12] Ibid., 110.
[^13] Ibid., 128.
[^14] 1 Corinthians 15:29.
