Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 31.

THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISM RESTORED

BAPTISM ORDINANCE ADULTERATED

So completely were the ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—such as baptism—changed by the fusing of the concepts and rites of various religions during the early centuries A.D., that baptism as practiced by the Christians during the third century and following can hardly be recognized as having evolved from the New Testament practice of this rite. But when one studies all the religions that contributed to the complete religious situation of the Graeco-Roman world, one can easily recognize that Christian baptism of 250 or 300 A.D. was a composite of Hebrew, Christian, and pagan thought and practice, with the major contributions coming from the latter two.

EFFORTS AT REFORMATION

Many Christians in Europe recognized during the sixteenth century that the prevailing Catholic practice of baptism did not correspond with the teachings of the New Testament. There was, therefore, a desire and a conscious effort made to revive, as nearly as possible, the original method of administering this ordinance. This reformation was expressed in the Ana-baptist and Baptist movement which began in Germany and spread throughout Europe. It later found its way to America. But this reformation movement did not nor could not officially restore the holy ordinance of baptism. There was no church in existence following the Great Apostasy and preceding the nineteenth century that could officially administer the ordinance of baptism, because the holy Priesthood of God was not in the world during that period.

A DIVINE RESTORATION

The "Falling Away" from the Gospel truths necessitated a divine restoration. As has been previously mentioned, this restoration took place during the early part of the nineteenth century. The Lord through divers ways made known to Joseph Smith, the American Prophet, the true plan of salvation, which includes the holy ordinance of baptism.

One beautiful spring day (May 15, 1829), while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were translating the Book of Mormon at Harmony, Pennsylvania, they discovered that baptism by immersion for the remission of sins was mentioned a number of times in the ancient Nephite record. Since the ordinance of baptism was erroneously understood and practiced by the various Christian churches, Joseph and Oliver concluded to inquire of the Lord for light. They retired to the woods near the Susquehanna River and engaged in humble prayer. While they were thus engaged, an angel descended from heaven in a cloud of light and introduced himself as John, known as John the Baptist in the New Testament. He said he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, the Lord's apostles who held the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and that he had been sent to confer on Joseph and Oliver the Aaronic Priesthood, which holds the keys of the temporal Gospel. He laid his hands upon their heads, saying:

Upon you, my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. [^1]

The messenger told Joseph and Oliver that the Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but soon thereafter the Melchizedek Priesthood would be conferred upon them. The angel instructed them to go down into the water and baptize each other, and then to lay hands on each other and re-confer the Priesthood which he had bestowed upon them. Following the instructions of the angel, they went down into the water, where Joseph first baptized Oliver and then Oliver baptized Joseph by immersion. To quote the Prophet:

Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy, when, standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of this Church, and many other things connected with the Church, and the generation of the children of men. [^2]

Shortly thereafter Joseph and Oliver received the Melchizedek Priesthood from Peter, James and John. The restoration of the higher Priesthood took place somewhere between Harmony, Pennsylvania, and Colesville, New York, on the banks of the Susquehanna River. The Prophet of God who had been called to usher in the last dispensation of the Gospel now had the authority of God to baptize by water and by Spirit. Only those people who have reached the age of accountability in our day who receive the holy ordinances of baptism and confirmation through the administration of this divine restoration shall inherit the kingdom of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught as follows regarding the necessity of baptism by Spirit:

The baptism of water, without the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost attending it, is of no use; they are necessarily and inseparably connected. An individual must be born of water and the Spirit in order to get into the Kingdom of God. [^3]

REVELATIONS RECEIVED BY JOSEPH THE PROPHET

Following the divine restoration of the ordinance of baptism and the authority of God to perform the holy ordinance in a valid and acceptable way, Joseph the Prophet received numerous revelations from Jesus and the Eternal Father relative to baptism. Thus the Prophet gave to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints a clear and comprehensive understanding of the doctrine of baptism.

This ordinance as revealed to Joseph Smith contains a number of principal items. First, God gave the commandment in this dispensation, as He had done in previous Gospel dispensations, for all people who had arrived at the age of accountability to repent and be baptized by water and by fire in order that they might enter the kingdom of God. To quote:

Believe on the name of the Lord Jesus, who was on the earth, and is to come, the beginning and the end; repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, according to the holy commandment for the remission of sins; and whoso doeth this shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on the hands of the elders of the Church. [^4]

And this is my Gospel—repentance and baptism by water, and then cometh the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which showeth all things, and teacheth the peaceable things of the kingdom. [^5]

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized. And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands. [^6]

Verily, verily, I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are not baptized in water in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall not come into my Father's kingdom where my Father and I are. [^7]

On several occasions the Lord made it clear to the Prophet that any baptism that was valid and accepted by Him must be performed by one ordained to the holy Priesthood and thereby possessing the proper authority. [^8] He also explained that the only acceptable mode of baptism was immersion, being "baptized after the manner of his [Christ's] burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power." [^9] Following baptism, the Church member was commanded to continue to live faithfully all the principles of the Gospel; and if he succeeded in doing so he would be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise in the resurrection to be accounted among the members of the Church of the Firstborn to dwell with Christ in Celestial glory forever and ever.

God did not leave the Prophet in the dark regarding who should have the privilege of being baptized and the definite method by which baptism should be performed. In April, 1830, the month during which the Church was organized, the Lord instructed Joseph as follows:

All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the Church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into His Church. . . .

No one can be received into the Church of Christ unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance.

Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all those who repent: The person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented himself or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by name: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen."

Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of the water. [^10]

BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD RESTORED

God not only revealed the doctrine of baptism for the living to the Prophet Joseph Smith, but He established on earth again the glorious doctrine of baptism for the dead, thereby opening the door to all of His sons and daughters who have ever lived in mortality to come back into His presence on condition of their worthiness. The Lord told Joseph that baptism for the dead should be performed in His holy house; in fact, one of the principal purposes He had in mind in commanding the Latter-day Saints to build temples was for the performance of this holy ordinance. In the revelation the Lord declared: "For a baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be baptized for those who are dead." [^11] Then God commanded the Saints to build temples in which to perform the ordinance of baptizing for the dead, proclaiming that this ordinance was instituted from before the foundation of the world for the salvation of His children who, for various reasons, would not accept the Gospel while in mortality.

A week following the dedication of the Kirtland temple, April 3, 1836, Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the temple and bestowed upon them the keys of sealing power, that all the ordinances for the dead might be performed in a valid way. [^12] Later the Lord revealed many more details regarding this sacred work, [^13] thereby making it possible for the complete purposes of God regarding His children to be accomplished.

BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD IN APOSTOLIC DAYS

This dispensation of the Gospel is not the only one in which baptism for the dead has been practiced. This doctrine was so well known by Jesus' apostles and the members of the Christian Church during the Apostolic Age that Paul need not explain the doctrine in detail when he wrote to the Saints. But the apostle did make the following definite reference to the Christians' well-established practice of baptism for the dead:

Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead? [^14]

We are informed in First Peter that while Christ's body was in the tomb preceding His resurrection "He went and preached unto the spirits in prison," giving unto the people who had been destroyed by the flood during the days of Noah another chance to hear and accept the Gospel. We are told in the Doctrine and Covenants that those of this group who accepted the Gospel and made themselves worthy in all other respects, received terrestrial glory. [^15] And what were the Gospel principles which Christ preached unto the spirits in prison? Certainly they included faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism by water and Spirit. Another reference in the same scripture proclaims the foregoing facts to be true. To quote:

Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. For this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. [^16]

For lack of historical records, we do not know exactly when or why the Christians stopped baptizing for the dead, but this is another example wherein they changed the ordinances of the Gospel.

TEACHINGS OF JOSEPH SMITH

Joseph Smith gave many wonderful teachings on the doctrine of baptism, explaining vividly and in simplicity what the Lord had revealed to him. By way of example, two short quotations from his sermons are given:

Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to Him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^17]

In the former ages of the world, before the Savior came into the flesh, "the saints" were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ to come, because there never was any other name whereby men could be saved; and after he came in the flesh and was crucified, then the saints were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, crucified, risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, that they might be buried in baptism like Him, and be raised in glory like Him, that as there was but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one God and Father of us all, even so there was but one door to mansions of bliss. [^18]

CONCLUSIONS

With the coming of John the Baptist and Peter, James and John to the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery—giving to them the keys of the Priesthood—the authority to act in God's name in administering the holy rite of baptism by water and by Spirit is again present on the earth. Thus the Church of Jesus Christ is the only church in existence that can officially administer this holy ordinance. The publication of the Book of Mormon (which contains a detailed account of baptism as taught by Jesus to the Nephites following His resurrection and also as taught and practiced by the Nephite prophets) plus the revelations on baptism which now appear in the Pearl of Great Price, and also the reception of numerous revelations which appear in the Doctrine and Covenants, resulted in the Prophet's having as comprehensive an understanding of the doctrine of baptism as was ever possessed by man. Therefore, this holy ordinance as administered by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today is, in all respects, the same as practiced by Father Adam, by the Nephites, and by Jesus and His apostles in Palestine during the early Christian period. This is the only church in the world which administers to its converts the true ordinance of baptism.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 31

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Matthew 26:17-30; Mark 14:12-26; Luke 22:14-23; John 6:31-71; 1 Corinthians 11:17-35; 15:1-40; Jeremiah 31:31-32; Hebrews 8:13. Charles Gore, Jesus of Nazareth, p. 156.
[^2] Book of Mormon: 3 Nephi 18:1-12, 26-32; 20:1-9; Moroni 4:1-3; 5:1-2. Matthew 26:26-28; Mark 14:22-24.
[^3] Luke 22:19. The italics were supplied by the author.
[^4] I Corinthinas 11:17-35.
[^5] Ibid., 11:25.
[^6] Moses 1:39; 6:58-59.
[^7] Corinthians 15:1-40.
[^8] Charles Gore, A New commentary on Holy Scripture, p. 423.
[^9] Nephi 18:1-12.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 20:78-79; Moroni 4:1-3; 5:1-2.
[^11] Williston Walker, A History of the Christian Church, p. 40; John 6:31-70.
[^12] Cited in Walker, op. cit., pp. 138-139.
[^13] Ibid., p. 99.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] The Catholic church has seven sacraments which are comparable to some of the ordinances in the Church of Jesus Christ, but the Catholics do not use the term ordinances. The Catholic seven sacraments are as follows: Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance (Confession), Extreme Unction (Last Anointing). Orders and Matrimony. See Cardinal Gibbons, The Faith of Our Fathers, p. 266ff.
[^16] Cyprian, Letters, cited in ibid., pp.62-63.
[^17] Augustine, Forgiveness of Sin, 1:34; cited in Walker, ibid., pp. 262-265.
[^18] Walker, ibid., pp. 262-265.
