Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 32.

THE SACRAMENT OR THE HOLY EUCHARIST

SACRAMENT INSTITUTED

Whenever the true Gospel of Jesus Christ has been on the earth the worshipers of God have always commemorated the great atoning sacrifice of our Lord and Savior by a holy ordinance. Originally this rite was that of sacrifice, which was practiced down to the advent of the Only Begotten Son of God. At the time of the death of the Master, however, the ancient law was fulfilled in His infinite and eternal sacrifice. He, therefore, gave to mortals a new ordinance known to Latter-day Saints as the Sacrament and to Catholics and some of the other Christian denominations as the Holy Eucharist. Since the latter term has been used so universally throughout the course of Christian history and for sake of word variety, we shall use the two terms interchangeably throughout the chapters which deal with this subject.

The institution of the Sacrament was regarded by the early Christians "as the new and true paschal celebration; as St. Paul wrote, 'Christ our Passover has been sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the feast'." [^1]

The night before the crucifixion of the Man of Galilee, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, "Take, eat; this is my body." And He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, "Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." [^2]

It is true that the wording given by Matthew and Mark is rather mystical, suggesting to the practical-minded westerners the presence of flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament.

But the orientals—the companions of the Nazarene—could be much better trusted than people of the West to grasp clearly the full significance of Christ's figurative language. Peter, James, John and the other apostles knew very well when Jesus said, "Take, eat; this is my body," that it was physically impossible for them to be eating of the Master's physical body, as He had not as yet been sacrificed. He was a living person who had Himself given them bread and the cup.

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME"

Luke threw considerable light on the mystical wording of Matthew and Mark by quoting Jesus as saying:

He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and give it unto them saying, "This is my body which is given for you: This do in remembrance of me" [^3]

Paul, the apostle to the Gentiles, also wrote an account of the establishment and significance of the Holy Eucharist. He received his information by special revelation from the resurrected Savior. Students of the scriptures affirm that his account was the first one of those in the New Testament to be recorded; therefore, because of its accuracy and trustworthiness, it is of paramount importance in revealing to us the early Christians' interpretation of the Sacrament.

Paul agrees with Luke in reporting that the bread and wine were to be taken in remembrance of Jesus. [^4] He cautioned the Corinthian Christians against partaking of those substances (not flesh and blood) unworthily, stating that if they did so they were eating and drinking damnation unto themselves. He quoted Jesus as saying: "This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me." [^5] In other words, Paul taught that the Sacrament was an ordinance of the new covenant of atonemnet, brought about through the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, in order that man might attain immortality and eternal life. [^6]

Paul regarded the Sacrament as a means of communion with the Lord; also as a memorial of the covenantsacrifice of the Lamb of God. Being a Hebrew of Hebrews, thoroughly versed in the laws and customs of his people, he conceived of Jesus as the true Paschal Lamb and the partaking of the Eucharist as the Christian Passover. Just as the eating of the Paschal Lamb commemorated the deliverance of the children of Israel from the Egyptians, so did the Christians, eating of the Sacrament commemorate the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, who died to deliver all mortals from death and the grave. The point of significance in the Sacrament doctrine is not the fact that Christ died—but that He lives, as Paul presented so clearly in his discourse on immortality. [^7]

The fact that Paul's and Luke's accounts definitely state that the early Christians partook of the Sacrament in remembrance of the sacrifice of the Master indicates that the early devotees of Jesus did not believe that they were actually eating the flesh and drinking the blood of their crucified Lord. That concept came into Christianity as a later development. In the words of Dr. Charles Gore:

There is not a word in St. Paul of that "eating of the god." . . . All his teaching grows out of the thoughts of the Passover and the covenant feast of Exodus 24:1-11, immeasurably deepened and spiritualized by the doctrine of the union of Christ with his people which St. Paul had received from Christ Himself. [^8]

TRUE MEANING OF SACRAMENT

Jesus Christ visited the Nephites in America following His resurrection and imparted to them also the same Gospel truths that He had given to the Jews. In order to ascertain the true meaning of Sacrament, a comparison of the Book of Mormon and New Testament accounts should be made. In the words of the Nephite record:

When the disciples had come with bread and wine, he [Jesus] took of the bread and brake and blessed it; and he gave unto the disciples and commanded that they should eat. . . . "And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you. And it shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my spirit to be with you."

And it came to pass that when he said these words, he commanded his disciples that they should take of the wine of the cup, and drink of it, and that they should also give unto the multitude, that they might drink of it. . . .

And when the disciples had done this, Jesus said unto them, "Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you. And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me, ye shall have my spirit to be with you" [^9]

Fortunately the Nephite historian recorded the sacramental blessings given to his people by the Savior and used in their dispensation of the Gospel. These blessings agree exactly in their wording with the revelation on Sacrament received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in April, 1830. [^10] This is further evidence that the Gospel has always been the same. If at any time a change should occur in an ordinance, the change could be made officially only through revelation from the Lord Jesus Christ— the co-author of the eternal plan of salvation.

An analysis of the doctrine of the Sacrament as given in the Nephite record reveals definitely several facts. In the first place, it is clear that the sacramental substances were bread and wine—not flesh and blood. Also, the emblems were partaken in remembrance of the body and blood Jesus which were sacrificed for the redemption of mankind. All who partook of these holy emblems entered into a covenant with their Eternal Father that they would keep His commandments. He in turn promised His Spirit to be with them and to guide them. Therefore, the partaking of the Sacrament officially sanctioned a covenant entered into by the worshipers of Jesus and their Maker to the effect that each party concerned has done, and will continue to do, his share in bringing about the atonement of mankind. In other words, Sacrament is a symbolical representation of the great covenant-sacrifice of Jesus Christ, who died that we might live. His blood was shed in order that we might receive forgiveness of our sins on condition of repentance and that all men might be resurrected into immortality. The Sacrament is also a token of Christian fellowship and of spiritual communion with our Eternal Father and His Only Begotten Son—Jesus the Christ.

CHANGES IN CHRISTIAN EUCHARIST

History testifies that, after Jesus established the Sacrament and up to the time of the Reformation, several pronounced alterations took place in the Christians' Eucharistic concept. The first evidence of drastic change appears in the writings of Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, two Christian apologists of the second century A.D. They both accepted as literal the mystical wording of the Gospels, and especially that of Jesus' famous sermon on "the Bread of Life" as recorded in the Gospel of John. [^11] Their teachings mark a definite stage in the Christian interpretation of Sacrament from which later Catholic writings differ fundamentally very little, the main difference being the attempts made by theologians from time to time to explain how the great mystery of conversion takes place.

Irenaeus (about 185 A.D.) maintained that the Holy Eucharist became endowed with spiritual qualities through the "invocation of God"; thereby, in a realistic way, it engendered potions of immortal life into those who partook of it. Quoting Irenaeus:

For as the bread, which is produced from the earth, when it received the invocation of God, is no longer common bread but the Eucharist, consisting of two realities, earthly and heavenly; so also our bodies, when they receive the Eucharist, are no longer corruptible, having the hope of the resurrection to eternity. [^12]

John of Damascus (about 759 A.D.) maintained that the Eucharistic objects (the bread and the wine) were identical with Christ's body and blood—that same body that was born of Mary. [^13] Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem (350 A.D.), attempted an explanation as to how the conversion occurred. He said:

The Holy Spirit, who is a living person within the Godhead, descends upon the bread and wine at the prayer of the celebrant, and changes them into the body and blood. [^14]

Gregory maintained that the Holy Eucharist was the greatest of the sacraments, [^15] and that it was a repetition of the sacrifice of Christ offered to God by the priest for both the living and the dead. As early as Cyprian's time (?200-285 A. D.), a rather definite doctrine of the Eucharist as a sacrifice had developed. In his own words:

For if Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, is Himself the chief priest of God the Father, and has first offered Himself a sacrifice to the Father, and has commanded this to be done in commemoration of Himself, certainly that priest truly discharges the office of Christ who imitates that which Christ did; and he then offers it according to what he sees Christ himself to have offered. [^16]

The Christian writers of the fourth and fifth centuries taught that partaking of the Eucharist was absolutely essential to salvation, a teaching not found in the scriptures. Quoting St.Augustine (?354-430 A.D.):

The churches of Christ maintain it to be an inherent principle that without baptism and partaking of the Supper of the Lord it is impossible for any man to attain either to the kingdom of God or to salvation and everlasting life. [^17]

Latter-day Saints, however, believe that partaking of the Sacrament is very desirable and should be participated in each Sabbath and on certain other occasions by worthy Church members.

CONVERSION (TRANSUBSTANTIATION) And SYMBOLIC THEORIES

During the Middle Ages two Eucharistic theories, conversion and symbolic, were vigorously discussed, each having its advocators. The conversion theory means that the bread and wine actually change into Christ's flesh and blood; and the symbolic theory maintains that the sacramental objects remain bread and wine. Paschasius Radbertus, a monk of the monastery of Corbie (about 831 A.D.), published a thoroughgoing treatise on the Holy Eucharist in which he strongly advocated the conversion theory. Eleven years later Ratramus, also of Corbie, answered Radbertus' arguments and supported the symbolic theory. He maintained:

In the Eucharist bread and wine are received, but Christ's body and blood are understood. The latter, therefore, are received in mystery and figure, not in sensible reality. [^18]

Two hundred years passed before another open attack was made on the conversion theory. In 1050 A.D., Berengar, head of the cathedral school of Tours, condemned the doctrine of Radbertus and defended Ratramus' symbolic theory. Two church councils condemned him and required him to sign a confession of faith to the effect that the consecrated bread and wine are not only a sacrament, but also the real body and blood of Chris, and that these "not only sacramentally, but in sensible reality, are taken in the priests' hands." [^19] Berengar conformed temporarily to the demand of the councils; however, in 1069, he published his views at length in a treatise on the Holy Supper, in which he denied "subjective change." Again (1079 A.D.) he was required to sign a declamation affirming that the bread and wine are substantially converted. Berengar subscribed and the conversion theology was victorious.

About the time of the Berengar controversy, the name transubstantiation was first used in connection with the Holy Eucharist. It "seems to have been first used by Hildbert (1018-1045 A.D.), archbishop of Tours; and its first authorized admission to the doctrinal vocabulary dates from the Fourth Lateran Council (1215 A.D.)." [^20] This council gave it full approval and the highest dogmatic standing.

Thomas Aquinas (1227-1274 A.D.) put the doctrine in its final form, giving to it clearness of definition. He taught that when the priest consecrated the Sacrament the power of God performed a miracle upon it, so that while the "accidents" (the shape, the taste, and the like) remained unchanged, the "substance" was actually transformed into the very body and blood of our Lord and Master. [^21] By Aquinas' time the doctrine had developed that the whole body and blood of Christ are present in either element of the Eucharist. Thus the theory of transubstantiation became firmly rooted in Christendom. Although rejected later by most Protestant religions, it remains today a pertinent doctrine of Catholicism. [^22]

SUPPLEMENTARY READING—CHAPTER 32

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Genesis 9:3-4; Leviticus 17:10-16; Deuteronomy 12:16, 23; The Inspired Version, Genesis '14:1-40. Shirley Jackson Case, The Evolution of Early Christianity, p. 299; Samuel Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity, p. 130; Frazier, The Golden Bough, vol. 4. p. 31; Robertson-Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 320; Jane Harrison, Themis, p. 123.
[^2] Firmicus Maternus, De Errore profanarum Religionum, vol. 6, p. 5, cited in Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, pp. 76, 85; Jane Harrison, Ancient Art and Ritual, p. 87; Genesis 9:4; Leviticus 17:10-16; Deuteronomy 12:16, 23; Hebrews 9:10.
[^3] Willoughby, op. cit., pp. 100-101; Edward Carpenter, Pagan and Christian Creeds, p. 60.
[^4] Willoughby, op. cit., p. 101.
[^5] Robertson-Smith, op. cit.
[^6] Firmicus Maternus, op. cit., 18, cited in Willoughby, op. cit., p. 135.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Clement of Alexandria, Protrepticus, ii, 21.
[^9] Willoughby, op. cit., 59-60.
[^10] Cited in Angus, op. cit., p. 129; Carpenter, op. cit., p. 66; Willoughby, op. cit., p. 162.
[^11] Williston Walker, A History of the Christian Church, p. 92.
[^12] Inspired Version, Genesis 14:17
[^13] Ibid., p. 99.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] The Catholic church has seven sacraments which are comparable to some of the ordinances in the Church of Jesus Christ, but the Catholics do not use the term ordinances. The Catholic seven sacraments are as follows: Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance (Confession), Extreme Unction (Last Anointing). Orders and Matrimony. See Cardinal Gibbons, The Faith of Our Fathers, p. 266ff.
[^16] Cyprian, Letters, cited in ibid., pp.62-63.
[^17] Augustine, Forgiveness of Sin, 1:34; cited in Walker, ibid., pp. 262-265.
[^18] Walker, ibid., pp. 262-265.
[^19] Ibid.
[^20] Edward M. Hulme, The Middle Ages, p.361.
[^21] Walker, op. cit. pp.263-264,288.
[^22] James Cardinal Gibbons, The Faith of Our Fathers, pp. 287-299.
