Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 33.

PAGAN INFLUENCES ON THE EUCHARIST DOCTRINE

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

In the early part of this lesson we refer to some of the same pagan practices that were discussed in chapter 26, i. e., the pagans' eating of the flesh and drinking of the blood of their savior-gods (animals). The emphasis in the previous chapter, however, was that of shedding of blood for the purpose of atonement from sins. The emphasis in this lesson is on the pagans' practice of eating and drinking divine or sacramental substances, which belief was similar to show the influence of the pagans' beliefs and practices on the Christian Holy Eucharist doctrine.

ORIGIN OF TRANSUBSTANTIATION

Whence came the concept of transubstantiation? An examination of the pagan contemporaries of early Christtianity reveals the fact that the strongest pagan religions, especially the Mystery cults, ate eucharistic meals as part of their religious ritual. This religious practice had been participated in for generations before Christianity was planted by Jesus and His disciples in the world of paganism. The Sacramental doctrine was almost universally accepted by the pagans of the Mediterranean world at the time Christianity was established. There was one belief held in common by most of those ancient heathenistic religions, viz., that their sacramental objects were, in a realistic sense, their savior-gods, and must be consumed in order for the worshipers to obtain the virtues that they believed those deities were able to contribute. The spiritual portion of man must be fed with divine substance, they believed; thus they must eat their god. The methods used in obtaining this sacramental grace ranged from the most barbaric orgies to a highly refined sacrament, similar to the Christian Holy Eucharist.

PAGAN PRACTICES

We shall present briefly only a few examples of pagan eucharistic beliefs and practices for the purpose of showing the heathenistic doctrine which altered Christian Sacrament from "This do in remembrance of Me" to the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation.

The Dionysian Mysteries promised its devotees immortality and communion with their god through a sacrament of eating and drinking.

Participation in the life of the god was realistically attained by drinking the blood and eating raw flesh of the sacred victim in which the god was assumed to be incarnated. [^1]

The victims varied according to the country in which the worshipers resided. It might have been a fawn, a goat, a ram, or a bull—whatever the hapless animal was, the worshipers exhibited a certain ferocious cruelty in tearing it to pieces.

Since during their religious festivities, the god Dionysus was believed to be temporarily resident in the sacramental animals, the underlying philosophy of such pagan eucharistic practices and transubstantiation was basically the same. The principal difference, however, was that the sacramental ritual of the pagans was orgiastic and barbaric, while the other was refined.

Dr. Willoughby concluded in regards to the Dionysian belief that:

By the sacraments of eating and drinking they entered into direct communion with their god, and became partakers of his immortality. In assimilating the raw flesh wherein the god was temporarily incarnate and in drinking the juice of the grape, they received into their bodies an undying substance. In life mystically united with their god, in death they could not be divided, and when the time came for them to go to the invisible world, they were sure of sharing the blessed life of their god. [^2]

The Orphic worshiper also partook of a sacrament by eating and drinking the flesh and blood of his god Zagreus. He maintained that this sacrament was a "divine substance that nourished and strengthened the immortal life within himself"; [^3] thereby setting the balance of his body more Dionysiac (spiritual) than Titanic (mortal), which would make possible the breaking of the cycle of reincarnation. Thus the partaking of their sacrament was absolutely necessary for the salvation of the worshipers, a belief which came into Christendom, as was pointed out in the last lesson.

Just as the life of Zagreus entered the devotee physically when he partook of the flesh of the bull, so the man's soul entered more fully into the spiritual life of Zagreus by this very physical process. In a mystical sense God and man became one by the communion. [^4]

Professor Robertson-Smith gives a very interesting account of a similar sacramental custom among the Arabs of the Sinai region. On certain occasions, these ancient people killed a spotless white camel and ate the uncooked blood and flesh of the animal entirely before daybreak. To quote:

The slaughter of the victim, the sacramental drinking of the blood, and devouring in wild haste of the pieces of still quivering flesh, recall the details of the Dionysiac and other festivals. The plain meaning is that the victim was devoured before its life had left the still warm blood and flesh; . . . and that thus in the most literal way, all those who shared in the ceremony absorbed part of the victim's life into themselves. One sees how much more forcibly than any ordinary meal such a rite expresses the establishment or confirmation of a bond of common life between the worshipers, and also, since the blood is shed upon the altar itself, between the worshipers and their god. In this sacrifice, then, the significant factors are two: the conveyance of the living blood to the godhead, and the absorption of the living flesh and blood into the flesh and blood of the worshipers. Each of these is effected in the simplest and most direct manner, so that the meaning of the ritual is perfectly transparent. [^5]

PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT PARALLELS

The sacraments of several of the very prominent pagan rivals of Christianity furnished close parallels to the perverted Christian Holy Eucharist. One example was that of the Cybele-Attis Mysteries. Firmicus Maternus denounced this paganistic rite because it was so similar to

Christian interpretation of the Holy Eucharist of his day. "Both were believed to communicate divine life to the devotee and assure him of salvation. Maternus concluded his invective against the pagan rite with the appeal, 'It is another food that gives salvation and life. Seek the bread of Christ and the cup of Christ.' " [^6] The Cybele-Attis sacrament consisted of a beverage and a solid food.

It is not unlikely that a corn product, or some other vegetable food in which Attis was believed especially to dwell, formed a part of the sacred repast. In partaking of this meal, the devotee was enabled to share in a naturalistic manner the life of his god. [^7]

Clement of Alexandria recorded the password of Eleusinian Mysteries as follows: "I have fasted, I have drunk the barley drink. I have taken things from the sacred chest, having tasted thereof I have placed them into the basket and again from the basket into the chest." [^8] This formula is a statement of their eucharistic ceremonial. The drink "was a direct and sympathetic participation in the experiences of the goddess, an action expressive of attained fellowship with the deity. . . . If, as is most likely, the sacred food consisted of cereals, then the assimilation of this food meant a direct and realistic union with Demeter, the goddess of grain. It meant an incorporation of divine substance into the human body." [^9]

During the first four centuries A.D., the Mithraic and Christian Eucharists resembled each other so much that Justin Martyr (135 A.D.), a Christian apologist, described the Eucharist and then made the following comment about the Mithraic sacrament: "The wicked devils have imitated this in the Mysteries of Mithra, commanding the same thing to be done. For that bread and a cup of water are placed with certain incantations in the mystic rites of one who is being initiated, you either know or can learn." [^10]

RELIGIOUS SYNCRETISM

Sufficient evidence has been given to illustrate the universality of the belief held by the pagan rivals of Christianity that they actually ate the flesh and drank the blood of their gods in their various sacraments. It should be kept in mind that in early Christendom the proselytes were obtained primarily from contemporary pagan cults. Thousands of worshipers of Mystery gods flocked into Christianity, bringing with them many of their most cherished beliefs. A very extensive syncretism resulted, reaching its height during the third and fourth centuries A. D. Thus the Sacrament as established by the Son of God was later blended with pagan eucharistic concepts, contaminating to a certain extent the divine ordinance and refining the heathenistic contributions in equal proportion. It was but natural for these pagans, when they became Christians, to believe that the bread and wine of the Sacrament were actually the flesh and blood of Jesus, since they had formerly believed that in their sacraments they had eaten and drunk their gods. Obviously, herein lies the origin of transubstantiation.

Of course, those obvious alterations that came into Christian theology and practice were not adopted from paganism purposely, but crept into Christendom through a natural process of religious syncretism, i. e., blending together of religious beliefs. In the words of Dr. Walker:

The course of development during the succeeding century was determined by the prevalence of ideas drawn from the Mystery Religions. There is no adequate ground to believe that there was intentional imitation. Christians of the last half of the second and the third centuries lived in an atmosphere highly charged with influences sprung from these faiths. It was but natural that they should look upon their own worship from the same point of view. It is probable that already existing tendencies in this direction were strongly reinforced by the great growth of the church by conversion from heathenism in the first half of the third century. The church came to be more and more regarded as possessed of life-giving mysteries, under the superintendence and dispensation of the clergy. [^11]

PROBABLE ORIGIN OF PAGAN SACRAMENTS

It is quite probable that the sacramental beliefs and practices of the pagan rivals of Christianity were adulterated forms of the true doctrine of Sacrament, just as most of their other beliefs were altered forms of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But, the reader may say, "You have just stated that the pagans' sacraments date many years earlier than the birth of Jesus." That is quite true; but it is probable that in one of the early Gospel dispensations God revealed the ordinance of Sacrament to man even before the advent of Jesus of Nazareth, in anticipation of the sacrifice that Christ would make for mortals. Yet it is true that practically all of the tangible evidence has been lost to history. We do know, however, that such doctrines as the United Order have been revealed and lived three or four times during certain periods when God's children were unusually righteous. Could not the same thing have happened in regards to Sacrament?

The Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, called the Inspired Version, suggests the foregoing conclusions to have been the case. For example, when Father Abraham met the great High Priest Melchizedek on a certain occasion the Inspired Version states:

And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine; and he brake bread and blest it; and he blest wine, he being the priest of the Most High God, and he gave to Abraham. [^12]

What interpretation could be given to this statement of the breaking and blessing of the bread and the blessing of wine by one holding the proper Priesthood and the serving of these substances to a Church member other than the observance of the holy ordinance of Sacrament? Therefore, it seems that again we find the roots of paganism running back for generations to the true Gospel revelations.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 33

2.Harold Willoughby, Pagan Regeneration, pp. 59-60, 70-78, 100-104, 134-136, 161-162.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 19:16; 20:46, 58, 68, 76-79; 27:1-4; 46:4-5; 59:9, 12; 62:4; 19:16-20; 76:40-43. Doctrine and covenants 20:76-79, 46, 58, 68.
[^2] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 175-183. James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, 179
[^3] John A. Widtsoe, Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 254-268. Doctrine and Covenants 20:38-40, 46, 58, 68.
[^4] Of course, it is obvious that the Lord did not mean for the entire congregation, especially when the audience is large, to kneel with the administrators while the sacrament is being blessed. The propriety of performing this sacred ordinance in the spirit of worship would be disturbed and the ceremony would become one of confusion. Therefore, it is proper for the audience to remain seated, and in an attitude of prayer, covenant making, and thanksgiving, while the administrators offer the blessings on the holy emblems.
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants 20:76-77, compare with Moroni 4:1-3.
[^6] Ibid., 20:78-79, compare with Moroni 5:1-2.
[^7] Mosiah 3:7-8, 17; Doctrine and Covenants 19:16-20.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants 76:40-43.
[^9] Ibid., 27:1-4.
[^10] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 179-180
[^11] Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 109-110.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants 59:9, 12.
