Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 35.

THE GOLDEN RULE

JESUS' TEACHINGS

One of the greatest truths ever uttered, which would result in a happy society and the mutual good of all if followed, is known as "The Golden Rule." It constitutes the very heart of the message of the Man of Galilee. Teachers of religion and sociology are convinced that if this eternal truth were universally obeyed, the most remarkable advancement, evolution and growth, coupled with the most complete happiness of which human beings are capable, would be achieved in this mortal world. War, murder, hatred, and all manner of sins would be completely done away with if all men incorporated into their lives this famous admonition of the Christ's. Two of the Gospels—Matthew and Luke—report the Master's notable statement, each giving its own version. The statement as recorded in Matthew is as follows:

Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. [^1]

Luke records the same thought given by Jesus in the following words:

And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. [^2]

The Savior enlarged on this pertinent doctrine during the Sermon on the Mount in this sublime statement of the principle:

Ye have heard that it hath been said, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy." But I say unto you, "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? Do not even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect. [^3]

Jesus summarized all the teachings of the prophets from Adam's day to Himself in the following words, which He quoted from the holy scriptures:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. [^4]

This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. [^5]

Such teachings of the Master more fully explain what He meant in His statement of the Golden Rule.

Jesus not only taught that doctrine, but by example He showed throughout His entire lifetime that it was the natural and practicable way of life and could be followed by man. There has never been a more sublime example of this Godlike love in all history than was exhibited by the Master of eternal life as He was hanging on the cross on Calvary between two thieves. While He was suffering the pains of this most terrible of deaths—crucifixion—the blind, ignorant people cast lots for His garments and mocked Him, saying:

"Thou that destroyeth the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross." Likewise also the chief priests, mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, "He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him." [^6]

It was during this trying condition that the Master gave unto us a glimpse of Godliness by putting into practice all that He had ever taught on this subject. Casting his eyes heavenward, He prayed: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." [^7] This indeed is the Golden Rule.

UNIVERSALITY OF GOLDEN RULE

The Golden Rule is another of those eternal truths which is world-old and world-wide. It appears in practically every major religion, many of them antedating the birth of Jesus by hundreds of years. Each of the seven great world religions contains in its sacred writings a version of the Golden Rule. To quote:

"The Hindu: 'The true rule is to guard and do by the things of others as you do by your own.'

"The Buddhist: 'Once should seek for others the happiness one desires for oneself.'

"The Zoroastrian: 'Do as you would be done by.'

"The Confucian: 'What you do not wish done to yourself, do not to others.'

"The Mohammedan: 'Let none of you treat your brother in a way he himself would dislike to be treated.'

"The Jewish: 'Whatsoever you do not wish your neighbor to do to you, do not unto him.'

"The Christian: 'All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.' " [^8]

All teachers who have been exponents of this great truth have believed that the best good of each person in society will insure the best good of the whole group, and every effort should be made to insure the welfare of each unit. They seek a happy balance between individual rights and group emphasis. If a social institution is over-emphasized, such as the state, the free agency of the people is curtailed and the result may be one form or another of Nazism. On the other hand, if all the individuals in society acted as they desired, regardless of the rights of others, a condition of gangsterism and lawlessness would prevail. Such philosophers as Nietzsche would push the weak out of the way to make room for the strong. That type of philosophy is materialistic, based entirely on the principle of competition. But the Golden Rule, as taught by the great religious leaders, is a philosophy of cooperation, proving that the earth life of an individual is merely part of that larger life of eternity. To these leaders the worth of every human soul is great in the sight of God. In the words of Hugh M. Woodward:

The Golden Rule represents the parting of the ways between the materialistic philosophy, with all its unlovely selfishness, competition, and ruthless destruction on the one hand and the spiritual philosophy with its cooperation, altruism, love, and eternal helpfulness on the other. [^9]

This perfect balance between the individual and the social group is found best in the Gospel of Jesus Christ as taught by the Master in Palestine, or as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in our day. Politically, the most ideal type of government extant today which makes possible the practicing of the Golden Rule is the government of the United States of America or other political systems kindred to or patterned after it. The government of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also furnishes a good example of the practical application of the Golden Rule in human society.

TEACHINGS OF OUTSTANDING RELIGIOUS LEADERS

It would be well at this point to give additional teachings of the leaders in the outstanding world religions which confirm and amplify the Golden Rule. Nearly 1,500 B.C., Krishna was teaching such philosophy as the following:

This is the sum of all true righteousness, Treat others as thou wouldst thyself be treated. Do nothing to thy neighbor which hereafter Thou wouldst not have thy neighbor do to thee. In causing pleasure or in giving pain, In doing good or injury to others, In granting or refusing a request, A man obtains a proper rule of action By looking on his neighbor as himself. [^10]

Zoroaster (about 600 B. C.), the famous Persian religious teacher, laid down this rule to his followers: "Break not the contract, neither the one that thou hadst entered into with one of the unfaithful, nor the one that thou hadst entered into with one of thy own faith. For Mithra stands both for the faithful and for the unfaithful." [^11]

From distant China we receive truths similar to those uttered in Palestine and Persia. On one occasion Confucius (551-479 B. C.) Was asked to sum up him teachings in one word. "He chose the word 'shu.' This term expresses the Golden Rule in such poetic way that it is almost impossible to convey it to the people of the West. The word has been translated in English as meaning 'my heart responds to yours, or my heart's desire is to meet your heart's desire, or I wish to do to you even as I would done by'." [^12]

Lao Tze, another Chinese teacher—an ethical philosopher and a contemporary of Confucius—is credited with having said: "To them that are good I am good, and to them that are not good, I am also good, thus all get to be good. To them that are sincere, and to them that are not sincere, I am also sincere, thus all get to be sincere." [^13]

Buddha, i. e., "the enlightened one" (560 to 480 B. C.), carried on his ethical reformation in India during the same period that Confucius and Lao Tze were presenting their teachings to the people of China. Also during that period God was revealing many truths to the Hebrew prophets and to the Nephite leaders who had recently migrated to America. Zoroaster in Persia, the Greek philosophers and religious leaders in other countries were also gleaning certain truths. Some of the teachings of Buddha are as follows:

"With pure thoughts and fullness of love, I will do towards others what I do for myself." "Surrender the grasping disposition of your selfishness and you will attain to that sinless, calm state of mind which conveys perfect peace, goodness and wisdom." Again he says: "Let us, then, live happily, not hating those who hate us; overcome evil with good—a man who foolishly does me wrong, I will return to him the protection of my ungrudging love; the more evil comes from him, the more good shall go from me." [^14]

Such teachings of Buddha sound as if they came from Jesus, the Master of truth and light. They are the same as "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you." How much wiser and happier the world would be if mankind would follow this truth given by Buddha: "Conquer your foe by force and you increase his enmity; conquer by love and you reap no after sorrow."

TEACHINGS OF THE PROPHETS

The fundamental doctrine expressed in the Golden Rule constitutes the heart of the message of the prophets throughout all dispensations. For example, the voice of God came to Isaiah and to religious leaders of other generations with messages similar to the following: "Wash you, make you clean: put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relive the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widows." [^15] The famous discourses on charity given by Paul, King Benjamin, and Mormon contain the essence of this eternal doctrine. [^16] The prophet who opened the last dispensation of the Gospel, like all the holy men who preceded him, lived the Golden Rule and taught it constantly.

DIVINE SOURCE OF THE GOLDEN RULE

How did it happen that the Golden Rule was taught by people in far-off India and China hundreds of years before Jesus Christ proclaimed it to His followers in Palestine? How did it happen that this doctrine is so universal, and whence is its source? The answers lie in the fact that all truth comes from one divine source—God the Eternal Father and His Only Begotten Son—and that people of all races are children of the same divine parents. These truths have been declared by the prophets. For example, Nephi proclaimed that God "gave unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little,"and that He reveals His word unto the children of men in all the nations of the earth. [^17] Mormon, the ancient Nephite prophet, declared:

Wherefore, all things which are good, cometh of God; and that which is evil, cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. . . . For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that they may know good from evil. [^18]

Thus it is evident that the Golden Rule, like every other truth possessed by mankind, has been revealed from God to His children. [^19]

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 35

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Genesis, chapters 1 to 10; Isaiah 11:6; 24:19-23; 65:17-18; 35:5-7; 40:4; 51:3-6; Malachi 4; Psalms 102:25-28; Matthew 24:1-51; 2 Peter 3:10; Revelation 21:1-15. Genesis 1:1; 1: 2.
[^2] Book of Mormon: 1 Nephi 2:12, 17-36; 2 Nephi 2:14-15, 22; Jacob 2:21; 4:9; Mosiah 2:20-21; Alma 1:4; 18:28-29; 3 Nephi 9:15; Ether 3:4-9. Moses 2; 3; Abraham 4; 5.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 14:9; 76; 93:1-18; 43:16-35; 45:16-53; 88:18-27; 101:10-26; 86:1-11; 130:8-9. See chapter 10, pp. 60-61.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 1; 2; 3; 8; Abraham 4; 5. Moses 6:45; Abraham 1:28, 31; Ether 1:3-4, 16; 4:9.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, pp. 20-44. I Nephi 17:36; Doctrine and Covenants 14:9; 45:1; 76:24; 93:10; 20:18; 29:31; 88:20.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Restoration of All Things pp. 287-300. Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 350-351.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 247, 350-351. 1 Nephi 2:1; 2 Nephi 2:14-15, 22; Jacob 2:21; 4:9; Mosiah 2:20-21; Alma 1:4; 18:28-29; 3 Nephi 9:15; Mormon 9:11; Doctrine and Covenants 14:9.
[^8] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 66-75, 384-405. Genesis, chapters 3 to 8.
[^9] Malachi 4:1-2.
[^10] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Signs of the Times, p. 38.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants 101:28-25.
[^12] Tenth Article of Faith; Doctrine and Covenants 45:39-75; Matthew 24:1-51.
[^13] Isaiah 65:17-18.
[^14] Ibid., 51:3.
[^15] Ibid., 40:4.
[^16] Ibid., 35:5-7.
[^17] Isaiah 51:6; Psalms 102:25-28; Matthew 24:85.
[^18] 2 Peter 3:10.
[^19] Doctrine and Covenants 88:18-20, 25-27
