Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 37.

THE STORY OF THE EARTH (Comparative Religious Traditions)

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

This lesson is closely related to the preceding one, discussing also the story of the earth as it relates to its physical changes. While the last lesson centered on the teachings of the prophets, this one will present the same Gospel truths in their altered forms as the traditions of various religious groups after they had filtered outward throughout the world and down through the ages.

THE CREATION

Practically every great nation of antiquity has preserved legends or traditions of the creation of the world, of the origin of man, of a Golden Age, of the fall, of the deluge, and of the future rejuvenation of the earth. Some of these traditions are much more valuable than others, since they contain many startling resemblances to the accounts in Genesis and to the teachings of the prophets of God. These resemblances are so numerous and so pronounced that they bear irrefutable testimony to the fact that they are altered forms of the true revelations from God which were first received by Father Adam and later re-revealed during the other Gospel dispensations.

One of the most important documents containing these traditions is the Babylonian creation story. According to the Babylonian creation tradition, even before the beginning of things on this earth, the gods were in existence. Two of them, "Lakhmu and Lakhamu," created the heavens above, and also the earth beneath. After a certain time elapsed another god named Anu became the ruler of the sky. Following this, a terrific conflict between Tiamat and Enlil-Marduk, two other heavenly deities, took place. The latter god was victorious over Tiamat. Thereupon, according to the Babylonian traditions, he took one-half of the body of Tiamat and made a covering for the heavens, and with the other half he made the earth beneath. After this was accomplished, Anu, Enlil-Marduk, and Ea came from their heavenly realm to the earth and made it their abode.

We can see in this Babylonian legend a resemblance to the Gospel teachings of the existence of intelligent beings prior to the time when man was placed on this earth. There are some resemblances to the council in heaven, especially in the conflict between Enlil-Marduk and Tiamat, which remind one of the war in heaven, where Michael (Adam) fought against Lucifer, and Lucifer was defeated. The fact that the earth was created for man and that three of the gods made it their abode can be compared to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden before they became mortal beings and that God associated with our first parents in the garden before they partook of the forbidden fruit.

Dr. Ira M. Price quotes the creation traditions as recorded on the ancient Babylonian tablets, and then makes a comparison of the resemblances of the Babylonian and Genesis accounts. His summary is as follows:

(1) Genesis knows a time when the earth was waste and void. The Babylonian accounts mention a time when all was chaos and nothingness.

(2) In Genesis light dispels darkness, and order follows chaos. In the Babylonian records the god Marduk routs and overthrows the demon of chaos, Tiamat.

(3) In Genesis, after a time, the dry land appears. In the Babylonian account, Marduk creates the dust and pours it out by the water.

(4) In Genesis, the sun, moon, and stars are set in the heavens. In the Babylonian, Marduk places these as the stations of the gods.

(5) In Genesis, God created the animals and creeping things. In the Babylonian, the assembly of the gods created animals and living creatures of the field and plain.

(6) In Genesis, God created mankind. In the Babylonian, Marduk is the creator of mankind. [^1]

THE GOLDEN AGE

Among the world-wide concepts is a belief in a "Golden Age" in the past. Long before the coming of Christ, the Hebrews recorded a Golden Age in their story of the Garden of Eden. In Egyptian mythology we have accounts of "the time of the rule of the gods on earth." The Egyptian records speak of that same Golden Age as being under the god Ra. " 'Since the time of the god (Osiris),' and 'since the time of Re' are old formulas for expressing immemorial antiquity." [^2] According to the Babylonian tradition, these ancient peoples also believed in a Golden Age as follows:

The Age of Perfection lies at the beginning. Just and pure knowledge, revealed by the godhead, lies at the beginning, so that it is the task of science to discover the original truth by observation of the book of revelation written down in the stars, and to obtain freedom from errors which crept in through human guilt, so also the age of Pure Happiness lies at the beginning. [^3]

In further explanation of this Golden Age, the Babylonian records claim that it occurred in "the time before the flood." They believed also that, "In the time before the flood lived the heroes, who . . . dwell in the under world, or are removed into the heavenly world. . . . At that time there lived, too, the seven sages." [^4] This same people, as well as their neighbors, the ancient Persians, believed in a Garden of Eden which existed in the Golden Age. Of this belief, Ira M. Price has written:

The inscriptions tell us of a primitive sacred garden, in which there was a tree of life. This sacred tree is seen frequently on the seals of prominent personages of Babylon. It also appears among the alabaster reliefs found on the wainscoating of the royal palaces. Approach to it seems to have been limited to the gods or to distinguished persons. Its fruits also were thought to contain qualities capable of granting and maintaining life perpetually. [^5]

It is obvious that the Babylonian sacred garden tradition had its origin in the Hebrew account of the Garden of Eden.

The Greeks also had a concept of a Golden Age which was described by such writers as Pindar and Hesid. The former was a poet who lived 522-442 B.C. He wrote about the Islands of the Blest, "where the good lead a blameless, tearless life." Hesid, another Greek writer, who lived about two hundred years before Pindar, spoke of a time when men and animals spoke the same language and lived at peace with each other. Following is a summary of some of Hesid's famous writings:

First of all, the Olympian gods made the "golden race of men." These men lived when Kronos was king in heaven. They fared like the gods themselves, always making merry, and untroubled by toil or care, for the teeming earth bore of its own accord an abundance of all good things, and there was no old age. Even death itself, when at last it came, stole upon men like a pleasant slumber. When this race passed away, Zeus made them the good spirits that live above the earth and are the invisible guardians and helpers of mortal man. [^6]

Pythagoras, a Greek philosopher who lived about 580-500 B.C., was an expounder of the doctrine that "in the Golden Age men lived upon the fruits of the earth, and that the degeneration of later ages is marked by a departure from this rule." [^7] The Greeks, and later the Romans, believed that the race who lived in those happy days where eternal youth and joy abounded everywhere—the Golden Age—still existed somewhere, and that mortals might be able to find them; and, upon finding them, also obtain eternal youth. Hesid, in his "Isles of the Blest," described a place where dwell those sons of gods who have passed alive beyond the grave. Since that day, many a search has been made, similar to the one made by Ponce de Leon, when he was looking for the "Fountain of Youth."

THE FALL OF MAN

A tradition of the fall of man is just as universal as that of a Golden Age. Each of the races of antiquity gives its own version of how it came about that man changed from that condition of eternal youth and happiness into one of misery, sorrow, and eventually death. The Biblical account—with which we are all familiar—tells of Adam and Eve's partaking of the forbidden fruit and being expelled from the Garden of Eden. A remarkable story of the fall of man, the "myth of Adapa," is recorded on four Babylonian tablets. Dr. Price summarized this story as follows:

The resemblances of the ideas in this myth to the so-called "fall of man" in Genesis chapter three are passing strange. This Adapa, like Adam, had a certain amount of inherent wisdom, but was not immortal. He was a kind of a semi-divine person, and was the priest and sage of the temple of the god Ea at Eridu. In carrying out the requirements

of his office, he was a fisherman on the Persian Gulf. While [he was] out fishing one day the south wind suddenly swooped down on his craft, overturned it, and, of course, threw him into the sea. Enraged by the insult, he broke the wings of the south wind, and thus destroyed its power for seven days to blow cool air over the hot land. Anu and Ea, the great gods, called him to account warned him. Ea admonished him that when he should reach heaven's portal he should not eat the food or drink the portions which would be set before, him, for fear that they would be the food and drink of death. Such admonition was ill devised, for it was the food and drink of life that were set before him, and this bad counsel robbed him of immortal life, and he was obliged to return to the earth. [^8]

THE DELUGE

Genesis, Moses, Josephus (the Jewish historian), Eusebius (an early Christian historian), American Indian tradition, [^9] and Babylonian cuneiform inscriptions all proclaim that there was an universal deluge. In vigor of description and details, the Babylonian account stands next to the Biblical record. According to Dr. Price, "This epic is the finest and most beautiful poem that has been preserved for us in the literature of ancient Babylonia." [^10] Ira M. Price has published what he terms "the most interesting parts of the translation" in The Monuments and the Old Testament, pages 119-127. Dr. Price draws the following conclusions from the Babylonian flood account:

The Babylonian account of the deluge bristles with resemblances to that of Genesis. These have led scholars to think that they are merely two versions of the same original account. At this distance we can set side by side some of these items: (1) There is divine revelation to the main hero of the deluge that a disaster is imminent which no one else knows about. (2) Both records tell of the building of a ship, (a) . . . (b) the embarkation with all living creatures to be saved alive, (c) the terrific storm bringing a deluge of water, (d) the destruction of all not on board the ship, (e) landing of the ship on a mountain, (f) sending out of birds—a dova, swallow, a raven, (g) the landing, (h) offering of a sacrifice on landing, (i) acceptance of a sweet savior by the (deity) gods, (j) a reference to the possibility of no deluge in the future. [^11]

REJUVENATION OF THE EARTH

Certain pagan religions resembled the teachings of the prophets in declaring that the earth was going to be rejuvenated. For example, the Mithraic Mystery Religion's legend claimed that after the earth had been re-populated following the flood, a great conflagration consumed most of the habitations of men and of beasts. Through divine protection a few of the creatures escaped.

The Mithraic Religion also taught its cult members that the earth would be rejuvenated, a concept similar to that held by the holy prophets regarding the Millennium. At that time Mithra would come back to earth to dwell. There would be a bodily resurrection of all the dead, and the wicked would be destroyed. [^12] Thus the Gospel truths appeared in an altered form in this pagan cult.

CONCLUSIONS

Dr. Ira M. Price gives his conclusion regarding the reasons for so many similarities in the religions of the world. Since his ideas sustain what I have previously written on this subject, we quote his exact words:

The similarities noted above between the records of Genesis and the inscriptions call for further consideration. These are not traditions peculiar to Semitic peoples and religions, which have grown out of their characteristics. They are common to all civilized nations in which they have been preserved and developed. Their common elements seem to point to a time when the human race occupied a common home and held a common faith. The records of Genesis and the Babylonian inscriptions give us two forms of these early traditions.

How, then, is the similarity between Genesis and the inscriptions to be explained? There are four answers sometimes given to this question: (1) The Genesis account is drawn from these traditions; (2) Genesis is the source of these traditions; (3) their likeness is attributable to like ways of thinking—similar traditions having spontaneously arisen in different parts of the earth because of "the natural tendencies of the human mind in its evolution from a savage state"; (4) "Their likeness is due to a common inheritance, each handing on from age to age records concerning the early history of the race." [^13]

These theories are elaborated by many writers, and are easily disposed of down to the fourth point. To this very many scholars are now turning as the most plausible solution of the problem. All religions are reducible to a small number of facts. These facts are either individual or common; of the common, some are undoubtedly due to the common nature of man, but others are just as clearly explicable only as an inheritance. Early races of men, wherever they wandered, took with them those primeval traditions, and with the varying latitudes and climes, their habits and modes of life, their intellectual and spiritual development, have carried and modified these, through the ages, and present them to us today in their different dresses. One ancient religion did not borrow these universal traditions from another, but each possessed primitively these traditions in their original form. A careful examination of all these traditions shows that the Genesis record is the purest, the least colored by extravagances, and the nearest to what we must conceive to have been the original form of these traditions. [^14]

In these terms Dr. Price confirms the concept that God revealed the Gospel of Jesus Christ originally to Adam; and that was the common source of all of these religious truths. From that day forward revelations of divine truths have continued to come to the holy prophets; and these verities have continued to be altered by man-made concepts and human influences.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 37

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible Galatians 4:26; Hebrews 12:22; Revelation 3:12; 12:1-27; 21; 22; Amos 5; 9:13-15; Jeremiah 31:9-13, 31-34; Isaiah 9:6-7; 42:1-7; 43:5-7; 51:3; 2:2-5; 11:1-9; 16:5; 32:1-7; 60:12; 65:17-25; Acts 1:1-12; Mark 16:9-20; Thessalonians 2:1-5; Matthew 24. Moses 7:17-21, 68-69. See also chapter 11, pp. 69-71.
[^2] Book of Mormon: Ether 13:1-12; 3 Nephi 20; 4 Nephi 1:1-27. Nephi 1:1-24.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants 42:9, 35, 67; 45:66; 84:2-4. Acts 2:37-47; 4:32-36.
[^4] Pearl of Great Price: Moses 7:16-21, 27, 58-59. Amos 5:6.
[^5] Ibid., 5:14.
[^6] Ibid., 5:24.
[^7] Isaiah 60:12.
[^8] Jeremiah 31:9; Amos 9:13-15; Isaiah 42:1-7.
[^9] Jeremiah 31:31-34.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, America is Zion. The word of the Lord has already gone forth from Jerusalem, as recorded in the holy scriptures; and the Constitution of the U. S. has served as a pattern for many constitutions in the various countries throughout the world. Thus the law has gone forth from Zion and shall continue to do so.
[^12] Isaiah 9:6-7; 11:1-6; 16:5; 32:1-7.
[^13] Ibid., 25:8; 65:19.
[^14] Ibid., 25:8.
