Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 38.

THE HOPE OF A BETTER WORLD

UNIVERSALITY OF THE HOPE OF A BETTER WORLD

The purpose that God had in mind in revealing the Gospel of Jesus Christ to Adam was that man might establish a social order here on earth in which perfection in laws, government, morality, and spirituality would prevail. All of the holy prophets and all good men have conscientiously worked toward the building of a better world. Their central hope has been that some day a state of ideal perfection in human society would be attained. Through divine revelations, many of the prophets were shown glimpses of a future Millennium which should be established on this earth, and God made known to them that after its establishment it would continue one thousand years.

From the teachings of the prophets, the philosophy of establishing the "Good Society" has spread throughout the world and has been handed down from age to age as a golden thread of religious truth. Few ideas in human history have been as universal as the concept that some day human beings would cease warring, murdering, and hating; and in their places universal love and intelligent living would prevail. A "Golden Age" in the future has been just as much a topic for the poet, for the philosopher, for the prophet, and for the teacher as has been the concept of a "Golden Age" in the past.

EXAMPLES OF THE GOOD SOCIETY

Many attempts have been made to establish the good society. Some of the most noble and some of the saddest pages in human history have come about in these attempts. For the purpose of illustrating that it lies within the realm of human possibility for mortals to live in perfect harmony together and in almost absolute righteousness, three examples will be mentioned.

The first was Enoch and his people. They established such a perfect social and economic order that God came down to earth and dwelt with them. After this perfect society had existed for 365 years, the City of Enoch "was taken up unto heaven, and the Lord said unto Enoch: 'Behold mine abode forever."' [^1]

Another example of the perfect society is found in the history of the Nephites. After Jesus' resurrection, He visited the inhabitants of ancient America and taught them His Gospel. Thereafter the political, social, and economic practices of this people became so perfect that for many decades they lived in almost perfect righteousness. Their economic system was one that could be termed the "United Order" or "Order of Enoch," since they had all things in common. This economic system completely did away with poverty.

Through the power of the Priesthood, the apostles healed the sick, caused the lame to walk, the blind to see, the deaf to hear, and even brought the dead back to life. All of these things were done in the name of Jesus Christ. The Nephite historian described the social conditions of the people as follows:

And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness. Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. [^2]

The natural result of living this way was that the Nephites became prosperous. They reared large families and "became an exceeding fair and delightsome people." They rejoiced in the fact that they were "the children of Christ and heirs to the kingdom of God." The record states that the Lord blessed them in all that they did and prospered them exceedingly. Thus this ancient people set a pattern of life which, if followed by mankind throughout the entire world, would raise humanity from a diseased, sordid, unhappy and sinful condition to one of joy and fullness of life.

Also, just after the time of Christ in Palestine another body of people successfully formed a good society. Since it was composed of Christians under the direction of Peter, James and John, it operated on the same principles as did the other two good societies discussed. However, such unpreventable factors as persecutions by their enemies forced the Christians to abandon their special economic system which was basic in their good society. Thus the economic phase of this social order was short-lived. [^3]

TEACHINGS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETS

The doctrine regarding the building of the perfect society declared by the Hebrew prophets had had more inspirational value than any of the secular or religious "Utopias"—theoretical or attempted—with the possible exception of the "Kingdom of God" element in Jesus' teachings. The doctrine of such prophets of Isaiah, Amos, Hosea, Micah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel have been sources of hope and inspiration to millions of people who have believed in and hoped for social betterment.

Amos and the other great prophets believed that the "Good Society" could come about only when there was a complete change both individually and nationally in the social relationships of the people with each other and in their attitude toward God. Amos' message was: "Seek the Lord and ye shall live." [^4] "Seek good and not evil, that ye may live." [^5] "But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream." [^6] He maintained that God's chief attribute was justice, and if the people expected anything but punishment from His hands they must practice justice toward each other. The teachings of all the prophets agree with Isaiash's, namely, that "the nation and the kingdom that will not serve God shall perish—utterly waste shall those nations be laid." [^7] In other words, the perfect society will be brought about only through the acceptance and obedience of the divine truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

However, one central theme runs through the teachings of the Old Testament prophets. It is a belief that eventually the time will come when mankind will serve God and thereby establish a perfect society. [^8] Jeremiah declared that the day will come when the Lord will make a "new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah." [^9] At that time, the Lord told Jeremiah:

I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, "Know the Lord": for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them. [^10]

ISAIATH'S DESCRIPTION OF THE MILLENNIUM

Of the Old Testament prophets, Isaiah's predictions regarding the millennial reign of the Lord are the most illuminating and extensive. In fact, he describes the Millennium in more detail than all of the other Hebrew prophets combined.

An important point which appears in several of Isaiah's prophecies is that the governing power throughout this period of one thousand years of peace will be the Gospel of Jesus Christ. People will learn, love, and obey its precepts. The headquarters of the Church will be Zion. [^11] From that point, the law shall go forth, and the word of the Lord shall come from Jerusalem. A Righteous Judge, a descendant of King David, shall reign; and He shall rule with equity. [^12] Sorrow and grief will cease, "and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces." [^13]

The people of the earth shall live until they are a hundred years old; then they shall be changed in a twinkling of an eye unto a blessed immortality. For God (Christ) "will swallow up death in victory." [^14] "There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but

the sinner shall be accursed. . . . For as the days of a tree are the days of my people." [^15]

Peace shall reign supreme throughout the entire world. The people "shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruits of them." War—that monster and curse of humanity—shall be completely done away with. "And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face," saith the Lord. [^16] For the purpose of illustrating Isaiah's understanding of the Millennium, we shall quote some of his teachings:

The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. [^17]

And many nations shall come, and say, "Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. . . . And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. [^18]

CHRISTIANITY'S HOPE OF A GOOD SOCIETY

Jesus Christ opened His public ministry with the hope of a good society. He selected as the text for one of His early public sermons a Messianic prophecy made by Isaiah. Thus he announced that the course He intended to follow was "to preach good tidings unto the meek, . . . to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." [^19] In

other words, the Savior, like the great prophets of God who preceded Him, Knew that the good society could be established only by people learning and obeying the Gospel.

From that day forward the Man of Galilee taught the principles of truth with a power and understanding greater than that with which any man has ever taught. The heart of His message was "Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness and all other things shall be added unto you." He summed up all of the teachings of the holy prophets who preceded Him in the following words: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." [^20] Through His life and through His teachings, He proclaimed the plan of salvation which, if followed by all of humanity, would bring about that perfect society that the holy prophets have foreseen and foretold from Adam's day down to the present time.

Peter, Paul, and the other great teachers who contributed to the New Testament literature also proclaimed the Gospel of love and peace. They championed the prophets who lived before them in attempting to establish a better society which would ultimately result in the thousand years of peace.

John the Revelator saw in vision the millennial reign of the Lord and the New Jerusalem. Doubtless his writings did much to further stimulate the Christians' hope for the speedy arrival of that great day. (Read John's description of this "holy city Jerusalem" as given in Revelation, chapters 21 and 22.) Following is part of his beautiful word-picture of this glorious event:

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, "Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away." And he that sat upon the throne said, "Behold, I make all things new." [^21]

Jesus had scarcely been resurrected when many of the Christians began to look daily for the second coming of the Son Of Man to establish the reign of righteousness, although the Master had told the apostles shortly before His crucifixion of the many events that should occur before His return to earth. [^22] During the middle of the first century A.D., the Saints in Thessalonia, whom Paul had converted to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, were definitely expecting the immediate return of the Savior. Paul, however, wrote them a letter, informing them that before the Son of Man should come to earth to reign, an apostasy from the true plan of salvation would take place. [^23] Nevertheless, from that time forward Christians by the hundreds have continued to set the date of the Millennium, some of them going so far as to predict an exact year—even the month and day.

The concept of the coming of Jesus Christ to reign upon the earth for a thousand years as Lord of lords and King of kings, and of the perfect society prevailing wherein all hatred, strife, and sin of any nature cease to exist, has been one of the most dynamic and impelling forces in Christian history. Teachers of each generation have felt that it was and is their special calling to prepare the world for that great event—the Millennium.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 38

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Charles Gide, Communist and Co-operative Colonies, pp. 1-222. Joyce Oramel Hertzler, The History of Utopian Thought, p. 100
[^2] Joyce Oramel Hertzler, The History of Utopian Thought, pp. 1-320. Ibid., pp. 84-94.
[^3] Ibid., p. 127.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 147-148.
[^5] Ibid., p. 178.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 181-224.
[^7] Cited in ibid., p. 97.
[^8] Charles Gide, Communist and Co-operative Colonies, pp. 1-222.
[^9] Jeremiah 31:31-34.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, America is Zion. The word of the Lord has already gone forth from Jerusalem, as recorded in the holy scriptures; and the Constitution of the U. S. has served as a pattern for many constitutions in the various countries throughout the world. Thus the law has gone forth from Zion and shall continue to do so.
[^12] Isaiah 9:6-7; 11:1-6; 16:5; 32:1-7.
[^13] Ibid., 25:8; 65:19.
[^14] Ibid., 25:8.
[^15] Ibid., 65:17-25.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants 101:26.
[^17] Isaiah 11:6-9.
[^18] Isaiah 2:2-5; Micah 4:1-5.
[^19] Luke 4:14-22; Isaiah 61:1-4.
[^20] Matthew 22:37; Mark 12:20-21; Luke 10:27; Deuteronomy 6:5; Leviticus 19:18; Psalms 31:23.
[^21] Revelation 21:1-5.
[^22] Matthew 24:1-51.
[^23] 2 Thessalonians 2:1-5.
