Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 39.

UTOPIAN AND ZION CONCEPTS

FAMOUS UTOPIAN WRITINGS

Numerous students of society—many of whom were stimulated by the teachings of the prophets—have produced an abundance of literature on the ancient hope for a perfect society which has come to be known as a Utopia. Among these writings are the following classics: Plato, The Republic; St. Augustine, The City of God; Sir Thomas More, Utopia; Lord Francis Bacon, New Atlantis; Thomas Campanella, City of the Sun; James Harrington, Oceana.

Plato (427-347 B.C.) was the most brilliant of Socrates' disciples. In his book, The Republic, he pictured a state free from the corruption of extreme license and from the danger of tyranny. Its laws and institutions were the embodiment of the highest moral ideals of individuals united into a socialized state. "He used the myth of an ideal republic in which future mankind was to blissfully abide, as a vehicle by means of which to express these ideas which he could not otherwise openly utter. . . . But, above all, its main argument is the search after justice." [^1] Plato was doubtless influenced by Hesid's description of the Golden Age. In The Republic, Plato expressed the ideal of a classical philosopher, the best secular thought of that brilliant Greek age.

St. Augustine wrote the City of God between the years 413 and 426 A.D. In this book he maintained that the teachings of Christ, if lived by all people, would produce the best and most inviolable state. His writings represent a rather comprehensive expression of his religious and theological beliefs; but the most important parts present his doctrine of the two cities—"the City of Men and the City of God, in respect to their origin, their history, and their destiny." It was Augustine's purpose in his monumental work—The City of God—to show that the bond of agreement and the one things which would produce a righteous society is the love of God. If humanity would love Him deeply, they would renounce all lust and sinfulness and would obey the divine laws, thereby preparing themselves to dwell in the City of God. "This is a beatific vision of a social life in which the personality of the individual is bound to that of other individuals through God, truly the highest stage of moral perfection." [^2] On the other hand, Augustine taught that the "City of Men" represented diametrically opposite principles in all respects from the "City of God."

Nearly a thousand years passed following the appearance of Augustine's City of God, during which period there was no significant Utopian literature. One big aspect of the Renaissance, however, was the production of a number of Utopian books.

The first and one of the most important of them, known as Utopia, was written by Sir Thomas More (1478-1535 A. D.). His writings pictured a perfect communistic commonwealth. More, in his book, "has so surpassed those of his contemporaries and later rivals, not only in vividness and daring, but also in its depth and scientific contribution, that it has given its name to the whole class of literature and has become a word of common parlance." [^3] Without doubt, his work was the beginning of a literature that played a prominent part in the social and scientific progress of the sixteenth and succeeding centuries.

Nearly a hundred years after More's death, Francis Bacon wrote the New Atlantis. His book "proclaimed with almost romantic enthusiasm that scientific method alone was the ladder by which man was to ascend to perfect living. Its new program to attain Utopia was the rebuilding of society in the light of knowledge and discovery." [^4]

The same year (1623) that Bacon wrote his New Atlantis, Thomas Campanella wrote the City of the Sun. He

was an Italian, born in 1568. The Utopianism in his book is quite similar in many respects to ideas found in the Republic and also to those found in More's works. Here lies a good illustration of how ideas bridge centuries as a golden thread of truth coming down from age to age.

James Harrington's political Utopia, called Oceana, which appeared in England in 1656, differed from the others in that it was written to solve the political needs of England during the Cromwell period. Although writing of an ideal state, the author was presenting a constitution for immediate and practical use, and in order to insure its publication he presented it in the form of what he called a "political romance."

OTHER UTOPIAN WRITINGS

In addition to these famous writings, since the time of More an abundance of Utopian literature has been produced. Joyce O. Hertzler gives the following list:

The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were the richest in speculative treatises of an Utopian nature of any period in history. Among other works of this age the following are significant: Joseph Hall, Mundus et Alter Idem (1607); Erycius Puteanus, Comus (1608); Johann Valenti Andreae, Christianopolis (1620); Sir John Eliot, Monarchy of Man (1622); John Barclay, Argenis (about 1630); Jani Nicii Erythracus, Eudemiae (1637); Bishop Francis Godwin, The Man in the Moon (1638); Jacobus Bidermannus, Utopia (1640); John Milton and Samuel Gott, Nova Solyma, the Ideal City, or Jerusalem Regained (1648); Thomas Hobees, Leviathan (1651); John Sadler, Olbia, the New Island (1660); Robert Filmer, Patriarcha (1680). [^5]

UTOPIAN SOCIALISTS

Seven men, all of them Frenchmen but one, are known by historians as "the Utopian Socialists." [^6] They did their work during the latter part of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. They are: Abbe Morelly, born about 1720; Francois Noel Babeuf, born 1764; Count Henry de Saint-Simon, born 1760; Charles Fourier, born 1772; Etienne Cabet, born 1788; Louis Blanc, born 1813; and Robert Owen, born in Wales in 1771.

Unlike some modern social reformers, none of these men were trying to bring about reforms for their own personal benefit. They represented such professions as editing, journalism, business, science, and politics. They were really social-conscious men who had inherited from ages past the concept of a Millennium or Golden Age in the future wherein society and the world in general would be a blessed place for all of humanity.

It was the hope of each of these men to do away with disorder, misery, poverty, hunger, and human suffering, which the world at their time presented, and in their places make it possible for wealth, happiness, harmony and beauty to be enjoyed by all mankind equally. This they believed could be accomplished through the establishing of a new social order. It is true that no two of them agreed in the details of this new social order, but they all had a similar purpose and similar basic principles. The following statement, made by one of them, expresses well the purpose of all the others: To "calm the suffering of the peoples, deliver the unfortunate from the anguish of hunger and misery and the fortunate from their egotism, and bring about a marriage upon earth between work and pleasure, between riches and kindly feeling, between virtue and happiness."

Fundamental in their belief was that God had ordained all things to serve the happiness of His children on earth. This was the starting point of their Utopianism. They all believed that men were naturally good and, with proper environment, perfection in society could be brought about.

These Utopian Socialists represent part of that great stream of thought which has come down through the ages proclaiming the establishment of a better society for mankind—a world which would eventually culminate in the millennial reign of Jesus Christ as predicted by the holy prophets since the world began.

RECENT UTOPIAN WRITINGS

Among the more recent Utopian writings which have become somewhat famous are the following: Edward Bellamy, Looking Backward, published in 1889; Theodor Hertzka, Freeland—A Social Anticipation, written in 1890; and H. G. Wells, Modern Utopia, published in 1905. The conception of social growth and development into a more perfect society is fundamental in each of these writings. They were all produced after the world had been affected extensively with the ideas of evolution.

SAVONAROLA'S GOOD SOCIETY EXPERIMENT

Stimulated by divine revelations from God through the holy prophets, religious teachers have constantly attempted to establish the good society. From generation to generation, new leaders arise who put forth renewed efforts to bring about the reign of peace upon the earth.

One outstanding and famous example is "Savonarola's Florentine Theocracy." In 1494, Fra Girolamo Savonarola, the foremost preacher and most influential personage of Florence, Italy, came forth with the idea of establishing in his beloved city a theocracy. It was to be a city-state built upon the pure principles of Christianity. Immorality and all kinds of sin were to be suppressed. Private interests were to be sacrificed to the common good. The social and civic life of the people were to be ruled by divine principles; in fact, God was to reign.

Savonarola preached his fiery sermons from prophetic texts, and called upon the citizens of Florence to put down vice with a vigorous hand, and for each of them to forsake worldly pleasures, and to give themselves in humility to the worship and service of God. A strong political and religious fervor blended together and soon remarkable and unheard-of reforms took place, transmitting Savonarola's dream into a temporary reality. For three or four years' time Florence was lifted from a city of most degrading vices to one of hopeful social righteousness. To quote a contemporary historian:

The whole aspect of the city changed. Finery and jewelry were cast aside; women dressed plainly on the streets; money which had before been spent for ornament and display was now given to the poor; theatres and taverns were empty; cards and dice disappeared; the churches were crowded; alms boxes were well filled; tradesmen and bankers restored their ill-gotten gains; purity, sobriety, and justice prevailed in the city, and the prior of San Marco (Savonarola) was every-where hailed as the greatest public benefactor. [^7]

Unfortunately this blessed condition was short-lived. The citizens of Florence soon reverted to their former way of living, and the faithful teacher was obliged to look forward to another day for establishment of the good society.

COMMUNIST AND COOPERATIVE EXPERIMENTS IN AMERICA

After the United States had obtained its independence from England and was fast becoming a nation, religious leaders and social reformers from various lands looked upon America as the place to establish a new Zion, the New Jerusalem. Numerous communist and cooperative colonies were established in America during the nineteenth century. [^8] The New World seemed to supply especially fertile ground upon which to build the good society. Prominent among these new societies were the Shakers, the Perfectionists of Oneida, the Dukhobors, Owenite Colonies, Fourierist Colonies, the Free Society of Vaux, the Aiglemont Colony, Robinson's Colonies and numerous other groups who were looking forward for the coming of the Savior.

In practically all, if not all, of these social and economic experiments in America, the people who participated were eagerly looking forward to the second coming of the Master, accompanied by the good society spoken of by the prophets of old. In fact, the millennial hope was the overwhelming religious motivation of the period in American history when Joseph Smith was born and when the Gospel of Jesus Christ was restored to earth through that Prophet. Christians, regardless of which church they belonged to, were anxiously waiting for the time when the Lord would reign.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 39

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bible: Revelation 20:21; 22. (Review these.) Ether 1:42-43; 2:5-12; 1 Nephi 2:20-21; 2 Nephi 1:5-12; 10:10-20.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 29:10-30; 43:28-35; 45:22-71; 57:1-5; 58:6-14; 57; 62:4; 63:24-36; 78:15; 97:17-21; 101:1-101; 105:1-41; 133:1-74. Ether 13:3-6.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, pp. 278-286, 292-314, 322-327. Ibid., 13:10-11.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith (Compiler), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 17, 21, 24, 29, 80, 161, 254, 268, 362. Moses 7:62-63.
[^5] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, pp. 367-405. Ibid., Galatians 4:26; Hebrews 12:22; Revelation 3:12; 12:1-27.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants 52:2-5.
[^7] Ibid., 57; 58:6-14.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants 63:24-36; 78:15; 133:4-15.
