Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 40.

THE MORMONS' ZION CONCEPT

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

In this chapter we shall present the concept which has been held by the Mormon people in regards to the second coming of Jesus, the millennial reign for one thousand years, and the part that the Church is to play in preaching the Gospel, gathering the children of Israel, and building a holy city preparatory for the coming of the Son of Man. This new city is to be called Zion or the New Jerusalem. The word "Zion" not only means to Church members that one particular city which they are to be instrumental in establishing; but they also believe that in its largest geographical bounds, Zion is the whole American continent.

Another meaning of Zion is "the pure in heart," and the gathering place of the Saints; and so in this respect the term has been applied to the Church wherever its headquarters has been in America. At the present time, however, we speak of the principal concentrations of the Saints as being Zion, but our main emphasis in this chapter shall be the Zion or New Jerusalem which is to be established at Independence, Missouri, and the Mormons' concept of the Millenium.

HISTORICAL SETTING

Joseph Smith and his associates, at the time the Church was organized, were very familiar with the predictions of the holy prophets regarding the Millennium as recorded in the Bible. They knew the ideas that we have pointed out in previous chapters; namely, that Zion was to be established; that Jesus Christ was to reign upon the earth one thousand years; that this period should be one of peace, righteousness, and prosperity; and that it should be a time when enmity between man and man and between man and animal should exist no more. In fact, since these ideas were found in the Bible, they were common property of all Christian churches.

BOOK OF MORMON CONTRIBUTIONS

But the Prophet Joseph and his followers received from the Book of Mormon prophets an added stimulus to the millennial concept and new information that members of other Christian churches did not have. They learned from the Jaredite and Nephite teachers that the American continent was held in favor by the Almighty. It was, indeed, a "land of promise, a land choice above all other lands" upon the face of the earth! [^1] They also learned that the ancient American prophets had proclaimed that the Lord had blessed this land and dedicated it as the gathering place of Israel in the last days.

Furthermore, Ether, the last of the Jaredite prophets, had predicted that America was to be the land upon which the New Jerusalem was to be built and that it should be "the Holy Sanctuary of the Lord." [^2] Those who dwelt in this Holy City, he explained, would be "they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph who were of the house of Israel." [^3] Speaking in our terminology, they would be the righteous members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who are of the seed of Joseph.

REVELATIONS REGARDING BUILDING OF ZION

Since God the Eternal Father, through His Only Begotten Son and holy angels, was restoring the true plan of salvation to Joseph Smith, the Prophet felt that it was his duty to direct the establishing of Zion—the New Jerusalem —preparatory for the coming of the Savior. During the first few months following the organizing of the Church, therefore, Joseph became deeply concerned over the founding of the City of Holiness. Whenever the Prophet was confronted with any problem, he sought the Lord in humble prayer for the solution. Thereupon, in December, 1830, in response to prayer, God revealed to Joseph the vision of Enoch, which is recorded in the "Writings of Moses," now published in the Pearl of Great Price. From the words of the ancient prophet, the Mormon leader received additional information regarding the last days and the building of the City of Zion. Joseph learned that the Gospel was to be taken to all parts of the earth for the purpose of gathering out God's elect; and those Church members were to build "an Holy City . . . and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem." [^4] This great event was to be preparatory for the coming of the Lord; and at His coming He was to dwell in the New Jerusalem. God revealed the following unto Enoch:

There shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of one thousand years the earth shall rest. [^5]

Thereupon, after becoming acquainted with Enoch's vision, Joseph inquired of God as to the place where this Holy City was to be built. The Church was not a year old, in fact, it was in December, 1830, the same month that Joseph had received the revelation regarding the vision of Enoch, that the Lord "announced the revelation that the New Zion would be built somewhere in the West by the borders of the Lamanites." At this time the Saints were residing in New York, Joseph living at Fayette.

Early in the following year, Joseph directed the move of the Saints from New York to Ohio. They had barely arrived at Kirtland when the Mormon Prophet began to look toward another frontier farther west—on which to establish the Zion for the Saints of God.

Parley P. Pratt returned to Kirtland in the spring of 1831 from a mission to the Lamanites in Missouri. He gave a glowing report of the beauty and fertility of that region. Thereupon Joseph inquired again of the Lord relative to the location of Zion. In answer God instructed twenty-six elders, including the Prophet, to travel by twos to Independence, Missouri, stating that after their arrival He would reveal to them the location of the New Zion. All the elders were to go by different routes and preach the Gospel on all opportune occasions en route. [^6]

The missionaries arrived at Independence in the latter part of July. They had traveled 1,000 miles. Shortly thereafter the Prophet received a revelation which announced Missouri to be Zion, the gathering place for the Saints. [^7] Independence was designated as the center—the site for the New Jerusalem, and a holy temple to the Lord was to be erected on a knoll west of the courthouse.

ZION'S FAVORABLE LOCATION

The frontier of western Missouri offered the best possible location for the realization of Joseph's dreams of a "City of God." There in the unsettled West the Prophet contemplated gathering the pure in heart from all parts of the world. [^8] Many Lamanites were living on the Great Plains in the region bordering Missouri on the west, and to the eastward throughout the world lived a myriad of Gentiles. God had placed the responsibility upon the Mormons to take the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ to both peoples. Missouri—a spacious fertile frontier country— was centrally located in the United States, as well as being in the heart of the great Mississippi Valley. Extending from Independence—the centre of Zion—the Saints of God could build city upon city. The ideas of Zion, i.e., of righteousness and purity of heart, could spread until they eventually filled the whole of the American continent which the Prophet proclaimed to be Zion. To quote:

The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. [^9]

At that day when cities of righteousness should be established throughout the whole land, Zion will be great, wonderful, and glorious. The Lord declared to the Prophet Joseph:

Zion [shall] . . . spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible. And the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: "Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there; and he hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high tower." [^10]

ATTEMPTS TO ESTABLISH ZION

Twelve men, representing the twelve tribes of Israel, laid the first log for a Mormon house in Missouri on August 2, 1831. This was done twelve miles west of Independence, now part of Kansas City, where sixty Colesville Saints had settled.

After laying the log for the first house, Sidney Rigdon dedicated the land of Zion for the gathering of Israel, and put the people under solemn covenant to serve God in that land. [^11] The following day the Prophet Joseph dedicated the temple site at Independence. On this exact spot the house of the Lord will be erected when the New Jerusalem is built.

As previously suggested, the idea of Zion held by the Prophet was both a condition of the people and a geographical area. The Saints must be "pure in heart." [^12] They must live the Law of Consecration, or as otherwise termed, the United Order, as the children of God did in the City of Enoch or as the Nephites did following the advent of Christ. Joseph knew that if a successful Zion city were established, it would require a godlike people—a "Zion people"—to bring it about.

Therefore, the Prophet instructed his followers before he left for Kirtland as to how they should live in Zion. He appointed Edward Partridge to divide unto the Saints "their inheritance," and Sidney Gilbert to purchase all the land in Missouri that the Mormons could pay for. After holding a conference at Kaw Township, where the Colesville Saints had settled, all those who had not been appointed to remain in Zion returned to Kirtland, leaving Independence August 9, 1831. During the next seventeen years, Joseph Smith spent most of his time in Ohio and directed the "Zion Movement" from there.

A general plan for the physical make-up of cities of Zion was prepared by the Prophet in the spring of 1833. [^13] A copy of the plan was sent to Independence in June of that year, but the Missourian persecutions of the Saints prevented its being executed at that time. However, the plan of the "City of Zion" served as the model for the building of Far West in Missouri, and Nauvoo, Illinois, and later for Salt Lake City and the other Mormon settlements in the Great West.

Events and conditions that followed the dedication of the land prevented the Saints from building the New Jerusalem in Missouri; but matters looked well for awhile. Within a little over a year after Joseph had selected Independence, Missouri, more than a thousand of the faithful had gathered at that place.

It was not long, however, before their neighbors began to fear encroachments of this new group which worked and succeeded in such unified harmony. Gradually the feeling of jealous antipathy developed into open persecution and mob violence, and the Mormons, being outnumbered greatly, found resistance futile. They were driven from their homes in Jackson County. They crossed the river north into Ray and Clay counties, where they resided temporarily while they sent word to the Prophet in Kirtland regarding their pitiful plight.

The following spring (1834), Joseph organized a volunteer, untrained army from the faithful members in Ohio, and traveled 1,000 miles westward to Missouri to "redeem Zion." But upon arriving, Joseph's army, known as Zion's Camp, was abandoned without restoring the refugees to their homes in Jackson County. At that time the Lord revealed to the Prophet that the reason the Saints had not been restored to their homes and were not permitted to build the City of Zion at that time was because they had not kept the commandments of the Lord to the degree requisite for the building of the City of God—the New Jerusalem. [^14]

Four years later the Saints were driven by force from the State of Missouri. They took refuge in Illinois. There, under the leadership of Joseph the Prophet, they built a city known as "Nauvoo—the Beautiful." The Prophet was now able to put into effect many ideas which he had long before conceived concerning the plan of the City of Zion. When Nauvoo was only five years old, however, Joseph and his brother were martyred by a ruthless mob (June 27, 1844), and less than two years later the Saints were again driven from their homes.

They were led to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains by Brigham Young, and here they established their new home in the solitude of the Great West. But the Saints have continued to look forward to the day when they would return to Missouri and participate in the building of the New Jeruslem preparatory for the coming of the Lord to reign a thousand years. [^15] They firmly maintain that they shall be the mortals who shall have the main responsibility in building the Holy City, for it is they who hold the Priesthood of God and who have been divinely authorized to carry forward the Gospel during this the last dispensation. Conditioned on obedience, they are heirs of the kingdom of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ: thus when the Lord comes the Saints who are worthy shall dwell with Him in the New Jerusalem. [^16]

THE MILLENNIUM AS REVEALED TO JOSEPH SMITH

We have previously discussed the teachings of Isaiah and the other prophets regarding the Millennium, but our purpose now is to examine the revelations from God directly to the Prophet Joseph Smith regarding the thousand years of peace and righteousness.

The heart of the Mormons' concept is the belief in the Millennium—a perfect society which shall be established here on this earth. They accept all the teachings of the holy prophets as given in the scriptures, many of which have been presented in the preceding chapters. In addition to those revelations given to ancient prophets, Jesus Christ has made known additional facts to Joseph which help to clarify the whole picture of the reign of peace and righteousness. Through direct revelation, the American Prophet received as complete a knowledge of the millennial reign of Christ as can be found in the combined teachings of all the holy prophets as recorded in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Pearl of Great Price. Thus the Doctrine and Covenants and the teachings of Joseph Smith constitute the Mormons' principal source of information regarding this glorious event.

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will participate in the building of the New Jerusalem. They will be joined in that activity by the righteous of the earth who have lived during the various Gospel dispensations from Adam's time forward. Christ, accompanied by the hosts of heaven, shall come to make His abode in Zion. "The Lamb shall stand on Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads. . . . And the graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion, and upon the Holy City, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night, forever and ever." [^17] Father Adam, Enoch and his people who ascended to heaven, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, the apostles of the Lamb, and all the holy prophets of God who have lived from the time of the first man shall come to live in the presence of the Lord. [^18]

Even the lost tribes of Israel "who are in the north countries" shall come to Zion, "and they shall bring rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants. . . . And they shall fall down and be crowned with glory even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim." [^19]

Thus during the Millennium there shall be both mortals and immortals living upon the earth together. The mortal "children shall grow up without sin unto salvation. For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their King and their lawgiver." [^20]

Satan shall not have power to tempt any man. And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree; and when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. [^21]

When the Lord shall come, He shall reveal all things unto man: things which have passed, things regarding the earth, and the heavens, and all the purposes of God. [^22]

At the end of the thousand years of peace and righteousness, men will again begin to deny their God. Satan will be loosed and reign only for a short season, and then the end of the Terrestrial period of the earth shall come. At this time all those who have not heretofore been resurrected shall come forth from their graves to be assigned to their eternal reward or eternal damnation. This shall be another "great and dreadful day of the Lord"—great for the righteous and dreadful for the wicked. Following this, "the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth." [^23] The world shall be celestialized and shall forever become the home of those who have lived righteous lives.

SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS—CHAPTER 40

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 1:6, 30.
[^2] Ibid., 28:7.
[^3] Ibid., 1:8.
[^4] Mark 16:15.
[^5] E. L. Thorndike, "The Production, Retention and Attraction of American Men of Science," Science, XC (Lancaster, Pa., August 16, 1940), pp. 137-141.
[^6] Moses 1:39.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 14:7.
[^8] Ibid., 29:34.
[^9] John 14:8-9.
[^10] Ibid., 8:19.
[^11] Ibid., 10:36.
[^12] Ibid., 17:3.
[^13] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 311-312.
[^14] Doctrine and Covenants 105:1-40; 101:1-24.
[^15] Ibid., 101:16-21; 136:18.
[^16] Ibid., 45:58-59; 43:29-31; 29:11, 22-23.
[^17] Ibid., 133:16-25, 46-47, 56.
[^18] Ibid., 133:54-55.
[^19] Ibid., 133:26-34.
[^20] Ibid., 45:58-59.
[^21] Ibid., 101:24-34; 68:51.
[^22] Ibid., 101:32-34.
[^23] Ibid., 29:11, 22-28; 43:29-31. The calamities which shall befall man at the time of the Savior's coming to earth to reign at the beginning of the Millennium has been proclaimed "the great and dreadful day of the Lord."
