Milton R. Hunter, Gospel through the Ages ( 1945)

Chapter 41

THE DYNAMICS OF MORMONISM

INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

The story of the "Gospel Through the Ages" as given in this book began back in the distant past before man was placed on the earth, and it has moved forward throughout world's history to and including the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to earth again through the American Prophet—Joseph Smith. It has also continued forward from our day through the periods of the terrestrial and into the celestial stages of the world as revealed by the Lord to the holy prophets.

But since the greatest of all Gospel dispensations and the culminating period of the story of God's dealings and revelations to His children on this earth reside in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the one and only completely true and officially recognized religion by the Lord—and since all the power, authority, ordinances and principles of the Gospel (with a thorough understanding of the same) which have been in the world during any Gospel dispensation are and will continue to be present in Mormonism, we shall conclude our story of the history of the Gospel with a discussion of the power, vitality, or dynamics of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—Mormonism. Does this Church contain the requisites to make it the one official organization upon the face of the earth duly endowed by Jesus to bring salvation and eternal life to all of God's children who repent, are baptized, and obey its teachings? Yes, this is the claim made by Mormonism to the whole world. This religion is an ensign, a beacon, which is destined to guide the inhabitants of the earth into the path of light and truth and forward into eternal life.

NEED FOR A RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL

It has been pointed out throughout this book—and by way of summary it should be restated—that as the Christian Church emerged from the conglomerate social thought and became the universal religion in 392 A.D., it was an adulterated Christianity. A religious syncretism had taken place, fusing many of the best of the pagan beliefs and practices with the teachings of the Master. Many of the grandest precepts given to the world by Jesus were lost. The "Spirit of the Lord was grieved" and He withdrew His holy Priesthood or power from the earth. There was not a church upon the face of the earth at the beginning of the nineteenth century which could officially perform ordinances in the name of Jesus Christ and have those ordinances accepted by God as being valid and binding both on earth and in heaven. Thus a Great Apostasy had occurred, which is evidenced by the rise of hundreds of Christian denominations.

The condition had become such that in the spring of 1820 the Savior declared to Joseph Smith that the creeds of Christendom "were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.' "

THE RESTORATION

God the Eternal Father and His Only Begotten Son felt the necessity of reaffirming the cardinal Christian principles and of re-establishing the divine truths which had been lost through the fusion of pagan and Christian beliefs. If religion was to again become a vital force in human experience, all the principles of Christian living enjoyed by former dispensations, in addition to new principles applicable to our civilization, must be revealed. It was God's purpose, as many prophets of old had foretold, to establish in the last days a glorious dispensation of the Gospel into which all other dispensations would flow; therefore, a dispensation should be established which should be the greatest of all. The Gospel of Jesus Christ was to come to the earth for the last time—the true religion was never to be adulterated again nor given to another people.

Beginning in the spring of 1820, when God the Father and His Only Begotten Son appeared to Joseph, and continuing on from that date, the American Prophet and his successors received revelation upon revelation until all the principles and ordinances of the Gospel requisite for the salvation of mankind—both the living and the dead—were upon earth again. Among the heavenly beings who appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Moses, Elias, and Elijah, each coming to restore to earth keys of the holy Priesthood. Thus the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, established by the Prophet under the divine direction of the Savior of the world, contains all the keys, powers, and authority of God, which have been enjoyed by any or all of the other Gospel dispensations. Herein lies the dynamics of Mormonism, and the genius that it possesses to give to its members lives of richness in mortality and an assurance of blessed eternal lives in the kingdom of their God.

THE TRUE AND LIVING CHURCH

In a revelation given to Joseph Smith in 1831—labeled by the Lord, "My preface unto the book of commandments"—Jesus declared that the Church He had established through the American Prophet was "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." [^1] The statement "true and living church" is a significant explanation as to the cause of the moving forces within Mormonism which gives it the aptitude, not only to convert strong intellectual individuals, but to develop and hold forceful characters.

KEYS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

The claim made by Mormonism of its divinity is one of the factors which makes it a "living church." Latterday Saints maintain that the keys of the kingdom of God and the holy Priesthood are vested in the president of the Church and that all official acts of the Church are performed through the Priesthood. In speaking of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said: "I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead." [^2] Each succeeding President of the Church has received the same keys. The Church is endowed, therefore, with Divine Power.

This is indeed the true Church of Jesus Christ, established in this dispensation through divine revelations given to a Prophet who was also ordained to the holy orders of the Priesthood by heavenly beings sent from the presence of God the Father and the Son for that purpose. Therefore, the ordinances performed by any other Christian denomination, as well as those performed by non-Christians, are valid only in this world and only among men. They are not consummated by the holy Priesthood of the Son of God, and so they are not binding in the world to come.

SERVANTS OF GOD

Faithful individuals affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (and that includes a vast majority) give freely of their time, talents and money whenever the authorities ask them to do so, because they believe that those who preside are appointed by God. No stronger drive could be conceived than that of a man becoming convinced that he is a servant of the Lord, possessing authority to speak, act, and officiate in the ordinances for the Master, and having the right to bless mankind through the divine Priesthood which he holds. Coupled with that strong religious drive is the power of Godliness which comes to the Church members who are honoring the holy Priesthood which has been bestowed upon them. They are indeed divinely endowed servants of the Most High God.

Many individuals not connected with Mormonism marvel over the fact that thousands of Latter-day Saints leave their homes and friends to go into foreign countries—paying their own expenses—to proselytize for the Church. The missionaries do this because they are thoroughly convinced that they are clothed with the power of the heavens to carry forward the work of Christ here upon the earth. Having been ordained unto the holy Priesthood and having been called by the First Presidency to fill a mission, they have the authority to speak in the name of the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. In modern revelation, the Lord declared: "Verily, I say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious." [^3]

OFFICERED BY THE LAITY

The fact that the Mormon Church is composed of and officered by the laity is another reason for its being a "living church." When the Savior was establishing His teachings in Palestine, He did not select as His helpers learned rabbis of the Sanhedrin; but He drew His apostles and other disciples from the common people. Men highly trained in the Jewish law, but far removed from the impulses, sorrows, and problems of society, were of no use to Him. Fishermen, tax collectors, and men of similar professions became His devout helpers, because they possessed an intellectual sincerity, honesty and faith which could be vitalized into a tenacious life of adoration and religious worship. To these men He gave the Priesthood and commanded them to go "into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." [^4] History records morally beautiful yet pitiful stories of how these devout messengers of truth, for the cause of the Master, cheerfully suffered the torture of burning at the stake, of crucifixion, of having wild beasts tear them to pieces, and of all other manners of persecutions. Life actually flowed through the veins of this new church. It was a dynamic religion and remained so until the practice of giving the Priesthood only to a trained group replaced the practice of giving it to all worthy male members of Christendom.

Just as early Christianity was a "living church" because each lay member could function in its ordinances, so is Mormonism forceful today. In accordance with a revelation given to Joseph Smith, all worthy male members of the Church are ordained unto the Priesthood and have the right of advancement to the highest order therein. This is a gift more priceless than the wealth of the world.

A learned professor of theology from the East recently visited one of the business men in Salt Lake City and expressed a desire to meet a Mormon bishop. The business man immediately pressed a button. The professor received the surprise of his life when in walked the janitor, who was introduced as the business man's bishop. As long as a church draws its officers from different vocations, it will remain a vital growing concern.

PRODUCES POWERFUL LEADERS

Another evidence of the dynamics of Mormonism is the fact that throughout its history it has distinguished itself as a great institution productive of outstanding leadership. Thousands of obscure individuals have been gathered into Mormonism and recreated. They have been born anew into a God-centered life. What historian today would be classifying Brigham Young as one of the world's greatest colonizers, Jacob Hamblin as a unique frontier scout and "apostle to the Lamanites," Wilford Woodruff as an accomplished missionary, and Orson Pratt as an outstanding religious philosopher, if these men had not been caught in the net of Mormonism? They, like hundreds of other people, while helping create history of the Church were created by the Mormon Church.

The Latter-day Saint program also prepares its youth for leadership. Obedience to the Gospel teachings molds the individual into a character of moral, mental, physical and spiritual strength. Those are the characteristics which are requisite for leadership. An illustration will help to show the power of Mormonism in this respect.

An article entitled "The Production, Retention and Attraction of American Men of Science," by Professor E. L. Thorndike of Columbia University, published in the August 16, 1940, issue of Science, [^5] shows how effective the Church training and inheritance has been in helping to prepare its youth for leadership in the field of science. Thorndike's statistics are based on the population figures of the forty-eight states in 1890 and in 1900. His study shows that Utah has produced nearly once and a half times as many "Men of Science" per capita as any other state in the Union. Based on 1,000,000 population, Utah has produced 492 "Men of Science"; Colorado, the next highest of the forty-eight states, has produced, 340, and Georgia, the lowest state in the group, has produced only 44.

A PRACTICAL RELIGION

Another reason for the dynamics of Mormonism is the ability that that institution possesses to care for all the earthly needs of its members and to continue to adjust to a changing world. It fosters all Christian virtues, such as honesty, chastity, temperance, perseverance, reverence, and love. Obedience to these principles immediately brings serenity to the soul, physical and mental health, prosperity and happiness. The Word of Wisdom is the beacon to health. Mormon literature of Utah pioneer days is filled with examples in which the preacher devoted part of his sermon to a discussion of spiritual problems connected with theology and the remainder of his sermon to the giving of advice relative to the building of an irrigation ditch, a bridge over the canal, or a factory for the community. The Church leaders from Joseph Smith on have maintained that true religion is to make people prosperous and happy here and now. Proper thinking and acting towards one's associates are of vital importance in the good life. One glance at the Church school system, at the recreational activities of the M. I. A., at the intellectual religious instructions in Sunday School, at the programs of the Relief Society and Primary, at the activities of a Mormon bishop, and at the Church Welfare program, furnishes sufficient evidence to prove that Mormonism provides for the physical and mental needs of its members in a changing world.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROGRESSIVE ETERNALISM

Any religion that remains powerful in the lives of the people is a religion which gives to its followers assurance of eternal life. The one thought held uppermost in the mind of the early Christian preacher was the fact that Christ had been crucified, but was alive again. His followers had the assurance that in like manner they, after death, would live again. Mormonism rests upon the fact, as was earlier pointed out, that the work and glory of God are "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^6] The whole philosophy of the Church is built around the doctrine of eternal progression. God promised the Saints, "if you keep my commandments and endure to the end, you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." [^7] To the Mormons, all laws pertaining to religion are spiritual and eternal. [^8] Baptism, marriage, family life and temple ordinances are spiritualized and made to endure forever. The deepest loves in human lives and the strongest hopes in the hearts of men are satisfied in this philosophy of progressive eternalism. No wonder Mormonism is the "true and living Church."

TEACHES TRUE CONCEPT OF GOD

Jesus Christ came into the world to give mankind a revelation of the personality of His Father. These two individuals were so much alike in their thoughts, actions, purposes, and personalities that when Philip said, "Lord, show us the Father," Jesus replied, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." [^9] On another occasion He said, "If ye knew me, ye would know my Father also." [^10] His parables are full of the concept of a personalized God who is the Father of the human race. He made the definite claim, "I am the Son of God." [^11] Jesus looked upon Elohim as an individual who possessed an unlimited amount of love and compassion for His children and an unbounded interest in their well-being. The vitality of the Savior's personality was that He was God-centered at all times, ofttimes making such remarks as, "I do nothing except that which my Father hath commanded me to do." It is well to read again the Gospel of John in order that we may fully appreciate the intimate relationship that existed between Jesus and God the Father.

But the philosophers of modern Christendom have done away with a personalized God. He is to them an abstraction, making it difficult to get real adoration for and communion with Him. Generally speaking, one who accepts their creeds cannot experience the beautiful and intimate relationships with the Father that Jesus enjoyed and that Latter-day Saints experience.

Through numerous revelations—including "the First Vision"—the Prophet learned the true character of Deity. This He taught to His followers. One of the strongest factors in Mormonism is its interpretation of God. Latter-day Saints accept and worship their Heavenly Father as taught by Jesus. The only way we can conceive of Him is in personal terms. Yet, we are sure that He far surpasses in love, in charity, in beauty of person, in intelligence and wisdom, and in all other attributes, the most perfect conceptions that the human mind can produce. As has been pointed out, Mormons sincerely believe Jesus' statement. "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." [^12] The complete revelation of Deity will come only to the man who becomes as God is. By living the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there is a possibility of mankind eventually reaching that goal. Therefore, the heart of Mormonism is the God-centered philosophy of the Church revealed by the Savior.

POWER OF TESTIMONY

The last point which shall be mentioned illustrating the dynamics of Mormonism is the conviction which is given to every faithful member of the divinity of the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thousands of men, women, boys and girls stand up at the testimony meetings each month and soberly declare that they know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Joseph Smith is a true Prophet of God and one of the greatest Prophets that has ever lived. Through their lives and actions they also bear testimony to the truthfulness of the Gospel. These testimonies come through the gift of the Holy Ghost. It is only through that gift that man can bear absolute testimony to the truthfulness of these things. Many thousands of Latter-day Saints have borne that testimony, and some of them have even sealed it with their lives. The power of individual testimony, therefore, is one of the most forceful things in life and it is the distinguishing power of Mormonism which makes it a "living church."

CONCLUSIONS

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the "true and living Church" because the Lord has again established His work here upon the earth and has endowed it with divine authority. Mormonism provides abundant opportunity for each individual to develop his personality by participating in all Church activities. It also takes into account all the needs of its members, and furnishes a God-centered philosophy which, if obeyed, will produce lives of richness and happiness eternally.

Since God has decreed that the Gospel which was restored to earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith shall never be taken from the earth again nor given to another people, the story of "the Gospel Through the Ages" naturally reaches its climax in a discussion of the dynamics of Mormonism. We are now in the last Gospel dispensation, known as the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. Thus this religion (Mormonism) will go forward accomplishing the designs of God until the Son of Man comes to earth to assume His position of President of His Church which was named in His honor, namely, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Footnotes

PROBLEMS AND ACTIVITIES

General Suggestions: The topics in this book are plainly given in the text of each chapter and so there is no need of repeating them in this outline of suggestions on studying the Priesthood course. But the suggestion is hereby made to each teacher that throughout the entire course he follow the textbook and discuss the various topics as given. At the end of each chapter are to be found "Supplementary Readings," which have been very carefully selected because of their bearing on the subjects under discussion. The teachers of the various classes can enrich their store of information each week by studying as many of the supplementary readings as time will permit. Also, if each member of the Priesthood group can find time to read extensively, such information will be helpful and enlightening to him and to the class. But it is imperative as a minimum requirement that all members of the Melchizedek groups study carefully each week the material presented in the textbook if the course of study is to be pursued with satisfactory results.

CHAPTER 1—THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST—PAGES 1-5

Discuss: What is meant by the Gospel of Jesus Christ? What is it based on? Where are the best sources of its teachings? Discuss Paul's definition. What is meant by a covenant? What is the origin of the names Old Testament and New Testament? What is meant by the "new and everlasting covenant"? How extensive is the Gospel or what is its scope? Discuss the statements made by Brigham Young and John Taylor on the scope of the Gospel. How old are the Gospel principles and ordinances? What is meant by the laws of God? What is meant by light and truth? What is the source of all light and truth? Through what mediums do light and truth operate? Why do pagan and world religions resemble the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

CHAPTER 2—THE WORK AND GLORY OF GOD—PAGES 6-11

Discuss: For what purpose did God create the world? How? Give evidence that the world was organized by a divine intelligence. What is God's principal work? In what way may we help to enhance God's glory? What is the meaning of immortality? What is meant by eternal life? Distinguish between immortality and eternal life. Explain how immortality is a gift of God through Jesus Christ. Point out what man must do in order to receive eternal life. What is meant by "to know God and Jesus Christ"? What is the purpose of life?

CHAPTER 3—THE PLAN OF SALVATION—PAGES 12-19

Discuss: What is meant by the law of eternal progression? What is meant by "the Great Plan"? Who presided at the council in heaven and was the author of the plan of salvation? What part does law play in the plan of salvation? List three mediums through which we receive revelations from God. What is meant by the first spiritual death? Discuss the need for a savior in the plan of salvation. Do Latter-day Saints believe in foreordination?—Give evidence. Distinguish between foreordination and predestination. What plan did Lucifer present at the council in heaven? What great principle fundamental in growth and eternal progression would Lucifer's plan have interfered with? Did all the spirit children of God attain the same status of development in the pre-mortal life? Describe the war in heaven, stressing leadership, purpose, and results. Show its relationship to similar conflicts in this world. What is the relationship of the Gospel ordinances to the salvation of mankind? To what extent is obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ required of man if he is to attain life eternal? Did Jesus have to obey all the Gospel principles and ordinances?

CHAPTER 4—JESUS AND THE GOSPEL—PAGES 20-24

Discuss: Why was the Gospel named the Gospel of Jesus Christ? During the early period of earth's history, what was the Priesthood named? Why was the name changed? What part will the Gospel play in the lives of men when the earth is celestialized? How many true Gospels are there? What is the only name by which salvation shall come to the children of men? Describe Jesus' status in the spirit world and His relationship to us. By what names has Jesus been known to mortals? Explain thoroughly in what respect mortal beings may become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. In what respect is Jesus the Father of this world? Distinguish between the Fatherhood of Jesus and the Fatherhood of God.

CHAPTER 5—RELIGION IN HUMAN HISTORY—PAGES 25-29

Discuss: How old is the Gospel of Jesus Christ? When was it first revealed to mortals? To what extent have human beings searched for God and for salvation? Analyze carefully the various definitions of religion given in the text and formulate definitions of your own. What is the center of all religions? Define theology. Distinguish carefully between religion and theology. What are the definitions of religion given by such holy prophets as James, Amos, Samuel, Micah, and Jesus? How extensive has the quest for religion been among the human family? In what respect do Horace T. Houf's and Joseph Smith's viewpoints agree?

CHAPTER 6—MAN'S QUEST FOR SALVATION—PAGES 30-38

Discuss: What is the author's purpose in Chapter 6? Have human beings fostered numerous religious systems or relatively few? How extensive a part has religion played in the history of mankind? There are approximately how many Christian denominations? List the major world religions, their present approximate memberships, and the dates and places where they originated. Which century in world's history was creative in regards to religious groups? Describe the religious conditions of the Roman Empire during the early Christian centuries. At the time of the birth of Jesus, what was the status of the Greek Homeric religion? What was the status of the ancient Roman Religion? What was the policy of Augustus Caesar regarding religion in the Roman empire? What was the name which applied to several pagan religions which were the rivals of early Christianity? List five factors which contributed to the popularity of the Mystery Religions. What evidence is there to prove that the Mystery Religions were altered forms of the true Gospel as revealed to Father Adam and the holy prophets who succeeded him? Why are the Mystery Religions of great importance in this course of study? Discuss the following Mystery Religions: Mithraism, Hermeticism, Isiac Mysteries, Cybele-Attis (Great Mother) Mysteries, Eleusinian Mysteries, and Dionysian or Bacchus Mysteries. Describe Mystery Religions. Why did Christianity finally become victorious over the Mystery Religions?

CHAPTER 7—COMMON SOURCE OF RELIGIOUS TRUTHS—PAGES 39-45

Discuss: Make a list of some of the most outstanding similarities between world religions and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. How did Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Las Casas, and others account for the similarities in religious beliefs and customs? Explain what is meant by the "Independent Development Theory." Explain the "Diffusion Theory." What is the common source of all religious truths? Could both the Independent Development and Diffusion theories be explanations for religious practices being world-old and world-wide? Explain how the teachings of the prophets sustain these theories. According to Mormon belief, to whom does God reveal His will?

CHAPTER 8—DIVINE FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL TRUTH—PAGES 46-53

Discuss: Are Mormons the only people that receive truth and divine guidance from God? Pay particular attention to President Joseph F. Smith's statement regarding all truths coming from God through the mediation of Jesus Christ. What did the prophets teach regarding the source of truth? Which ones of God's children receive the greatest number of divine revelations? What prevented Joseph Smith on one occasion from translating the Book of Mormon? Through what channels does God reveal His will to man? What part does obedience to law play in man's learning truth? What is the relationship of obedience to law and the receiving of God's blessings? To what extent is God responsible for man's progression? To what extent is man responsible for his own progression?

CHAPTER 9—APOSTASIES AND HOW THEY OCCUR—PAGES 54-57

Discuss: Define apostasy. Explain how apostasies are brought about through sin and ignorance and give examples. What is meant by religious syncretism? Explain how apostasies are brought about through religious syncretism and give examples. Explain how the Gospel has come down through the ages and how apostasies and restorations have occurred as discussed under the topic "World's Stream of Religious Thought."

CHAPTER 10—THE GOSPEL GIVEN TO FATHER ADAM—PAGES 58-65

Discuss: Show how "the fall" was a spiritual death. Why has it been absolutely necessary for Father Adam and his posterity to receive divine revelation? Make a list of as many Gospel principles and ordinances as you can that were revealed to Adam. What is meant by the Adamic language? Describe the "Book of Remembrance." Of what importance is Priesthood in the plan of salvation? What position does Adam hold in the Priesthood? Who is Michael the Archangel? Read carefully and analyze the account given in the Pearl of Great Price of Adam's receiving the Gospel. What did Joseph Smith and Brigham Young teach regarding Adam's having the Gospel? List all the available evidence sustaining the statement that Adam had the same Gospel that we have today.

CHAPTER 11—THE GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS—PAGES 66-71

Discuss: Explain when and by whom the phrase "Gospel dispensations" has been used. Give the meaning of Gospel dispensations. What part in the Gospel plan was played by Adam in the spirit world prior to his coming into mortality? What is Adam's place in the Gospel plan in mortality? Describe the important council meeting which is to be held at Adam-Ondi-Ahman. Describe some of the leading events in the Adamic dispensation. Tell the story of Enoch as found in the Book of Moses. Give evidence which shows that Enoch had the Gospel. Describe Enoch's vision. Describe Enoch's great accomplishments.

CHAPTER 12—GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS FROM NOAH TO JESUS—PAGES 72-81

Discuss: In what respects was Noah the second father of humanity? List the evidences which prove that Noah had the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Describe Noah's work. What is meant by the Patriarchal dispensation? How did it come about that Abraham received the Gospel and the Priesthood? List Abraham's righteous desires. From whom did Abraham receive the Priesthood? Explain that the holding of the Priesthood is evidence of one's having the true Gospel. List the items which show that Abraham had the Gospel. What is meant by a covenant? Discuss the nine points given in the text relative to God's covenant with Abraham. In what respect are all members of the Church of Jesus Christ accounted Abraham's seed? Discuss the "Chosen People" concept and show its force in human history. Give a short description of Moses' life. What evidence is available to prove that Moses had the Gospel? What is meant by the Law of Moses? What was its principal purpose? Did the Hebrews have the Gospel from Moses' time to Jesus'? Did they hold the Melchizedek Priesthood? Did any other ancient peoples have the Gospel of Jesus Christ besides the Israelites, Jaredites, and Nephites? Who was Jethro and what proof do we have that he had the Gospel? Answer the foregoing question as applied to Melchizedek.

CHAPTER 13—GOSPEL DISPENSATIONS IN ANCIENT AMERICA—PAGES 82-89

Discuss: Which prophet was the religious leader and founder of the Jaredite dispensation? Tell the story of his great vision. List all the evidence available that he had the Gospel. Tell the story of the Jaredite dispensation. Which prophets began the Nephite dispensation? Evaluate the Nephites as a religious people. Give evidence to show that the Book of Mormon contained the Gospel. Make a list of the principal Nephite prophets and teachers. Did the Nephites live under the Law of Moses or were they governed entirely by the Gospel? Describe the Church of Christ as it operated throughout Nephite history. According to available records, when in history were people first called Christians? Read the teachings of the Master as recorded in Third Nephi.

CHAPTER 14—THE MERIDIAN AND FULLNESS OF TIMES—PAGES 90-95

Discuss: Why is the Christian dispensation of special importance in this course of study? What is meant by "the Great Apostasy"? Give evidence that a Great Apostasy occurred. What is meant by the Reformation? Make a list of as many Protestant reformers as you can. What was the principal reason why the reformers could not establish the true Church of Jesus Christ? What were the views of Ralph Waldo Emerson regarding Christianity of his day? What is meant by the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times? In what respects does it differ from other dispensations? Why has it been declared to be the greatest of all dispensations? List evidences supporting the claim of the restoration of the Gospel to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

CHAPTER 15—CHILDREN OF GOD—PAGES 96-103

Discuss: In what respect are men the offspring of God? What is the origin of the "children of God" belief? Describe a spirit-being from the evidence given in the vision beheld by the Brother of Jared and Doctrine and Covenants, 129. Give evidence that the Hebrew prophets understood the doctrine that we are spirit children of God. Did Jesus believe literally in the Fatherhood of God? What is the Mormon concept regarding our Heavenly Parents? Study carefully the poem "O My Father" for the purpose of observing its teachings of a Mother as well as a Father in heaven. Are there any resemblances between the teachings of the pagans on man's being a child of God and the teachings of the Gospel? Observe one by one the teachings of the various pagan groups on this doctrine. Why should their teachings resemble Mormonism?

CHAPTER 16—MEN MAY BECOME GODS—PAGES 104-113

Discuss: Why is Jesus sometimes referred to as "the Son of Man"? According to Joseph F. Smith, Orson Hyde, and Daniel H. Wells, what is the principal difference between God and man? Study carefully Joseph Smith's statement on page 105 in which he declares God to be an exalted man. Which Mormon first taught the doctrine that "men may become Gods"? Who is responsible for the following statement: "As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become"? Give the available evidence supporting the doctrine that men may become Gods. What is the evidence supporting the doctrine of the plurality of Gods? Did the early Christian Fathers know of the Gospel doctrine of men's becoming Gods?—Give proof supporting your answer. Compare the pagans' beliefs of deification with the doctrine of men's becoming Gods. Which statement made by one of the Mystery Religions resembles most closely the statement (previously discussed) made by Lorenzo Snow? Study the poem—"Man's Destiny"—for the purpose of getting President Snow's beautifully expressed ideas of men's becoming Gods.

CHAPTER 17—"THEN SHALL THEY BE GODS"—PAGES 114-123

Discuss: What are the requirements to reach the exalted station of Godhood? In what respects do Gods differ from other intelligent beings? How did the Eternal Father become God? Describe the personality of God. What did Joseph Smith teach regarding the way in which men may become Gods? Compare the teachings of the Gospel and those of paganism on knowledge of Deity as an avenue to Godhood. Explain how celestial marriage is the crowning Gospel ordinance. Distinguish between celestial marriage and plural marriage. Was celestial marriage practiced by the ancient patriarchs? Have any individuals besides Jesus who have lived in mortality become Gods? What is the principal difference between a God and an angel? Compare the pagans' concept of celestial marriage and the Catholics' practice of the same doctrine. Do the practices of either of them have any relationship to the true doctrine of man's becoming a God? Explain.

CHAPTER 18—THE IMMORTALITY OF MAN—PAGES 124-129

Discuss: How extensive in the world is the belief in immortality? According to Dr. Bennion and Joseph Addison, why do human beings believe that they are immortal? Study carefully the teachings of the prophets, especially Joseph Smith's, regarding immortality. Explain how the life, intelligence, or mind of man is eternally existent. What is meant by an "intelligence"? Describe, as far as we have the information, eternally existent intelligences. If we are as old as God the Eternal Father (both being eternal), then explain how He became our Father. Describe the spirit world and spirit-beings according to the teachings of the prophets. What evidences do we have in mortality that we had a pre-mortal existence? Review briefly the Latter-day Saints' concept of post-mortal life.

CHAPTER 19—UNIVERSALITY OF THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY—PAGES 130-137

Discuss: Which mortal received first the knowledge of the immortality of man? Prove your answer. Is there as much information concerning immortality in the Old Testament as there is in the other scriptures? Quote the choice Old Testament statements regarding immortality. Make a list of Jesus' teachings on the subject. Read Paul's entire discourse on immortality given to the saints at Corinth and compare his teachings with those of the other prophets. Compare the teachings on immortality in the Book of Mormon with those found in our other scriptures. What did Lao-Tze and Confucius teach regarding immortality? Did the Egyptians believe in immortality? Describe the Sumerian burial practices and compare them with those of the Egyptians. Compare the immortality doctrine of the Mystery Religions with the concept held by the Christians. Do many of the most brilliant modern scientists believe in immortality? Give evidence to sustain your answer. Since it has been pointed out in the text that the belief in immortality is universal, give reasons why such should be the case. As members of the Church of Jesus Christ, what direct evidence do you have that we are immortal?

CHAPTER 20—WE SHALL BE JUDGED—PAGES 138-144

Discuss: Will we literally stand before the judgment seat of God and give account of the lives we have lived in mortality? What did Paul teach regarding our moral responsibility? What is the basis of God's judgment of our actions? Give evidences from the scriptures sustaining the doctrine of a final judgment day. Who will be the principal judge of the human family? Are men to be held accountable for their thoughts as well as for their words and actions? Is the Christian religion the only one which teaches the doctrine of a final judgment? Describe the teaching of a final judgment of the Egyptians, Persians, and the people of India. Compare the teachings of the Old Testament, New Testament and Book of Mormon on the final judgment. According to the beliefs in Mithraism, what was Mithra's principal function? Who were Persephone and Pluto? What were their principal functions in the Eleusinian Mysteries? Describe the Orphic beliefs of the next world and the final judgment. What is the source of the belief in a final judgment?

CHAPTER 21—THE MESSIANIC HOPE—PAGES 145-151

Discuss: What is meant by the Messianic hope? What is the origin of such a belief? Have there been any other religions in world's history which believed in a Messiah (Savior) other than the true Gospel? Describe Enoch's knowledge of the Messiah. Give evidence that the Jaredites also knew that a Messiah should come into the world. List all the teachings and practices you can which sustain the thesis that the Hebrews had a Messianic hope. Compare the teachings of the Bible and the Book of Mormon regarding the Messiah.

CHAPTER 22—THE BELIEF IN A SAVIOR-GOD—PAGES 152-160

Discuss: What is the purpose of chapter 22? Give evidence that the belief in a Savior-God was universal. Compare the traditions regarding Prometheus, Buddha, and Krishna with the prophecies and life of Jesus Christ. What is the contents of the Messianic prophesy found in the ancient Chinese religion as quoted on page 154? Who was Quetzalcoalt? In what respects did traditions regarding him resemble our knowledge of Jesus? Make a list of the savior-gods of the Mystery Religions and compare the beliefs regarding them with our knowledge of the true Savior. Were there any beliefs held by the Mystery Religions which resembled the Gospel concept of God the Father and Mary the mother of Jesus? While reading this chapter, it would be of value to make a list of beliefs regarding the pagan savior-gods and then note the relationship of each of those beliefs with one or another of the teachings regarding Jesus Christ. What is the source of all the pagans' savior-god concepts?

CHAPTER 23—THE ONE DIVINE SAVIOR-GOD—PAGES 161-166

Discuss: Why have many modern writers attempted to discredit the divinity of Jesus? Do the most reputable scholars of early Christian history believe that the New Testament accounts give a true history of Jesus? Discuss the evidence that Mormons have in addition to that of other Christian churches regarding the divinity of Jesus. What is the principal purpose of the Book of Mormon? Discuss Joseph Smith's testimonies regarding the divinity of Jesus Christ. What were the signs which were to accompany the birth and the death of the Savior according to Samuel the Lamanite? Note the appropriateness of those signs. Which religions held a belief in a new star as a sign of a birth of a savior or a great personage? Compare Zoroaster's prophesy and the story of the wise men as told in Matthew. Discuss the conclusion of this chapter.

CHAPTER 24—JESUS AND THE SORROWS OF HUMANITY—PAGES 167-176

Discuss: What is the purpose of this lesson? Why do human beings suffer? Discuss the birth of Jesus and the greatness of His personality. What problems did Jesus meet during the earlier years of His life which helped to prepare Him to understand the sorrows of humanity? Did Jesus and the people of Nazareth know when He was a boy that He was to be the Savior of the world? Did Jesus grow and develop gradually as you and I do? How perfect did Jesus become while in mortality? On what occasion did Jesus receive the direct announcement of His Messiahship? What was John the Baptist's testimony regarding Jesus as the Messiah? In what respects did Jesus fail to fulfill the Jewish Messianic hope? Analyze the course of life that Jesus chose to follow. In what ways did the Savior give hope to suffering humanity? What did Isaiah prophesy regarding the suffering of Jesus? Describe Jesus' suffering. What was the purpose of His suffering? Through His victory over sin and death, the Savior assured man of what great blessing?

CHAPTER 25—ATONEMENT THROUGH SACRIFICE—PAGES 177-184

Discuss: What part did the use of blood as a means to purge one from sin play in ancient religions? What were the Bible's teachings regarding blood? State the purpose of this lesson. What part did the atoning blood of Jesus play in the redemption of man? In what sense have all of us passed through "the fall"? List the qualities which Jesus had which fitted Him to atone for the sins of man. To whom was the atonement doctrine first revealed? Discuss the events connected therewith. What was the purpose of the law of sacrifice as revealed to Adam and practiced in ancient Israel? In what respects may some of the Hebrew priests have misinterpreted the law of sacrifice? Discuss the teachings of the prophets regarding the Hebrew practice of sacrifice. Why was it necessary for the blood of Jesus to be shed? Compare the efficacy of the shedding of Jesus' blood with that of shedding of animals' blood.

CHAPTER 26—PAGAN BELIEFS OF ATONEMENT THROUGH SACRIFICE—PAGES 185-191

Discuss: What is the origin of the pagan beliefs of atonement through sacrifice? Describe the blood atonement practices of the Eleusinian Mysteries. How did the Orphic worshipers attain regeneration? Discuss the extreme practices in the Dionysian Mysteries. What is meant by "The Bacchae"? Who was Euripides? What was the pagans' belief regarding the blood of Dionysus? What was the origin of the pagans' practices of human and animal sacrifices and the principal philosophy back of those practices? Define and describe taurobolium, also criobolium. What is the true meaning of the phrase "washed in the blood of the Lamb"?

CHAPTER 27—THE TRUE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM—PAGES 192-199

Discuss: To whom must we look to find the origin of baptism and the other principles and ordinances of the Gospel? Give proof that baptism is essential to our gaining eternal life. Describe Adam's experiences connected with his baptism. Give proof that during Enoch's day the saints of God became church members through the ordinance of baptism. Did Noah know of the ordinance of baptism? Was baptism practiced by God's chosen people during the period from Noah to Jesus? Are there quotations in the Old Testament on baptism? What evidence do we have that the Jews practiced baptism? Did Lehi receive the ordinance of baptism from the Jews? Discuss Nephi's and Jacob's knowledge of baptism. Study carefully the doctrine of baptism as taught in the Book of Mormon. What changes did the Nephites make in the ordinance of baptism? Has baptism been a vital Gospel ordinance in the true Church of Jesus Christ from Adam's day to the present time?

CHAPTER 28—BAPTISM IN CHRISTENDOM—PAGES 200-206

Discuss: Tell the story of Christian baptism's being instituted in Jesus' day. What was Jesus' statement to Nicodemus on the necessity of baptism? Discuss the proper mode of baptism. Give evidence from ancient sources which prove that immersion was the mode of baptism practiced in the early Christian period. What is meant by "baptism by Spirit"? What three points on baptism as practiced during New Testament days are listed in the text? What commission did the Savior give to His apostles following His resurrection? Describe Peter's teachings on baptism. Give the story of the Christians' changing immersion to sprinkling. What were the principal causes for the Catholics' instituting infant baptism? What is meant by godparents? Describe the development of elaborate ceremonialism in Christian baptism. What connection does Priesthood have to baptism? What is meant by the three kinds of baptism in the Catholic Church today?

CHAPTER 29—PAGAN INFLUENCES ON CHRISTIAN BAPTISM—PAGES 207-213

Discuss: Whence came all of the changes discussed in the last chapter from the true order of baptism as established by Jesus Christ? What was the social and religious heritage of Christianity of the fifth century A.D.? What were the principal causes of the Great Apostasy? Did the pagans practice baptism? Describe the baptism practices of the Eleusinian Mysteries. What were the fundamental beliefs regarding baptism in this religion? What was the source of those beliefs? Discuss the validity of Tertullian's argument of the superiority of Christian baptism over pagan baptisms. Compare Christian and Mithraic baptism practices. Which pagan religions had the practice of feeding their newly baptized converts a diet of "milk and honey"? What effect did these practices have on Christianity? For what purpose did the pagans robe their baptized converts in white? What is the origin of the arduous preparatory training for baptism which was adopted by the Catholic Church under the name of catechumenate? Describe the Isiac baptism practices. What are the roots of the ordinance of baptism?

CHAPTER 30—REPENTANCE AND REBIRTH—PAGES 214-218

Discuss: What is the purpose of this lesson? What part has repentance played in Gospel history? What commandments were given to Adam and Enoch in regards to repentance? In what respects is repentance a spiritual rebirth? What is the relationship of repentance to baptism? List and discuss the constants in baptism practices. Contrast the teachings of repentance and rebirth in Hermeticism with similar teachings of the prophets of God. What is the relationship of baptism and rebirth as taught by the ancient pagans? What is Dr. Willoughby's opinion in regards to the quotation from Mithraic literature found on page 218 of the text?

CHAPTER 31—THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISM RESTORED—PAGES 219-226

Discuss: What causes were responsible for adulterating the ordinance of baptism during the Catholic period? Why could not the Protestant reformers restore the true ordinance of baptism? Discuss briefly the principal points in the story of the restoration of the Gospel to Joseph Smith. What keys did John the Baptist restore to Joseph and Oliver? Discuss the events connected with the baptism of Joseph and Oliver. When and where and to whom was the Melchizedek Priesthood restored in this dispensation of the Gospel? What are the principal items regarding baptism which were revealed to the Prophet Joseph? On what conditions are baptisms valid and acceptable to God? Who shall have the privilege of being baptized? Study carefully the doctrine of baptism for the dead. What proof is there that baptism for the dead was practiced in ancient times? Present to the class some of Joseph Smith's teachings regarding baptism. Discuss the contents of the conclusions of this chapter.

CHAPTER 32—THE SACRAMENT OR THE HOLY EUCHARIST—PAGES 227-233

Discuss: What is meant by Holy Eucharist? Give the story of the instituting of the Sacrament. Compare the teachings of Matthew and Mark on Sacrament with those of Luke, Paul, and the Book of Mormon. In what respect was Jesus the true Paschal Lamb? Give Dr. Gore's interpretation of Paul's teachings. Examine carefully the Book of Mormon record for the purpose of getting an understanding of the true meaning of Sacrament. What interpretation did Justin Martyr and Ireaneus put on Holy Eucharist? Read and discuss Jesus' sermon on "the Bread of Life" for the purpose of finding the Catholic justification for their interpretation of Sacrament. Discuss the interpretation of the Holy Eucharist given by John of Damascus, Cyril, Gregory, and St. Augustine. Tell the story of the controversy during the middle ages over the conversion and symbolic theories. What is meant by transubstantiation? Who is credited with first using the term transubstantiation as applied to the Sacrament? What contributions did Thomas Aquinas make to the Catholic Holy Eucharist doctrine?

CHAPTER 33—PAGAN INFLUENCES ON THE EUCHARIST DOCTRINE—PAGES 234-239

Discuss: What are the principal points of emphasis in this lesson? What is the origin of the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation? Discuss the eucharistic beliefs and practices in the Dionysian Mysteries and compare those practices with the doctrine of transubstantiation. Tell the story of the Orphic sacrament of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of the pagan god Zagreus. What did Professor Robertson-Smith say was the custom among the Arabs of the Sinai region? Compare the sacraments of the Cybele-Attis Mysteries and of the Eleusinian Mysteries with the doctrine as established by Jesus. What charge did Justin Martyr make against the Mithraic sacrament? Note carefully the religious syncretism that took place during the early Christian centuries for a picture of pagan influences on the Eucharist doctrine. What is the probable origin of pagan sacraments? What evidence do we have that Melchizedek gave the Sacrament to Father Abraham?

CHAPTER 34—RESTORATON OF THE TRUE SACRAMENT RITE—PAGES 240-244

Discuss: Give the reasons for Joseph Smith's instituting the practice of partaking of the Sacrament in the Church of Jesus Christ. According to revelations received by the Prophet Joseph, what are the purposes of the Sacrament ordinance? Explain how Sacrament should be properly administered. Where can we find copies of the blessings on the bread and wine (water)? Why do Mormons usually serve water instead of wine as one of the Sacrament emblems? Who shall partake of the Sacrament?

CHAPTER 35—THE GOLDEN RULE—PAGES 245-250

Discuss: What would be the result in the world if everybody lived the "Golden Rule"? Study carefully Jesus' statements of the Golden Rule and His enlargement on the same doctrine in the Sermon on the Mount. Are there other teachings of the Master and actions which show beyond doubt that He sincerely believed the Golden Rule? Did any other world religions proclaim a doctrine similar to the Christian Golden Rule? Compare the statements of the Golden Rule made by various religious teachers. Why are they so much alike? Contrast the philosophy of Nazism and Nietzsche with the teachings of the Golden Rule. Give examples of practical application of the Golden Rule in governments. Compare the teachings of outstanding religious leaders, such as Zoroaster, Confucius, Lao-Tze, and Buddha with the teachings of the prophets (pages 248-250). What is the source of the true teachings of all of these religious leaders?

CHAPTER 36—THE STORY OF THE EARTH (PROCLAIMED BY THE PROPHETS)—PAGES 251-256

Discuss: What is the purpose of this lesson? Discuss the most vital points in the creation accounts given by the prophets. Contrast the creation stories in the three scriptures. What erroneous concept regarding the creating of the earth was held by various Christian denominations in Joseph Smith's day? What light was thrown on this subject by the Prophet? Discuss briefly the Hebrew golden age story. What is meant by telestializing the earth? Was the earth ever baptized? Discuss the teachings of the prophets in regards to the earth being cleansed by fire. When will the earth be a terrestrial orb? What changes will take place before that condition is realized? What is meant by celestializing the earth? Describe the place where God dwells. Describe the earth after it is celestialized.

CHAPTER 37—THE STORY OF THE EARTH (COMPARATIVE RELIGIOUS TRADITIONS)—PAGES 257-263

Discuss: What is the difference between the contents of this lesson and the previous one? Did the great nations of antiquity other than the Hebrews preserve legends of the creation of the world, of the origin of man, of a golden age, of the fall, of the deluge and of the future rejuvenation of the earth? What was the source of the traditions of antiquity? Compare the Babylonian creation story with the one found in Genesis. Study Dr. Price's summary (page 258). How do we account for the golden age tradition being among practically every people of antiquity? Which tradition of a golden age found among peoples other than the Hebrews do you think is the most striking and true? Make a list of all the items of conditions that existed during the golden age as proclaimed in the traditions of various peoples and compare the list with the Bible account. Compare the fall of man account in Genesis and the one recorded on the Babylonian tablets. Which ancient writers recorded a deluge (flood) story? Compare the Babylonian flood account with the story recorded in Genesis. What is meant by the rejuvenation of the earth? Why are there so many similarities in the religions of the world? Study the conclusions made by Dr. Ira M. Price and compare those conclusions with what we have previously pointed out in the text.

CHAPTER 38—THE HOPE OF A BETTER WORLD—PAGES 264-270

Discuss: Give reasons for the Gospel of Jesus Christ's being placed on the earth. Have any other peoples besides the Biblical groups believed that a Millennium would be established? Is it possible for people to establish a "good society" and live in almost perfect righteousness? Study the social conditions that prevailed in the three examples of the good society which are listed in the text. What were the basic principles which made these social groups righteous? Which of the Old Testament prophets predicted the establishment of a good society? Upon what principles did they believe that that society would be founded? Discuss Isaiah's description of the Millennium. What did Christ teach would be the basis of a good society? Study John the Revelator's vision of the millennial reign of the Lord and the establishment of the New Jerusalem. After Jesus' resurrection, did the Christians look for Him to return to earth? What did Paul prophesy would happen before that event occurred?

CHAPTER 39—UTOPIAN AND ZION CONCEPTS—PAGES 271-276

Discuss: Who were the authors of "famous Utopian writings"? What are the main points in Plato's Republic? What is meant by The City of God? What is the outstanding feature of Sir Thomas More's Utopia? What book did Francis Bacon write? What is meant by The City of the Sun? What caused James Harrington to write Oceana? Look at the list of other Utopian writings on page 273. What is meant by "Utopian Socialists"? What was their main purpose? Have any writers during the past century produced Utopian literature? Tell the story of Savonarola's good society experiment? Why did it finally fail? Of what importance has America been in communist and cooperative experiments? What was "the overwhelming religious motivation of the period in American history when Joseph Smith was born and when the Gospel of Jesus Christ was restored to earth"?

CHAPTER 40—THE MORMONS' ZION CONCEPT—PAGES 277-285

Discuss: What is the purpose and principal viewpoint of this lesson? What was the historical setting of Joseph Smith's millennial hope? What additional information did the Prophet receive on this subject in the Book of Mormon? What is the background in regards to Joseph Smith's receiving revelations regarding the building of Zion? What did Enoch prophesy regarding Zion? Tell the story of locating Zion. What conditions contributed to Zion's favorable location? According to Joseph Smith, where is Zion? What does Zion mean? Tell the story of the attempts to establish Zion in Missouri. Why were the Mormons driven out of Independence? What is meant by Zion's Camp? Do the Mormons still expect to build the New Jerusalem in Missouri? Study the details of the Millennium as revealed to Joseph Smith and contrast his knowledge of this great event with what had been revealed to the prophets of old. Who shall participate in building the New Jerusalem? What is meant by "the great and dreadful day of the Lord"?

CHAPTER 41—THE DYNAMICS OF MORMONISM—PAGES 286-295

Discuss: What is the scope of the story of the Gospel Through the Ages? Which is the greatest of the Gospel dispensations? Why? List reasons why it was necessary for God to restore the Gospel to Joseph Smith. Discuss briefly the story of the First Vision and the other important incidents connected with the restoration of the Gospel. What is meant by "the true and living Church"? Who holds the keys of the Priesthood? Discuss the belief held by Mormons that they are servants of God. Give examples. What are the strong points of Church government officered by the laity? Give proof that Mormonism produces powerful leaders. In what respects is Mormonism a practical religion? How does the doctrine of progressive eternalism help to make Mormonism a living Church? Give evidence to show that this Church teaches the true concept of God. Of what value is testimony in the Church of Jesus Christ? How do Church members get their testimonies? Discuss the conclusions at the end of the chapter.

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 1:6, 30.
[^2] Ibid., 28:7.
[^3] Ibid., 1:8.
[^4] Mark 16:15.
[^5] E. L. Thorndike, "The Production, Retention and Attraction of American Men of Science," Science, XC (Lancaster, Pa., August 16, 1940), pp. 137-141.
[^6] Moses 1:39.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 14:7.
[^8] Ibid., 29:34.
[^9] John 14:8-9.
[^10] Ibid., 8:19.
[^11] Ibid., 10:36.
[^12] Ibid., 17:3.
