Mark E. Hurst, Executive Secretary, Young Men General Committee

The sacrament is one of the most sacred ordinances in which Church members can participate. While the ordinance itself is rather simple, its significance for those who participate—both as recipients and as officiators—is essential. The renewal each week of covenants made earlier, at the time of baptism, enables those who partake to recommit themselves to live in accordance with the example of Jesus Christ.

As an officiator at the sacrament table, worthy priests or Melchizedek Priesthood bearers who have been given this assignment are in a unique position to enhance the spiritual experience of those participating in the ordinance.

Since the sacramental prayers are actually scripture (Moro. 4:3; Moro. 5:2; D&C 20:77, 79), the Lord has given us specific instructions as to the manner of asking blessings upon the bread and the water. The worthy and reverent offering of these prayers can make a great difference in whether the ordinance of the sacrament is highly spiritual or merely perfunctory. Aaronic Priesthood curriculum materials for priest-age young men recommend memorization of the prayers. Studying and understanding the purpose of the sacrament and the significance of the prayers can also greatly improve the effectiveness of those chosen to perform the ordinance. As in most things, preparation and practice will lessen the chance of making mistakes when repeating the prayers. Even though the prayers should still be read from the cards provided (or from the scriptures), familiarization with and memorization of the prayers by those who will read them will enable the officiator to have a confidence and a knowledge that will bring reverent and spiritual offering of the prayers.

Everyone makes mistakes from time to time, however, and knowing that they can be easily corrected often brings even greater confidence and less likelihood of making mistakes. If the officiator makes a mistake and corrects it immediately, it is not necessary to repeat the entire prayer. If the mistake is not corrected by the officiator, it is the responsibility of the bishop to sensitively and without embarrassment direct that the prayer be repeated.

Partaking of the sacrament is one of the most important purposes of the sacrament meeting. In addition to the importance of the ordinance itself, it is here that the atmosphere for the remainder of the sacrament meeting is set. It prepares those in attendance to be in tune with the Spirit and to more fully benefit from the gospel teachings that should follow. Those who officiate at the sacrament table should do so with a sense of great reverence for the blessings they assist in bringing to those who partake of the sacrament.
