Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Preface

Elijah is one of the most enigmatic figures of the Old Testament. He appears suddenly, with no prior reader preparation or background information. His first words are an oath and a curse. He is fed by ravens in the wilderness, denounces the acts of the monarchy, calls a fiery blast from heaven atop Mount Carmel, and then retreats to the wilderness to commune with the Lord. He exits in a blaze of glory, transported by a chariot and horses of fire, causing his departure to be even more dramatic and sudden than was his arrival. Then, without as much as a passing reference to Elijah for hundreds of years, the last recorded words in the Old Testament foretell his future return to prepare the world for the coming of the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" (Malachi 4:5-6).

Who was this man? What do we know of him? How was his ministry a type of the Lord's coming? What does Malachi's prophecy of his return foreshadow? How was the prophecy fulfilled or, better yet, how is it being fulfilled? What does all of this mean to each of us, and why is it so critically important? In his book The Holy Temple, Elder Boyd K. Packer stated, "Elijah and his ministry are worthy of a book." [^1]Written in response to that suggestion, this book is but a beginning in the valuable quest to explore the history and significance of the mission of the prophet and to understand the meaning of "the spirit of Elijah."

It would not be an exaggeration to say that the brief references to Elijah in the King James Version of the Holy Bibleseven short chapters in the books of 1 and 2 Kings, a mention in 2 Chronicles, the two verses at the end of the book of Malachi, and a few references in the New Testamenthave generated thousands of traditions and tens of thousands of pages of commentary. In preparation for this book I have checked so many sources, studied so many maps and lexicons, and read so many books, articles, and monographs that I have lost count of their number. But after all the searching, reading, and note taking, there is something wonderfully refreshing about prayerfully seeking the influence of the Spirit and then simply reading and pondering afresh the words of the biblical text that recount the history of Elijah. Thus, in the midst of this search, I have earnestly sought the illumination of the Spirit to enlighten me about what really happened and what it means.

The completion of this work owes a great deal to the encouragement and assistance of others. The inspiration for studying this topic comes from the deep love I have for my eternal companion, Tricia. Reflecting on the covenants we have made has aroused an intense interest about the significance of the prophet Elijah's involvement with the priesthood keys that make those covenants eternally binding. Together my sweetheart and I have spent considerable time searching for our ancestors and performing ordinances for them in the temples of the Lord. The "spirit of Elijah" has been poured out upon us in rich abundance as we have concentrated on this labor of love. Blessings have come to us in all aspects of our lives, often at unexpected moments and from unanticipated directions. The more we have enjoyed of that special spirit, the greater my desire has become to understand it more fully. This book is the result of a quest to answer some of the questions I have asked about this topic over the years.

My arrival at Brigham Young University in 1989 afforded me added opportunity to seriously pursue the study of Elijah's life and mission. Many have assisted me in that study. Brant Bishop and Jared Smartt began the research. Mark Sheffield, Gary Ellis, Bryce Earl, and Ryan Moffat continued it. I am deeply indebted to James Howard for sorting through all the traditions and organizing them in such a way that I could present a brief sampling of them in the appendixes. Patrick Thurston rendered the valuable service of closely reviewing the manuscript and making textual suggestions. I am especially grateful for my friends and colleagues Robert L. Millet and Robert J. Matthews, who have given me continual encouragement for this undertaking and have provided significant insights into the topic.

To all who have given insights, added clarification for my thoughts, or participated in any manner in bringing this work to fruition, I extend my sincere appreciation. Yet, in the end, this book is a personal expression of my understanding of the life and mission of Elijah. It is not an official statement of either Brigham Young University or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

---
Notas:
[^1] William Hamilton Barnes, Studies in the Chronology of the Divided Monarchy of Israel (Harvard University, 1991), 153.
