Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter One

The Setting

The ancient kingdom of Israel had enjoyed an era of great territorial expansion and increased international power under the leadership of its king, David, the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, who ruled from about 1010 to 970 b.c. [^1]But as the narrative about Elijah begins, those days were long since past. Few people still lived who had firsthand knowledge of the glories of the reign of King Solomon, who had assumed the throne at the death of his father, King David. A greater number remained who had lived in the days of Solomon's son and successor, Rehoboam. Some of them remembered that Rehoboam had decided to raise taxes on the already burdened tribes of Israel and that, in response, the leaders of the people comprising the northern ten tribes had rejected Rehoboam as their king. Those ten tribes chose instead to follow the leadership of Jeroboam, of the tribe of Ephraim, and seceded from the union previously known as the "United Kingdom." The new confederacy formed by these ten tribes maintained the national name of Israel, while the remaining southern tribes who followed Rehoboam adopted the name of Judah for their kingdom.

Jeroboam, newly appointed as king by the northern tribes, worried that his confederation would crumble if the people continued their worship of Jehovah, the God of Israel. To do so would require them to offer sacrifices according to the law of Moses at the great temple in Jerusalem, which was then under the control of his enemy Judah. He therefore instituted a perverted form of Jehovah worship at Dan and Bethel, cities at the northern and southern extremities of his kingdom. At those sites he set up golden calves, which he commanded his people to worship. In reviewing Jeroboam's life, the Old Testament continually refers to him with the epithet "he made Israel to sin" (1 Kings 15:26).

Let it be noted here that there are many theories about the authorship of the Old Testament books of 1 and 2 Kings, but all are conjectural. [^2]1 Kings 19:3 provides a clue by referring to the city of Beersheba as one "which belongeth to Judah," perhaps suggesting that the author of that portion of the text was from the northern kingdom of Israel. It seems clear that whoeversingular or pluralwrote these books was primarily concerned with recording the children of Israel's maintenance of their peculiar covenant relationship with Jehovah. This covenant was originally made with their ancestor Abraham (see Genesis 17, Abraham 2-3), the Lord promising him and his descendants certain choice blessings if they would faithfully be His ministers and carry His message and power to all peoples of the earth. It was from such a perspective that the author(s) of the books of Kings made strong judgmental statements like those recorded about Jeroboam.

Roughly thirty years and several ruling houses after Jeroboam's death, Omri, the captain of the army of Israel, became king. There followed several years of civil war in which Omri contended for the throne with Tibni, another leader of the people. Ultimately, Omri and his followers prevailed. He was the fifth king of Israel to follow Jeroboam. Like his predecessors, who were without exception labeled as wicked by the author of 1 Kings, [^3]Omri followed and undoubtedly promoted the perverted Jehovah worship instigated by Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel.

Omri reigned only twelve years. Midway through his reign he purchased a virgin hill and began building his new capital city, which he called Samaria. Ahab, Omri's son and successor, continued and greatly expanded Samaria's construction. Additionally, he conducted major building projects in prominent fortress cities such as Megiddo and Hazor. Early in the 20th century a.d., archaeologists excavated the site of ancient Samaria, uncovering the magnificent palace of Omri, which Ahab enlarged, with its abundance of ivory objects in confirmation of the scriptural account in 1 Kings 22:39 referring to "the ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built." [^4]This era of growth and expansion displayed a certain sense of grandeur that permitted it to be compared with the reign of Solomon, allowing the northern kingdom and Samaria to be a true rival of Judah and its capital, Jerusalem. Omri thus established a legacy sufficiently significant that when Assyria conquered Israel more than a century later, the conquerors referred to their victory as being over the "house of Omri," [^5]even though the dynasty he founded had long since expired.

The era of Omri and Ahab was one of commercial expansion. It appears to have been a time of dramatic increase in business activity. Syrian "streets"probably business districts controlled by Syrian merchantswere established in Samaria under Omri, and Israelite "streets" in Damascus, the capital of Syria, under Ahab (see 1 Kings 20:34). The result of all this was a great disparity between the rich and powerful upper class and the poor, defenseless lower class. Such social inequality would bring the condemnation of later prophets. Interestingly, the author of 1 Kings says little about the economic achievements of the era. His relative silence parallels the prophet Mormon's glossing over all the temporal accomplishments of King Noah in the book of Mosiah. Both authors view history through lenses focused on the spiritual well-being of people, not the economic climate.

Geographically and politically, the kingdom of Israel was surrounded by opponents: Judah to the south, Phoenicia to the northwest, and Syria to the northeast. 1 Kings 20:34 makes brief scriptural reference to the fact that Syria had conquered and taken certain cities from Israel in the days of Omri. Following the period of internal civil strife during which his reign began, Omri sought both to unify his kingdom internally and to secure peace externally through political alliances with neighboring rulers. The loss of territory to the king of Syria likely prompted Omri to turn to the Phoenicians for alliances, probably resulting in the arranged marriage between Omri's son Ahab and Jezebel, "the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians" (1 Kings 16:31).

The mention of Ethbaal brings us to his city, Tyre. Tyre (the modern Sur) lies about 25 miles south of Sidonboth cities being on the Mediterranean coast of modern Lebanonand about 28 miles north of the coastal city of Akko in modern Israel. Tyre was, at that time, an island fortress (see Ezekiel 27:32). Centuries later, during the time of Alexander the Great, the city was connected to the mainland by a dike that has broadened over the centuries and now forms a peninsula. [^6]During Solomon's golden age, he made alliance with Hiram, king of Tyre, who provided materials for building the great temple in Jerusalem (see 1 Kings 5). It appears as though during the following decades the kings of Tyre consolidated their control over all the southern coast of Phoenicia, making them the kings of the Sidonians, or Phoenicians.

Prior to becoming king, Ethbaal had been a priest of the goddess Astarte. It appears that he usurped the throne following the murder of his brother. [^7]He began to rule at the age of 36 and reigned for about 32 years. [^8]He undoubtedly watched with concern the unrest and rapid succession of kings in the neighboring land of Israel. The desire for political stability likely motivated him and Omri to look favorably upon the union of their children Jezebel and Ahab. The marital union peacefully allied the two kingdoms in approximately 878-872 b.c. [^9]

This marriage was a turning point in Israel's history. Although Omri had presided over the decline of Israel's spiritual health to new depths (see 1 Kings 16:25), all that he did was only a prelude to the huge leap into the dark abyss that would be made by his son Ahab. Scripture records that "as if it had been a light thing" (1 Kings 16:31), or, to paraphrase, as if it had been insufficiently evil for Ahab to follow in the sins of Jeroboam, Ahab went a step farther by marrying an idolatress and then embracing the worship of her idol god, Baal. That is, Ahab not only married Jezebel but also married her god.

The very name "Jezebel" means essentially "Baal is prince." In general terms, Baal was the god of nature who, with his consort Asherahalso known as Astarte or Ashteroth (sometimes translated as "the grove(s)" in the Old Testament)presided over the pantheon of gods worshiped in much of the territory surrounding the kingdom of Israel. Epitomizing this fertility cult, Baal has sometimes been called the producing principle in nature and Asherah the receptive principle in nature. [^10]

Decades earlier, Jeroboam had set up altars in Dan and Bethel that were illegal under the law of Moses. Ahab now took the next giant, downward step by building a temple to Baal in Samaria wherein he erected an altar to this pagan deity. It was thus that idolatry, the archenemy of Israel's covenant with the true God, had not just crept in but been invited in as a welcomed guest. It was this act that resulted in the scriptural appraisal: "Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him" (1 Kings 16:33).

Some have viewed Ahab as a weak king for allowing his foreign-born queen to superimpose her religion over him and his people. While it seems clear that a Phoenician mentality penetrated all Israelite society under Jezebel's influence, it is hard to view Ahab as a weakling. He reigned over a prosperous and influential nation for 22 years, established a renown for his great building program, conquered the Syrian army under its king Ben-hadad (see 1 Kings 20:21), and then set up commercial enterprises in Damascus. He commanded an army of 2,000 chariots and 10,000 foot soldiers in a battle with Shalmaneser III of Assyria. [^11]It seems unlikely that such a man would have let Baal worship slip in the back door. He likely wanted to strengthen his hand in dealing with his neighboring kingdoms, both friend and foe. At that time Phoenicia, of which Tyre and Sidon formed a part, enjoyed great prosperity, sending commercial expeditions to distant ports and establishing colonies throughout the area. Jezebel came from the very family that in succeeding generations would establish the great ancient city of Carthage.

Ahab was thus not a weakling but was very clever. He seems to have felt that embracing the obviously successful Baal was progressive. But as part of his cunning, Ahab dared not totally forsake Jehovah. His people still worshiped at Jehovah's altars in Dan and Bethel, even though their worship had degenerated into a form of paganism. And he still had to coexist with neighboring Judah, where the law of Moses was followed and temple worship continued. Politically, then, if nothing more, Ahab maintained his affiliation with the God of Israel. He proceeded to offer overtures of peace to Judah, resulting in the first era of agreement between the two powers since the days of Solomon. The kings of the two countries joined forces to fight their common enemies, Syria and Moab (see 1 Kings 22, 2 Kings 3). Later, Israel and Judah even entered into political alliance through marriage. Athaliah, daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, married Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat of Judah (see 2 Kings 8:16-18).

Therefore, without abandoning Jehovah, Ahab nonetheless adopted Baal. While Jehovah provided the old, sure formula for maintaining control at home and political contacts with Judah, Baal seemed to be on the upswing and would cement Ahab's relations with his other neighbors. Ahab's actions exposed his ecumenical thoughts: "Why not invite Baal in to join Jehovah and have the best of both worlds?"

In the midst of such momentous changes the ancient city of Jericho was rebuilt (see 1 Kings 16:34). Its reconstruction raises several unanswered questions. Was it rebuilt as a fortress city on Israel's southern border to protect against advances by Judah or Moab? Was the builder, Hiel, a supervisor of construction under Ahab's direction or a freelancer at whose efforts Ahab only winked? Whatever the specific circumstances, it is clear that the curse placed by Joshua centuries earlier on the rebuilding of Jericho (see Joshua 6:26) was ignored and, thus, unwittingly activated. The king of Israel challenged or at least ignored this ancient curse at the same moment when a curse of much greater proportions descended upon his whole people because of the idolatry he initiated.

It appears that somehow the events surrounding Hiel's rebuilding of Jericho brought Ahab together with Elijah, the subject of this volume. Whatever countermeasures to Israel's growing idolatry the Lord may have taken up to that point in time, whatever priests or prophets had been charged with seeking to stop the spiritual slide of covenant Israel, now that wickedness had brazenly unveiled itself in the attitudes and practices of Ahab and Jezebel the Lord prepared a counteroffensive by unleashing his heavy artillery in the person of Elijah the Tishbite, who was, as one 17th-century cleric labeled him, "the eminentist prophet reserved for the corruptest age. [^12]

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Longking, "Elijah the Tishbite a Gentile," Methodist Review (November 1888): 901-11.
[^2] George Arthur Buttrick et al., eds., The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1952-57), 3:144-45.
[^3] Adam Clarke, The Holy Bible, . . . with a Commentary and Critical Notes, vol. 2 (New York: Phillips and Hunt, 1830), 452.
[^4] John A. Widtsoe, "Elijah, the Tishbite," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 27 (April 1936): 55.
[^5] Buttrick et al., Interpreter's Bible, 3:145.
[^6] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909-38), 4:195-96.
[^7] Clarke, The Holy Bible, 454-55.
[^8] John Gray, I & II Kings: A Commentary, 2d ed., rev. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1970), 378.
[^9] 9. Ibid., 144.
[^10] 10. Alfred Edersheim, Bible History: Old Testament, 7 vols. (1876-87; reprint, 7 vols. in 1, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), 5:178.
[^11] 11. Oppenheim, "Babylonian and Historical Texts," 278-79.
[^12] 12. Right Reverend Joseph Hall, D.D., Contemplations on the Historical Passages of the Old and New Testaments (London: T. Nelson and Sons, 1882), 279.
