Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Two

The Confrontation and the Brook

Speaking of those eras of history when general wickedness would prevail, Isaiah prophesied, "When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him" (Isaiah 59:19). Such a crisis existed in the days of Ahab and Jezebel. The flood of wickedness was about to devour all good before it, sweeping it into a dark sea of oblivion. A standard for righteousness needed to be erected; a power to stop the consuming flood must arise. To raise that standard of hope, Jehovah, the God of Israel, sent a prophet, Elijah the Tishbite, a man who spoke with and for the Almighty. Such individuals often appear to the carnal world as outsiders, as "strangers and pilgrims" (1 Peter 2:11). Elijah certainly fit that description. He appears abruptly, without introduction, in 1 Kings 17:1. His first words invoked the power of Israel's God to curse the land: "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word" (1 Kings 17:1). Who was this Elijah? Where did he come from? How old was he? What of his training and occupation and previous prophetic experience? Had he met the king before or was this their first encounter? So many questions without answers.

This mysterious figure appears so suddenly in the text as to catch the reader off guard. We are told only that he was Elijah the Tishbite, "of the inhabitants of Gilead" (1 Kings 17:1). What do the various aspects of this brief summary tell us? The name "Elijah" means "Jehovah is God," "Jehovah is my God," or "my God is Jehovah." This may have been his birth name, or perhaps it was the name attributed to him in adulthood due to the nature of his prophetic mission.

Gilead was that portion of ancient Israel east of the Jordan River. It is an area of rugged hills, dry forests, and open spaces, attributes that could be seen to fit Elijah's character as portrayed in the Old Testament. The prophet's title "the Tishbite" has given rise to much conjecture. One commentator has suggested that the title is so close to the Hebrew word for conversion that Elijah might have been a Gentile convert. [^1]Others assume the phrase is a reference to his being a sojourner and thus wonder if he may have been part of a group of nomads, perhaps a Kenite or Rechabite. [^2]Some have even suggested that he may have been an angel, explaining both why we know nothing of his parentage or early life and his being taken to heaven miraculously instead of dying. [^3]Another possibility is that the phrase means "the reformer, the changer, the man sent of God Jehovah to cause reform. [^4]

Most biblical scholars have looked for a location named Tisbi or Tisbeh as his original home. The traditional site since Byzantine times was a ruin named el-Ishtibpronounced today Listibeight miles north of the Jabbok River in the modern nation of Jordan. It is located one mile from a mount and shrine called Mar Elyas, "the Mount of Elijah." If accurate, this designation would place Elijah's home in the ancient area labeled Gilead, east of the Jordan River. Another possibility is a town named Tishbi in the territory of the tribe of Naphtali, the area now called Galilee, known from a story in the apocryphal book of Tobit (1:2, Septuagint). Perhaps he originally came from that town but was living in the area of Gilead at the time of his appearance to Ahab. Yet most modern commentators follow the wording of the early Greek Old Testament, the Septuagint, in placing Elijah's original home in Gilead. [^5]As this brief summary shows, there is no consensus on Elijah's birthplace.

When Elijah makes his initial appearance in the Bible, the text portrays him less as the bearer of the message of a coming famine than as its very orchestrator. His first recorded words are "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand . . ." Notice how much he communicated in that brief phrase. He reminded the king that Israel had a special covenant relationship with its God, who was, the prophet attested, still very much alive. Then the prophet made a solemn oath, swearing by the life of Israel's God, that he, Elijah, also had a special relationship with God that gave him authority to speak in God's behalf. As Elijah could swear by no greater Being, either he truly possessed the authority he claimed or he blasphemed. Having stated his authority as the Lord's servant, Elijah then declared, "There shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word."

We have no explanation of what generated this remarkable declaration. Something notable must have preceded it. Also, there is no mention of a response by Ahab. Was he overwhelmed at the power and spirit of the communication? Did the king's previous knowledge of Elijah's power therefore strike him with fear? Or were the two of them strangers? Did Ahab think him a crank or a nut or worse?

It is interesting that the books of ancient Jewish tradition known as the Jerusalem and Babylonian Talmuds relate an apocryphal tale about the meeting of Ahab and Elijah. The story says that both men met at the house of Hiel the Bethelite to console him on the loss of his sons occasioned by the rebuilding of Jericho. In the course of their visit, Ahab reportedly commented to Elijah that it seemed strange that the ancient curse pronounced by Joshua should have been fulfilled by the death of Hiel's sons. The king reasoned that Joshua occupied a secondary position in comparison to the great Moses, and yet Moses' curse on Israel stood unfulfilled. Ahab reminded Elijah that Moses had prophesied that if Israel should ever turn to the worship of other gods, the Lord would withhold the rain in its season (see Deuteronomy 28: 23-24).

But, continued Ahab derisively, even though everyone in Israel worshiped other gods, Moses' curse had still not come about. It was then, according to rabbinic tradition, that Elijah swore with an oath that the promised curse would now begin. [^6]We are left to wonder if there is any historical substance to such a tale. A single verse of scripture is all we have.

What about the predicted drought and resulting famine? The rains in Israel usually come from late fall to spring. For the balance of the year, morning dew provides the primary source of moisture. Would the curse pronounced by Elijah allow no moisture at all? For how long? Would not the land wilt and die? Could such a dearth of life-giving moisture be justified as an act of God or of his servant? As terrible as such a curse may be, there are worse things. The physical suffering and calamity occasioned by drought are not nearly so dreadful as moral delinquency and spiritual apostasy. One makes mortality miserable; the other threatens eternity.

To understand Elijah's pronouncement, it is instructive to review an analogous situation recorded in the book of Helaman in the Book of Mormon. Nephi, the son of Helaman, had powerfully preached repentance to his people to encourage them to turn from their pride and wickedness. He was rebuffed almost at every turn, however, and even falsely accused of murder. "Being much cast down," he was pondering over the situation of his people when the voice of the Lord came to him, saying: "Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done. . . . Behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:3-5.) The Lord then bestowed upon Nephi the power to seal and to loose on earth and in heaven (see v. 7). We commonly call this the "sealing power."

Nephi returned to his preaching with such power that some were angered at his words and began to fight among themselves. Before long, warfare broke out. As the people approached certain destruction, Nephi prayed that there might "be a famine in the land, to stir them up in remembrance of the Lord their God, and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee" (Helaman 11:4). The heavens were sealed at his command and the famine began. Some have wondered why it is better for people to be dying from famine than from war. In warfare, there is always an enemy, someone else to blame, which causes feelings of anger and revenge. But whom can you blame for a famine? There is something about the ebbing of physical strength and energy resulting from lack of food that seems to remove our thoughts from the mundane aspects of everyday life. We tend to become more sober and our thoughts often turn heavenward. In essence, famine may be the last chance to help us understand what it means to fast. For Nephi's people, it worked. They repented and the drought ceased in accordance with Nephi's plea to the Lord.

Would it stretch the limits of reason to see Elijah in a posture similar to Nephi's? Could we not imagine the Lord bestowing upon him the sealing power with words like those spoken to Nephi? Was not the famine in Elijah's day also caused to encourage repentance of a wayward people? Is it not also possible that Nephi announced the coming dearth to the leader of the Nephites in terms as strong as those addressed by Elijah to Ahab? The repentant Nephites pleaded with their leaders to request that Nephi ask the Lord to end the famine, indicating they knew who had been instrumental in bringing it about (see Helaman 11:8). Maybe Elijah was directed by the Lord to go into the desert not just to avoid destruction from the king's wrath but also that he might be removed from the entreaties of the people to end the famine before the Lord's timetable for its full effect had been met.

In 1 Kings 17, first verse, Elijah is speaking in behalf of the Lord. In the verses immediately following, the Lord is speaking to Elijah, instructing him to leave Jericho, flee eastward, and hide by the brook Cherith. The phrase "before Jordan" in verse 3 means "east of Jordan," the word before being used in much the same way in Genesis 23:17,19, and 25:18. Thus, Elijah turned eastward, crossed the river Jordan, and probably stayed in one of the many small ravines that carry tributary streams into the Jordan. Reading this chapter, one gains the impression that the Lord is leading Elijah one step at a time, giving him line upon line. We do not know whether Elijah had any idea he would pronounce a curse upon the earth before the inspired words came from his mouth. Nor do we sense that he knew what he was to do after that utterance. He seems to have been acting on faith, as next shown in verse 5: "So he went and did according unto the word of the Lord: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan." The Lord told him to go and "so he went." A more simple example of faithful obedience would be hard to find.

Note that the information recorded in the Old Testament about Elijah shows him to be both the natural prophetic successor to the great Moses and the forerunner of Christ. Many of the events in Elijah's history are reminiscent of those experienced by Moses. Likewise, much that Elijah did foreshadowed the acts of the Savior. The prophets serve as types of Christ, and such a type is nowhere seen more clearly or in fewer verses than in the seven chapters of 1 and 2 Kings that speak of Elijah. With the extraordinary brevity of information about Elijah, it seems certain that those few items preserved for us in the text are intended to draw our minds back to parallels with Moses and our hearts forward to visions of Christ. The introductory verses about Elijah reflect such types, first in his declaring his commission from God in speaking the Lord's words and second in his departing into the desert. Elijah went into the wilderness for solitude and preparation as did Moses, the desert being a place of temporal refuge and spiritual rejuvenation. Similarly the Savior often sought a solitary place to ponder and pray (see JST, Matthew 4:1; JST, Mark 6:33).

Elijah's experience is one example of many scriptural accounts of divine deliverance. The Lord inspires the righteous to flee before suffering descends on those who remain: Noah boards the ark; Abraham leaves Ur and Haran; Lot is led out of Sodom; Jacob flees across the Jordan to escape from his brother Esau; Lehi leaves Jerusalem before its destruction; Nephi and his followers are spared the wrath of Laman and Lemuel by fleeing; Mosiah abandons the land of Nephi to discover the people of Zarahemla; Joseph and Mary take the infant Jesus to escape Herod's edict; and so on. Elijah's flight into the wilderness adds to and perpetuates this theme of deliverance.

Returning to the account of Elijah, we read that the Lord indicated he would provide for him by commanding ravens to feed him. The ravens brought "bread and flesh" morning and evening (1 Kings 17:6), reminiscent of the bread (manna) and flesh (quail) miraculously provided to the children of Israel as they wandered in the desert under Moses' leadership centuries earlier (see Numbers 11). Some commentators feel that the word ravens should be read "merchants" [^7]or "Arabs," [^8]depending on the way they view the Hebrew text. Most, though, concur that the word really is ravens. It does not seem likely that the Lord would send Elijah to a desolate area to hide and then send people twice a day to feed him.

Note that Elijah faithfully followed the Lord's bidding in prophesying to Ahab the withholding of rain and dew. He then obediently found his way to the brook Cherith. Even though he was on the Lord's errand, he was not rewarded with delicacies and opulence, but only with the fulfillment of his basic needs. Even the brook, Elijah's only source of water, was destined to dry up "after a while" (1 Kings 17:7). Within a short period, the drought had tightened its grip on the surrounding country and even the lowland streams had ceased to flow. The Lord's promise that blessings will follow obedience does not necessarily include a pledge of luxury and ease. Remember that he said, "It must needs be done in mine own way" (D&C 104:16). Often, when our obedience induces him to open "the windows of heaven" (Malachi 3:10), nothing more emerges from the clouds than a raven carrying food. But, thank the Lord for ravens!

One conclusion we can draw from these events is that, while we know neither the exact location nor physical condition of either Elijah's original home or the brook where he stayed during the famine, he was definitely living in a spiritual wasteland. When Elijah made his first appearance as recorded in 1 Kings 17:1, a famine already existed in the landa famine of "hearing the words of the Lord" (Amos 8:11). Elijah's actions simply implemented on a temporal scale the spiritual dearth that already prevailed. While the Lord did not provide a life of comfort for Elijah at Cherith, he did preserve his life. As the brook turned to dust, Elijah was once again reminded of his total dependence upon the Lord. And assuredly, the Lord would continue to provide for him, even if it needed to be at the hands of a starving widow.

---
Notas:
[^1] Alfred Edersheim, Bible History: Old Testament, 7 vols. (1876-87; reprint, 7 vols. in 1, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), 5:195.
[^2] George Arthur Buttrick et al., eds., The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1952-57), 3:144-45.
[^3] Adam Clarke, The Holy Bible, . . . with a Commentary and Critical Notes, vol. 2 (New York: Phillips and Hunt, 1830), 452.
[^4] John A. Widtsoe, "Elijah, the Tishbite," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 27 (April 1936): 55.
[^5] Buttrick et al., Interpreter's Bible, 3:145.
[^6] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909-38), 4:195-96.
[^7] Clarke, The Holy Bible, 454-55.
[^8] John Gray, I & II Kings: A Commentary, 2d ed., rev. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1970), 378.
