Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Three

The Miracles at Zarephath

After his sojourn of perhaps several months at the brook Cherith, Elijah was commanded, "Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee" (1 Kings 17:9). Zarephath? A city of Sidon? Jezebel's own country? Had not the wicked practices of Jezebel and her husband prompted the drought that then choked the land? Was Elijah to be succored and nourished in Jezebel's father's own kingdom? What must have been Elijah's thoughts at this unusual pronouncement? The scriptures record only this: "So he arose and went to Zarephath" (1 Kings 17:10). Again, we see Elijah's remarkable obedience. He did not ask why; he simply "arose and went."

When the Lord calls us to some act of service or unexpected responsibility, do we find excuses because of supposed incapacity or inconvenience? Do we pull out our planners to see if our busy schedules will permit obedience and time for service? Or do we simply "arise and go" as did Elijah? His example is the practical demonstration of the commitment of Nephi, the son of Lehi, another whose life epitomized obedience. As a youth, he volunteered for a dangerous mission with these words: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). What a great example of faith and trust, both of which underlie willing obedience! This same Nephi's last recorded words summarize his life: "For thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey. Amen." (2 Nephi 33:15.) It is just such a lifetime of obedience that is encapsulated in the phrase that Elijah "arose and went" to Zarephath.

Zarephath was a city about seven miles south of Sidon on the road to Tyre. In the New Testament, the city is called Sarepta (see Luke 4:26). Anciently, Jacob's blessings on his sons indicated Zebulon's inheritance would extend along the seacoast to Sidon (see Genesis 49:13), including the area of this city. But when Joshua divided the promised land among the tribes of Israel, all this area, including the site of Zarephathcalled the Akko plainfell to the lot of Asher (see Joshua 19:26). This was in accord with Moses' blessings on the tribes recorded in Deuteronomy, where the tribe of Asher was promised, "Let him dip his foot in oil" (33:24), a reference to the fertility of the area and to its principal product, olive oil. But King Solomon later gave this region to King Hiram of Tyre, where its control remained until Elijah's day (see 1 Kings 9:11). The name Zarephath means "refining," coming from a root that signifies a crucible or place where metals are melted. Here, in a symbolic crucible trying his patience and faith, Elijah would be further refined.

Elijah wandered through or around Israel, likely avoiding most populated areas, on his journey from the Jordan River to Zarephath near the seacoast. Perhaps he wondered at the Lord's words that He would sustain Elijah at the hands of a widow woman. But had not Jehovah used ravens as emissaries to feed Elijah recently? Just as ravens were at the low end of the animal kingdom, being considered ritually unclean by the law of Moses (see Leviticus 11:13-15), so a poor widow would have been on the lowest rung of the social ladder. But the Lord said he had commanded her to care for Elijah, so the prophet proceeded on faith.

We know little of this widow, not even her name. She had a single son who must have been fairly young, since the text regularly refers to him as a child and since both Elijah and the widow carried the boy (see 1 Kings 17:19). A widow without children probably received more care in society than one who had them, for it was assumed that children, especially male children, would have the natural obligation to care for their mothers. Having a son meant that the widow's deceased husband had someone to carry on his name and assume his responsibilities. But if her son was young, he would not yet be in a position to provide for her. Therefore, she was probably left without help from any direction.

Had this widow always been poor, or was she reduced to poverty because of the death of her husband? Had her husband died recently as a result of the famine, or long ago, the current dearth simply compounding the depths of her meager existence? The fact that she had a "loft" (1 Kings 17:19) where Elijah could stay means that she had an upper room for guests, a common situation in Near Eastern residences even today. The loft may not have been much of a room, but was apparently sufficiently large for the prophet to pray and meditate and have a bed on which he could stretch himself. Having a house with more than a single room may signify that her circumstances had once been much better, that the death of her husband, the famine, or both had resulted in the penurious situation in which Elijah found her.

Just as the Lord had spiritually prepared Elijah to meet the widow, he surely spiritually prepared her for the coming encounter as well. Due to this preparation and the general nature of Near Eastern hospitality, it is not too surprising that, when Elijah arrived at the gate of the city and asked the widow for a little water to drink, she went "to fetch it" (1 Kings 17:10-11). What is more surprising is that there was any water to fetch! The famine had extended beyond the borders of Israel to affect this surrounding area as well. The Lord likely sent Elijah to this city because there was still water there. The poor widow's obedient response to Elijah's request reminds us of similar biblical narratives: Abraham's servant, seeking a wife for his master's son Isaac, asked water of a stranger named Rebekah in Nahor (see Genesis 24:10-28); and Jesus requested a drink from a woman at a well in Samaria (see John 4:1-30). The generous response of all three womenthe widow, Rebekah, and the Samaritanin giving water to a stranger is indicative of oriental culture. But in each of these three cases, an additional, greater request was also made, one requiring faith. In the widow's case, it was a specific request for her last morsel of food.

As the widow went for water, Elijah, famished from his journey, called to her, "Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand" (1 Kings 17:11). It is easy to imagine her stopping abruptly and turning to him in amazement. A request for a little drink was one thing, but one for food quite another. She responded, "As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse" (1 Kings 17:12). Her response began with a solemn affirmation by her swearing an oath by Elijah's God. What did she know of his God? How specifically had the Lord "commanded" her to prepare for Elijah's coming? (1 Kings 17:9.) It is remarkable that the first recorded phrases of both Elijah and the widow are oaths sworn by the life of Israel's God. The widow's oath affirmed that she had no "cake", meaning already cooked bread, probably somewhat like our flat fry bread. Her larder was entirely empty except for a handful of meal in a barrellanguage denoting flour in a pottery jarand a little olive oil. Divulging the extremity of her circumstances, she indicated she had been "gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die" (1 Kings 17:12). Note that she was gathering only two sticks, which would not make much of a fire. Perhaps fuel was very scarce. Or, more likely, she had so little flour and oil that two sticks would make a fire large enough to cook all she had.

Can we imagine what the widow of Zarephath was thinking? She simply had no more food and was about to prepare a final simple meal to share with her son to prolong their lives as much as possible. Elijah understood something of the pangs of hunger and sensed her desperate situation. Yet, with assurance, he said to her, "Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake" (1 Kings 17:13). Was he asking her to split what little she had three ways instead of two, asking her to abbreviate the short space of mortal life she had left? No, he was asking even more than that, for he said, "Make me thereof a little cake first" (v. 13). For him first? Could he really ask such a thing? As a man, he was far more capable of providing for himself in that society than was she. Yet he had said, "Make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son" (v. 13). But if she made even a little bread for him, there would be nothing left for her and her son. Was he being supremely selfish? What did he expect? What did he really want? And what must the poor widow have wondered?

Then came from Elijah's lips the glorious promise, "For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth" (1 Kings 17:14). Suddenly, the whole picture became complete; he had not been asking how much food she had, but how much faith. He was asking not just for her surplus but whether she was willing to give the proverbial widow's mite, "all that she had" (Mark 12:44). What can we make of her reaction to Elijah's request? Was it fear generated by the commanding presence of this stranger? Was she taking her chances against the odds, simply wistful wishing, or was it something more? Definitely more. There is no record of any verbal retort from her to the prophet's request, but, exhibiting faith in the power and promise of God's prophet, she simply "went and did according to the saying of Elijah" (1 Kings 17:15). What greater tribute could be paid to any of us than the one paid to the widow, that she "went and did"? This demonstration of her faith in action resulted in a rich reward, for "she, and he, and her house, did eat many days. And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah." (1 Kings 17:15-16.)

Notice that although Elijah spoke the words, the promise came from the Lord. The Lord's promises never fail. In the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said: "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:37-38; italics added.) Just as the Lord's promise through his prophet worked a miracle in the widow's life, so miracles can be experienced in our lives today as we heed the Lord's servants. What greater blessings could we ever seek than those tailored as specifically to our needs as the barrel of meal and cruse of oil were to hers? Sometimes we think our circumstances so extreme as to be impossible of resolution. Would the Lord do any less for us than he did for the widow long ago? Does he have any less love for us? No, he promises and he fulfills, for he is "the same yesterday, today, and forever" (Mormon 9:9).

There is, however, one warning regarding our expectation of blessings. It is that "God will give liberally to him that asketh . . . if [he] ask not amiss" (2 Nephi 4:35). In his New Testament epistle, James warned, "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts" (James 4:3). We should learn to be satisfied with and grateful for the Lord's helping us meet our needs. Notice how he first tried the widow's faith, then blessed her with enough for her daily needs, but not with a surplus. Likewise, Jehovah required the children of Israel in the wilderness to gather manna each day except for the seventh day, the mandated day of rest. Was the sending of manna any less a miracle because they had to work, gathering it each day? Are there not times when he gives each of us just what we need without any excess and when receiving even that depends on our working and striving for it? We should not read into this story, as some have done, that we can do a good deed and the Lord will provide for us thereafter without any effort or concern on our part. The Lord does not operate in that way. Even the widow had not seen the end of her trials.

"And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him" (1 Kings 17:17). The text fails to explain exactly what happened to her son. Some biblical commentators who profess to believe in the scriptural record have nonetheless expressed their doubt that the child was really dead. [^1]However, the reference to "breath" in "no breath left" must have been used by the author of 1 Kings in the same context as "the breath of life" in Genesis 2:7. The use of the words slay (v. 18) and slaying (v. 20) by the widow and Elijah, respectively, presupposes the death of the child. Therefore, there seems to be no reason to interpret this verse as indicating something other than that the child had died.

Notice the widow's reaction to this tragedy as she spoke to Elijah: "What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?" (1 Kings 17:18.) A careful reading of her response indicates that she did not blame Elijah for her son's death as much as herself. Perhaps some secret, hidden sin from her past resurfaced in her feelings, filling her with grief. Or maybe Elijah's righteousness prompted her to perceive her general unworthiness. Such feelings are reminiscent of Peter's exclamation to the Master, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord" (Luke 5:8). In any case, her sense of guilt caused her to turn inward with an accusatory attitude. Had she instead blamed someone or something other than herself for this calamity, it is to be wondered if the Lord would have blessed her with the miracle Elijah would soon perform. Godly sorrow for sin produces miracles, both spiritual healing and restoration of life. Note that humble people usually look inward for the source of their problems instead of abandoning personal responsibility and seeking to place blame elsewhere. It is surprising to many students of the scriptures to realize that the inspired leaders of the Nephites in the Book of Mormon never attributed the problems of their people to the Lamanites, but to the sins and omissions of the Nephites themselves (see Alma 59:11-12; Helaman 12:2, 4-6; 3 Nephi 3:15-16). Their prophetic writings reflect the attitude that many of our calamities are self-generated. They understood that with agency comes responsibility for our own actions and attitudes, that eventually we will reap what we sow.

Elijah took the child's body from its mother, carried it to the solitude of his room, laid it upon his own bed, and then poured out his soul in prayer. He did not attempt to explain to the widow why her son had died. He probably did not know. Nor did he speculate about it. He himself may have had questions about why the boy died. Instead of talking or asking, he acted, providing a powerful example for us today. Sometimes, when confronted with a difficulty, we sit and discuss it at length: Why am I in this situation? What brought this about? What should have happened differently? Who is at fault here? There is much of a "talk show mentality" in our culture, evidenced by people wanting to endlessly talk about their problems. Instead of constantly wondering and waiting, thinking and talkingor talking without thinkingdebating and arguing, why not be up and about, resolving the situation? Instead of praying, "Why me?" why not plead instead, "Lord, help me!" That is essentially what Elijah did. Why Elijah stretched himself upon the child three times is unknown, though the prophet Elisha did something similar. More detail is given in the account about Elisha found in 2 Kings 4:32-35, but we still do not understand what exactly was being done, nor why. The Lord responded to Elijah's prayer: "And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived" (1 Kings 17:22). The widow must surely have rejoiced at the return of her son. This miraculous event certainly confirmed Elijah's divine authority, and the fact that "the word of the Lord in [his] mouth [was] truth" (1 Kings 17:24). With that verse, we conclude the recorded events of Elijah's experiences with the widow of Zarephath. Why had the Lord brought Elijah to this city? For safety and sustenance? Yes, but also to test, strengthen, and confirm the widow's faith.

What other lessons can be gleaned from 1 Kings 17? Like many others recorded in scripture, the miracle that perpetuated the meal and oil defies an explanation based on known science. Miracles are manifestations of the power of God, not events contrary to nature as some have described them. Indeed, it is nature's God who is performing them, using some higher law which we do not now understand. This chapter shows Jehovah's power over those elements that direct weather patterns, expand the supply of foodstuffs, and control life itself.

We do well to pay attention to the favorable portrayal of the widow. Remember that she is a Gentile, that is to say, not a descendant of Jacob, the father of the house of Israel. She is gracious and hospitable, humble enough to feel pangs of guilt for sin, and sufficiently spiritually perceptive to recognize Elijah as a man of God. In Jesus' day the Jews seem to have forgotten that the widow was a Gentile until he reminded them at the synagogue in Nazareth (see Luke 4:24-26). There the Lord referred to her as part of his proof that "no prophet is accepted in his own country" (Luke 4:24). Elijah's going to the gentile widow after being rejected within Israel further symbolizes the gospel going to the Gentiles after its rejection by most of the Jews in the meridian of time. Jesus told his followers when he healed the servant of a centurion, a Gentile, "Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 8:10-11.)

Why are these few specific events recorded about Elijah? There must be great significance to each act and each word. Remember that Elijah follows and mirrors Moses, and precedes and prefigures Christ. Just as the miracle of the meal and oil foreshadowed the miracles of the loaves and fishes in Jesus' ministry, the circumstances surrounding the raising of the widow's son present Elijah as a type of the Savior. Why did the widow's son die? We cannot say. However, we remember the Lord's response to his disciples, explaining why a man had been born blind: "that the works of God should be made manifest in him" (John 9:3). Also, when told about the sickness of his friend Lazarus, the Savior replied that it was "for the glory of God" (John 11:4). So although we do not know why the widow's son died, we can understand the importance of his being raised from the dead: it manifested the power of God in answer to a widow's faith and demonstrated the existence of priesthood power and authority held by the prophet. It also stands as a type or foreshadowing of Jesus' raising of another widow's only son, the son of the widow of Nain (see Luke 7: 11-16). And if, as we suppose, Mary, the mother of Jesus, became a widow at a fairly early age, was not the miracle performed by Elijah in that small upper loft in Zarephath a foreshadowing of the raising of her Son, as well?

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul Billerbeck, Die Briefe Des Neuen Testaments und Di Offenbarung Johannis (Munich: C. H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1954), 760-61.
