Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Four

The Meeting of Prophet and King

Chapter 18 of 1 Kings begins: "And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year." The exact meaning of the phrase "in the third year" remains unclear. It has been understood by some scholars to mean one full year plus parts of the previous and following years. That would make the duration of the famine just over one year, perhaps fourteen to eighteen months. [^1]This interpretation would coincide with the ancient chronicles that mention a famine of one year during the reign of King Ethbaal of Tyre. [^2]

However, the New Testament's two references to the famine, one by the Savior and one in the Epistle of James, both record the duration of the drought as three and one-half years (see Luke 4:25; James 5:17). Certain commentators have sought to discount such a lengthy dry period because of the devastation it would cause in an already arid region. They attribute those references to the rabbinic tradition, which says that the number three and one-half, being half of the sacred number seven, represents a mystic cycle of disaster. [^3]Others suggest that the number three and one-half in rabbinic literature is not a specific number of years and months but rather a phrase meaning "a period" or "a duration" of time, much like the phrase "after many days" in 1 Kings 18:1. [^4]

Thus we cannot specify the exact length of the drought any more than we can determine how long the prophet spent in Zarephath, or how long he was at Cherith. However long the precise duration of the famine, Elijah had undoubtedly been awaiting the Lord's next directive. Whereas the word of the Lord to him had previously been "hide thyself" (1 Kings 17:3), it was now "shew thyself" (1 Kings 18:1). And to whom? To King Ahab, no less. Why? Because the Lord was about to send rain upon the earth.

If ever there was a time when Ahab and his people should have been brought to the depths of humility, it should have been at that moment. The heavens had been sealed for long enough that "there was a sore famine in Samaria" (1 Kings 18:2). We can only imagine the suffering, the complaints to the king, and the demands for relief. Yet, when we next encounter Ahab, what was he doing? Looking for any remaining scrubby fodder for his horses and mules. If, as it appears, the king had some right to the first crop of the year (see Amos 7:1), he was probably searching for grass on the supposition that his animals were the most important in the kingdom, and whatever growth might remain should be his. We cannot help but wonder if he was as concerned about his subjects as he apparently was about maintaining the royal animals. Note that we find him looking down for grass when he should have been looking up to heaven for forgiveness.

Ahab was on this scouting expedition for forage with his steward, Obadiahnot to be confused with the Old Testament prophet of the same name. The name Obadiah translates into "servant of the Lord." The text tells us that this servant "feared the Lord greatly: for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water" (1 Kings 18:3-4). The term prophets here probably means those who had a witness that Jehovah was the living God of Israel and served him. This persecution of the prophets by Jezebel, which has not previously been mentioned in the text, most likely took place during Elijah's absence from the country, possibly in retaliation for the famine. Ahab suggested to Obadiah that they take different paths to look for grass, the temporal reflecting the spiritual, for the two of them were already wandering different spiritual paths. Appropriately, Obadiah's path, like his faith and course of life, would lead him to the Lord's mouthpiece. Ahab would find nothing.

"And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord Elijah?" (1 Kings 18:7.) This verse and the next seem contradictory. Was Obadiah asking if this was Elijah or was he exclaiming in surprise that it was Elijah? His first word, "Art," is in italics, which means that it was added by the King James translators in an attempt to clarify the meaning of the sentence, which lacked that word in the original Hebrew. Without the word "Art," it seems Obadiah was making a declaration. Did he perhaps recognize Elijah by his clothing, by the mantle the prophet wore, or from someone else's description? Or had he perhaps seen Elijah before so that he knew him already? It is difficult to discern which is correct. In either case, Elijah confirmed his identity. He then instructed the prostrate steward to inform the king that Elijah was there. Obadiah's immediate response was, "What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?" (1 Kings 18:9.) His fear was probably well founded; for Obadiah to return to Ahab with word that he had seen Elijah without capturing or killing him would likely have caused Ahab to fly into a rage, resulting in the forfeiture of Obadiah's life.

The king's servant then related, "As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee" (1 Kings 18:10). Note that Obadiah begins with an oath, the same one used by the widow of Zarephath, referring to "thy God." It appears that the only ones in the narrative who had not recognized that Elijah was a messenger from God were Ahab and Jezebel! We infer from Obadiah's statement that Ahab had sent into all neighboring kingdoms searching for Elijah, either to convince the prophet to reverse the curse or to destroy him. Indeed Ahab required their rulers to search their territories and take an oath that Elijah was not there. Yet, for the majority of the time Ahab sought him, the prophet was safely housed within Jezebel's own father's domain. Maybe that is one place Ahab had not even thought to check.

In such an abbreviated narrative, Obadiah's explanation of why he was so hesitant to follow Elijah's command seems extraordinarily long. Perhaps Obadiah had some part in recording the events now found in the book of 1 Kings. In any event, the steward detailed the source of his fears and pleaded for exemption from the task as reward for his action in hiding the prophets. Elijah, to assure the doubting suppliant, again used an oath to seal his word: "As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day" (1 Kings 18:15). This oath is identical to the one with which Elijah introduced himself to Ahab except for the substitution of the phrase "Lord of hosts" for "Lord God of Israel." The most frequent use of the word hosts in the Old Testament is in reference to the multitudes that make up an army. But it also carries the connotation of all created life, as in Genesis 2:1, "Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them." Elijah's God is both the leader of the armies of Israel and the creator of all things. Having heard this solemn oath in the name and by the life of that being whom he also worshiped, Obadiah "went to meet Ahab, and told him" (1 Kings 18:16).

We then read that "Ahab went to meet Elijah" (1 Kings 18:16) and that, when he saw him, he said, "Art thou he that troubleth Israel?" (v. 17.) Ahab's comment reflects his belief that the cause of the drought had been Elijah's effrontery and defiance, which kindled the wrath of Baal. Since the word "Art" is again italicized, indicating it was not in the original Hebrew, we are left to wonder if this was really phrased as a question, perhaps a sarcastic one, or as an accusation, "Thou art he that troubleth Israel." In either case, Elijah's response turned the pointed jab back at the king: "I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim" (v. 18). Elijah condemned not only Ahab but all his father's descendants, meaning the extended family of Omri. Baalim is the plural form of Baal, denoting false gods in general.

Note that both the widow of Zarephath and Obadiah, when confronted with a dilemma, essentially said, "What sin have I committed that such and such should happen?" They both looked inward for the ultimate source of their problems, even though they may not have been at fault at all. Ahab, on the other hand, with so many sins to his credit, blamed Elijah for Israel's distress. Oh, how blind to the truth are the wicked! They blame everyone for their problems except themselves. Ahab's words are reminiscent of those of Laman and Lemuel murmuring against Nephi: "Our younger brother thinks to rule over us; and we have had much trial because of him" (2 Nephi 5:3). How remarkably different these records would be if they had been written by Laman or Ahab rather than by the prophets of God!

Elijah then issued his challenge, "Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table" (1 Kings 18:19). Elijah wanted the entire covenant people to be present to witness his challenge to the false god. The way the text reads, it sounds as though the king worshiped Baal and the queen worshiped Asherah. Elijah requested eight hundred and fifty prophets, yet the balance of chapter 18 refers only to the four hundred and fifty of Baal. Either the others were there and simply not mentioned, or Jezebel's prophet-priests did not attend the contest on Mount Carmel. Sometime after that event, Ahab gathered four hundred prophets to give him counsel about a battle (see 1 Kings 22:6). Since the priests at Carmel were apparently all killed, perhaps the four hundred referred to in chapter 22 were the priests of Jezebel who did not attend the rites at Carmel; either that or Ahab installed a large number of new ones. The phrase "which eat at Jezebel's table" indicates state-supported religion. Jezebel not only introduced priestcraft and apostasy but also subsidized it from the tax revenues taken from the supposed followers of Jehovah.

The text fails to provide further surrounding details of the meeting between Ahab and Elijah. The where, when, and how are glossed over so that we can move quickly to the confrontation on Carmel. The name Carmel means orchard, vineyard, garden, or fertile place. It is always written in the Hebrew text with the definite article the, making it the Carmel, or the garden place. Carmel stood on the border between the kingdom of Israel and the kingdom of Tyre, and had probably come under Israelite control during the military exploits of King David. The fact that the altar of Jehovah on Carmel had been broken down may mean that the area had been reconquered by Baal's followers. Perhaps this was done by the Baal priests as a demonstration or assertion of their supremacy as they passed this area on their way to accept the invitation of Jezebel to join her in Samaria. Being on the border of the two lands put Elijah on a pinnacle between the territories supposedly governed by the two opposing gods, an ideal spot for a contest. It may have been considered neutral ground, or it may have been chosen by Elijah as a location intended to give the priests of Baal every added advantage, so that the demonstration of the God of Israel's power might be even more impressive.

Mount Carmel is not a single peak but a long range of hills extending several miles in a southeasterly direction from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea near the modern port city of Haifa. On its heights, one can overlook the Mediterranean Sea to the west and the fertile valleys and forested mountains of northern Israel to the east. While it is not possible to place the exact location of Elijah's encounter with the priests of Baal, a site that well fits all the parameters outlined in the text is a place known today as El Muhrakah on the southern end of the Carmel range. While studying this episode, it is useful to try to visualize the spot. The following provides a helpful description of the area:

At the eastern extremity of the ridge, where the wooded heights of Carmel sink down into the usual bleakness of the hills of Palestine, is a terrace of natural rock. It is encompassed by dense thickets of evergreens; and upon it are the remains of an old and massive square structure, built of large hewed stones. This is el-Muhrakah; and here, in all probability, stood Elijah's altar (1 Kings 18:30). The situation and environs answer in every particular to the various incidents of the narrative. A short distance from the terrace is a fountain, whence the water may have been brought which was poured round Elijah's sacrifice and altar (chap. 18:38). The terrace commands a noble view over the whole plain of Esdraelon, from the banks of the Kishon down at the bottom of the steep declivity, away to the distant hill of Gilboa, at whose base stood the royal city of Jezreel. . . . On the lower declivities of the mountain is a mound called Tell el-Kusis, "the Hill of the Priests," which probably marks the very scene of the execution. May not the present name of the Kishon itself have originated in this tragic eventit is called Nahr el-Mokatta, "the River of Slaughter." The prophet went up again to the altar, which is near, but not upon, the summit of the mountain. While he prayed, he said to his servant, "Go up now, look toward the sea." The sea is not visible from the terrace, but a few minutes' ascent leads to a peak which commands its whole expanse. . . . The modern name of the whole range of Carmel is Jebel Mar Elias, "the mountain of St. Elijah." [^5]

And thus the stage was set for the great confrontation. "So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel" (1 Kings 18:20). All was in readiness for the vindication of "the Lord God of Israel" (1 Kings 17:1).

---
Notas:
[^1] See Thomas S. Monson, "Courage Counts," Ensign 16 (November 1986): 40-42.
[^2] New American Bible (Catholic Press, 1970).
[^3] The New English Bible (Oxford and Cambridge University Presses, 1970).
[^4] The Jerusalem Bible (New York: Doubleday, 1968).
[^5] The Holy Bible: New International Version (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1984).
