Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Five

The Challenge

The people of Ahab's kingdom felt they had a special relationship with the God of Israel. Approximately a millennium earlier, the Lord Jehovah had made a sacred covenant with their ancestor Abraham. In exchange for obedience to all the commands of God, Abraham received the promise of a numerous posterity, lands of inheritance, and the power to act in the name of God, known as the holy priesthood. Abraham was also promised that the Messiah would come through his lineage. (See Genesis 17:1-8; Abraham 2:8-11.) This sacred covenant was renewed with Abraham's son Isaac and grandson Jacob (see Genesis 26:3-5, 24; 28:13-15). The Lord even changed Jacob's name to Israel (see Genesis 32:27-28) and blessed him with twelve sons who became the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel, ten of which would later constitute the kingdom of Ahab. Following Jacob's death, the tribes of Israel sojourned in Egypt, where they were enslaved. The Lord freed them miraculously, gathered them under the leadership of Moses, and led them through the wilderness to Mount Sinai. There the Lord sought to renew with the people the covenant given to their fathers and promised them, "Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exodus 19:5-6).

The tribes of Israel eventually settled in the land called Canaan, the territory which was later split into the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. During the next several hundred years, they lived in varying states of adherence to the commandments of God. For many, remembrance of the covenant wore thin. The abominations of Jeroboam and his successors in the kingdom of Israel had weakened what residual understanding they had of what the covenant relationship meant. They had fallen into the easy trap of forgetting that being a "chosen people" meant they were chosen to do something, namely to be the bearers of the Lord's power and blessings to all peoples. Being chosen does not indicate a given people's importance reflected by the choice of God, but rather the choice of that people to be a reflection of God's preeminence. Rather than understanding what it meant to be chosen, they began to think that they were simply choice.

As if this spiritual drifting were not enough of a hindrance to their ability to fulfill their divine mandate, the nation of Israel then had Ahab for a king. Even taking the most positive view of Ahab, he could at best be considered a compromiser, for he had compromised the covenant with Jehovah by intermingling with it the trappings of Baal worship. Yet, then as well as now, it is not compromise but courage that brings forth the blessings of heaven. [^1]Courage springs from purity and makes its possessor fearless. As the writer of Proverbs said, "The righteous are bold as a lion" (28:1). With all of Israel vacillating, the Lord needed a lion. He sent Elijah. The confrontation on Carmel between the prophet and the king would prove to gathered Israel who had true courage and who had been compromised.

As the crowds climbed to the appointed place atop Mount Carmel, Elijah watched them come, pondering and praying as he did so. A diverse assembly gathered to view the remarkable contest. On the hill, hundreds of Baal's priests, arrayed in their long robes of fine linen, milled and chanted. The king, accompanied by many from his court, sat prominently on a dais under a canopy with a cover over his head to protect him from the blazing sun. Surrounding them, the multitudes of Israel, who had come at the king's bidding, mingled, chatted, and wondered what all this signified. In the midst of them all, Elijah stood alone. Or did he? Were there not unseen angels surrounding and protecting him? Was not all heaven arrayed behind him? Can one ever be alone when he is on the Lord's errand?

When the hilltop was filled, the throng waited anxiously to see what Elijah would do or say. What would his proposition be? Why had he gathered them? At length, he turned to the gathered multitude, addressing them instead of the king and his priests. His strong voice carried over the silent throng as he posed the penetrating question: "How long halt ye between two opinions?" Then in equally vibrant tones, he proclaimed his challenge, the only sensible resolution to his question: "If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him." (1 Kings 18:21.) And what was the response of the multitude to his invitation? "The people answered him not a word" (v. 21).

What did his question mean? Why was the crowd hushed to silence? The word halt in verse 21 is translated in many ways, depending on the language or the version of the Bible used. In Hebrew, the word means "to hop," connoting a jumping about in a limping fashion. The same Hebrew verb is used in 1 Kings 18:26, where the priests of Baal hop about their altar. There it might be understood as meaning a ritual dance that would have been part of their priestly ceremonies. Perhaps, then, Elijah's question really asked them, "How long will you try to do the dance of Baal and the dance of Jehovah at the same time?" The Hebrew word at the end of the questiontranslated "opinions" in the King James Versionhas one of two very different meanings. One refers to thoughts or opinions, while the other suggests something forked, like a branch. With all these possibilities, consider the following variant readings:

How long will you straddle the issue? [^2]

How long will you sit on the fence? [^3]

"How long," he said, "do you mean to hobble first on one leg then on the other?" [^4]

How long will you waver between two opinions? [^5]

How long will you hobble on two crutches? [^6]

How long hop ye about upon two boughs? [^7]

How long are you going to live in two camps at once? [^8]

To paraphrase, the general sense of the question seems to have been "How long can you simultaneously serve two masters?"

This confrontation closely mirrored the respective contests between Moses and the Egyptian magicians and Joseph and the diviners of Pharaoh. Simply put, it was a contest of supremacy. Perhaps for the first time, the people realized what the issue really was. They were stunned and silent as though it had not occurred to them that the two ways, following Jehovah and following Baal, were incompatible.

The silence that followed Elijah's challenge must have been somewhat like the stunned silence that reigns over a congregation in a stake conference when a General Authority condemns as evil, or tending toward evil, some worldly pastime we have grown to enjoy. Having been lulled into a false sense of security, we remain temporarily blinded from seeing the logical conclusion of our worldly choice until suddenlyand sometimes forcefullyconfronted openly by its true significance. As the reality of what we have been doing and where it will lead sets in, we are moved to silent reflection. If we are humble and receptive, the confirming impression of the Spirit bears witness that we must change our choice or suffer the unhappy consequence. Unfortunately, some fall silent because their irritation risesirritation that someone, even one with special authority, should question their fixed certitudes. It seems that the "natural man" part of our human nature often leads us to question whether a prophet is truly a prophet when he asks us to do something we do not wish to do, or to change an attitude or action with which we have become comfortable. When truth is presented we are either drawn to its light or offended by its brightness. Hence, the reference to the word of God as a "two-edged sword" (D&C 6:2). The truth will continue to stand regardless of how we respond, but our response to it surely measures the light and truth within us.

Basically, the multitude gathered upon the hills around Elijah wanted it both ways. They were much like those in today's society who feel that some compromise with the world is necessary in order to remain "modern." Just as Elijah's words indicated to the ancient Israelites that it was necessary to choose one or the other, so have the Lord's current spokesmen taught that the two paths cannot be blended or compromised, that we are to live in the world but not be of the world. The one path is exceedingly crooked; the other perfectly straight.

To another group attracted by the enticements of the world and thereby growing spiritually hardened, Samuel the Lamanite declared, "Ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38). Elijah's listeners were hopping or limping because of the unevenness of trying to walk with one foot in the world, following the allure of Baal, and the other foot in the Lord's way. Perhaps their silence indicated they had not grasped the issue as being so clear cut.

It is significant that the Book of Mormon authors teach in oppositesgood versus evil, light versus dark, life versus death. Some have jokingly complained that it seems hardly fair for the Lord to paint everything so black and white and then send us to live in a gray world. But that is the point! This life is a test. The Spirit, scriptures, and prophets instruct us to grasp the iron rod that we might successfully find our way through the gray mists. The Lord has assured us there is a way to discern good from evil. The key is given in a sermon by Mormon:

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil. (Moroni 7:15-17.)

As Mormon taught, there is a gift from God, a light within each of us, that enables us to discern the difference between good and evil, between following the Lord and following Baal. Unless we extinguish that light, it will allow us to find our way through those gray mists. Amazingly, the farther we travel by the glow of its beam, the brighter it grows, making it easier to distinguish the light from the dark. Eventually, this discerning light becomes almost laser-like in its power, infusing all around us with a deeper clarity and contrast. We then truly start to see things "as they really are" (Jacob 4:13).

Elijah sensed that his people had all but smothered that light or Spirit of Christ, leaving nothing more than a smoldering ember. He was calling on them to look inward, to see if they could not fan into flame that tiny spark flickering within each of them. There, on Carmel, the Lord transformed Elijah into a beacon, channeling divine light to his misguided people, to draw them back to the covenant. Elijah offered them the opportunity to rekindle their lights by reigniting them from his; for assuredly, as Elijah stood atop the mount and issued his call to accountability, he proclaimed to all the people, as would Jeremiah at a later time, that God's "word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones" (Jeremiah 20:9).

---
Notas:
[^1] Quoted in John Gray, I & II Kings: A Commentary, 2d ed., rev. (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1970), 402.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 181.
[^3] Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909-38), 4:198.
[^4] James A. Montgomery, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Kings, 2d ed. (Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1960), 302.
[^5] Smith, Teachings, 277.
[^6] Ibid., 277-78.
[^7] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1960, 75.
[^8] Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 14.4.3; see William Whiston, trans., Josephus: Complete Works (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1978), 292.
