Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Six

The Preparation

Having issued the challenge, "If the Lord be God, follow him," Elijah stood poised for the encounter to begin. Again addressing the people, he stipulated the nature of the contest: "I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men. Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken." (1 Kings 18:22-24.)

The issue presented to the people essentially questioned whether Elijah had offended Baal or whether the Canaanite god existed at all. One of the ancient writings known as the Ras Shamra texts boasts of Baal's supposed power over the elements:

Moreover Baal will send abundance of his rain,

Abundance of moisture with snow;

He will utter his voice in the clouds,

(He will send) his flashing to the earth with lightning. [^1]

If Baal was truly this powerful god of weather, why had there been no rain for so long? Elijah's contest thus challenged Baal to prove his divinity and show himself by sending fire to burn a sacrifice offered to him. The use of fire as the sign was a specially chosen witness of divinity, for the god who could bring fire from heaven to the altar was the one who controlled lightning, and whoever could produce lightning could also produce rain to end the drought.

Elijah gave every possible advantage to his opponents. He met them on a hilltop over which their god claimed dominion. The sea, the source of moisture that Baal supposedly controlled, was nearby, providing a ready resource for the god of rain. The summit of the mountain itself put them all closer to heaven and made it easier for a firebolt to reach them. Elijah pointed out to the people the staggering odds: "I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men." Elijah then addressed the priests of Baal, "Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your gods, but put no fire under" (1 Kings 18:25). He also let them go first, readying their sacrificial bull on the altar of Baal, which appears to have already been in existence at that location. Elijah afforded the priests all the time they wished. Every advantage was theirs.

Some readers have fretted over how Elijah's parentage and tribal affiliation affected the legitimacy of his offering sacrifice at Carmel. Was Elijah a Levite, of the house of Aaron? We do not know. The Lord obviously put his stamp of approval on Elijah's actions, whatever the prophet's specific lineage. While Elijah lived about midway through the Mosaic dispensation, it is clear to us that at some point Elijah received the holy Melchizedek Priesthood with all its accompanying powers, which would have enabled him to function in the performances of the lesser or Levitical Priesthood. Joseph Smith taught, "All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood." [^2]It seems logical that Elijah's ordination to this higher priesthood would have occurred sometime before we first met him in 1 Kings 17:1, since his miracles evidenced such authority, particularly his power in sealing the heavens, which sealing power is held only by those possessing the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

The priests of Baal, dressed in beautiful regalia, bedecked with the insignias of their status, put on a fine show. "They took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us." After a few hours, everyone began to tire. "But there was no voice, nor any that answered." Jewish tradition states that the Lord had commanded all creation to remain completely silent because any soundthe rustling of leaves, the chirping of crickets, the call of birdswould be grasped by the priests as an answer from their god. The world was still. [^3]To increase the power of their pleas, the priests "leaped upon the altar which was made." (1 Kings 18:26.) The word leaped is the same Hebrew word seen in 1 Kings 18:21 and probably refers to some type of ritual dance on and around the altar to attract the attention of Baal. This was likely the proverbial "rain dance" so common in many cultures. When the chants and prayers did not succeed, the dancing began. As noon came and went and Elijah began to ridicule the priests, the dancing turned to hysteria.

Elijah could remain subdued only so long, as he watched this mockery of true worship. His response to the show of the priests was one of righteous derision. "And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked" (1 Kings 18:27). Elijah taunted them with allusions to a god too busy to be beckoned by his priestseven four hundred and fifty of them. These insults were even stronger than they seem at first glance. Can one worship a god who likes to take trips and leave the world to run itself without supervision? Or a god who is so busy talking that he would not interrupt his chat to respond to the pleas of his ardent followers? The phrase "he is pursuing" actually should read "he has gone aside," which some commentators interpret as a euphemism to mean "he has gone to the bathroom." [^4]The taunt about a god who is sleeping should have been particularly significant before the multitudes of Israel, who had in their hymnal a song which poetically confirmed, "Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep" (Psalm 121:4).

Why did Elijah respond to the ranting of the priests in such a way? It is one thing not to worship a given god; it is something quite different to ridicule and mock him. Remember, though, our discussion about how the Lord paints things black and white. His covenant people seemed unable to sift through the gray without Elijah's exposing the absurdities of what they had been doing. It necessitated his pointing contemptuously at those whose antics had sidetracked so many from the worship of Jehovah. As a general rule, sarcasm has no place in the Lord's kingdom or in our interaction with one another. But under the Lord's inspiration, there are moments when it is used in a divine manner to expose or ridicule evil designs and hearts.

When the Lord gave the parable of the lost sheep and said to the self-righteous Pharisees, "Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance" (Luke 15:7), he was not saying the just were safe on their own; no one is considered just or justified under the law alone. Jesus chided their self-righteousness, which they based on their assumption that they could fully keep the law of Moses. Simultaneously, he rebuked their unwillingness to accept him as the Mediator who could extend mercy when the law was broken. In discussing this parable, the Prophet Joseph Smith pointed out that the lost sheep represented "hunting after a few individuals, or one poor publican, which the Pharisees and Sadducees despised." [^5]Jesus' essential meaning therefore was "I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that are so righteous; they will be damned anyhow; you cannot save them." [^6]Some have termed such rebuking "divine sarcasm." Suffice it to say, Elijah used a similar technique with the priests of Baal. In so doing, he fulfilled the prophetic utterance of the psalm, "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision" (Psalm 2:4).

If great effort and earnest pleading could turn an idol into a real god, the priests of Baal likely would have succeeded. When Elijah began to mock them, they "cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them" (1 Kings 18:28). This ritual self-mutilation was a form of perverted sacrifice to their god. The priests' desire to win this contest was so great that they pulled out all the stops. They worked themselves into a raving frenzy, a forced emotional ecstasy, which continued until the time of the evening sacrifice. But the result of all their efforts was that "there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded" (1 Kings 18:29).

One could almost feel sorry for the priests, working so hard for naught. Yet it is truly misplaced zeal to double your speed when you find that you are heading in the wrong direction. Elder Marion G. Romney warned us about enthusiasm for any cause that might lead us in the wrong direction. He said: "We . . . must beware concerning ourselves, that we do not fall into the traps [Satan] lays to rob us of our freedom. We must be careful that we are not led to accept or support in any way any organization, cause, or measure which, in its remotest effect, would jeopardize free agency, whether it be in politics, government, religion, employment, education, or any other field. It is not enough for us to be sincere in what we support. We must be right!" [^7]The priests of Baal failed because their assumptions and efforts, even if sincere, were intrinsically wrong. Elijah had the support of heaven because he was right!

As the time of the evening sacrifice approached, it was finally Elijah's turn (see 1 Kings 18:36). It is interesting that that would put Elijah's sacrifice at approximately the same time of day that the descendants of Aaron would have been offering their evening oblation at the great temple in Jerusalem, physically far removed but extremely close spiritually to the events then transpiring on Carmel. According to the Jewish historian Josephus, the preparation of the evening offering would have occurred at about 3 p.m. [^8]Speaking to the people for the first time since his challenge early that morning, Elijah invited them, "Come near unto me." He wanted them to approach him closely to see what he was about to do. "And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that was broken down." (1 Kings 18:30.) Elijah's short phrase echoes the Savior's frequent invitation, "Come unto me" (Matthew 11:28; 3 Nephi 30:2). Elijah also wanted the multitude to come spiritually to their God.

Earlier that day, when Elijah challenged the people to follow the true God, he spoke to their faculties of reason by proposing a contest that would appeal to and satisfy their sense of logic. Now, by inviting them to closely observe his reassembly of the stones of the abused and unused altar of Jehovah, he pulled at their hearts. The Lord would confirm the truth to them in the same way that he indicates his will to us, namely, in their minds and in their hearts (see D&C 8:2). Elijah's rebuilding of the altar with twelve stones, one for each of the tribes of Israel, symbolized the restoration of the twelve tribes into one people again, a reuniting and sanctification of a people broken into two kingdoms both by idolatry and by political schism.

Elijah dug a large trench around the altar of the Lord, "put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the wood" (1 Kings 18:33). He then directed that four barrelsmore accurately translated "jars"of water be poured over the sacrificial animal, wood, and stones. A spring near El Muhrakah on Mount Carmel probably served as the source of the water for filling the jars at that time of drought. Elijah commanded that the jars be filled a second and third time, until the symbolically sacred number of twelve had been reached. Twelve tribes, twelve stones, twelve jars of water. Just as the altar had been complete when the number twelve was reached, so the entire sacrifice was ready when the twelve jars of water had thoroughly soaked the wood and flesh, and even filled the trench around the altar. There is some evidence from antiquity that at times pagan altars were lighted by someone underneath who would start the fire at the appropriate moment to give a spectacular effect to the ceremonies. Elijah's drenching the whole sacrifice with water certified that he was involved in no such trick.

The prophet thus completed all the preparations. He had done all he could do. Having reached his extremity, he was now postured to call upon that Being who alone can accomplish the impossible. Elijah was ready to petition God for a miracle.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 367.
[^2] Roger Breuil, La Puissance d'Elie (Neuchatel et Paris, Editions Delachaux and Neistle S. A., 1945), 89.
[^3] Alfred Edersheim, Bible History: Old Testament, 7 vols. (1876-87; reprint, 7 vols. in 1, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), 6:20.
[^4] Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), 288; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation standardized.
[^5] Smith, Teachings, 277.
[^6] Ibid., 277-78.
[^7] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1960, 75.
[^8] Flavius Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 14.4.3; see William Whiston, trans., Josephus: Complete Works (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1978), 292.
