Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Seven

The Triumph at Carmel

With all in readiness, Elijah positioned himself near the altar in the sight of all the multitude. Everyone's attention followed his upturned eyes and upraised hands as he cried aloud, "Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again." (1 Kings 18:36-37.) The Joseph Smith Translation changes the phrase "hast turned their heart" to "mayest turn their heart," clarifying that Elijah was pleading with the Lord to soften the people's hearts and turn them back to Him, instead of declaring what had already been done.

Why did Elijah pray for a miracle? To put the priests of Baal in their place? To demonstrate his own preeminence? No, he desired only that the Lord demonstrate his power so that the people might repent and return to the covenant they had made with Jehovah. The Lord's answer to Elijah's humble plea was immediate. "Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord [Jehovah], he is the God; the Lord [Jehovah], he is the God." (Vv. 38-39.) That is to say, they acknowledged Jehovah as God. Elijah's prayer had been answered, both his prayer for fire and for the hearts of the people.

The experience of Elijah at Carmel actually happened just as it is recounted in scripture. It was a historical event. But the happening can also be viewed symbolically. The entire event on Carmel represents the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, namely, faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. First, Elijah called the people to demonstrate their faith. Asking them, "Whom do you believe?" he called them to follow the true God, to trust in Jehovah. Second, Elijah's reconstruction of the altar that had been broken down was reminiscent of repentance. It symbolized the healing of a broken heart. God's wrath had been kindled by the wickedness of his people. The fire of his indignation must fall either on the people themselves or on their sacrificial substitute. Thus the slain animal laid on the altar was an offering of penance, a symbol of the people's wishing to regain God's favor, a substitute to receive the meting out of justice so that the people might receive mercy instead. Next, the sacrificial offering and the twelve stones of the altarrepresenting united Israelwere totally immersed in water, symbolic of baptism with its cleansing and purifying connotations. Certain baptisms today are performed over symbols of these same twelve tribes. Lastly, fire, the oft-used symbol of the presence of the Spirit, fell from heaven to consume the entire offeringthe animal life (the bullock), the vegetable life (the wood), the stones, the dust (the soil), even the water. The Spirit engulfed everything, calling to mind Joseph Smith's statement that "our God is a consuming fire." [^1]Even as fire both consumes and purifies, the multitude before Elijah was renewed. The response of the people was to acknowledge the one true God, the Lord Jehovah.

Additionally, the miracle on Carmel symbolized the atonement of Christ, for, as the Lord has stated, "all things are created and made to bear record of me" (Moses 6:63). In Moses 6:60, he explained, "For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." All three of these elements were present at Carmel: the water, the heavenly fire, and the blood of the bullocka type of the blood of the Lord Jehovah himself. The offering at Carmel thus foreshadowed the future offering of the Holy One of Israel as the sacrificial substitute for the sins of all mankind, including those in attendance at Carmel that day, that he might "purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works" (Titus 2:14).

The aftermath of the miracle proved to be dramatic. "And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there." (1 Kings 18:40.) Some writers have considered Elijah's killing of the priests of Baal as a disgraceful crime and see regret for having done so as the cause for his sadness reflected in 1 Kings 19:4. [^2]Perhaps other readers might acknowledge that difficult times require tough measures, but feel that such actions would be condemned under the New Testament philosophy of "turning the other cheek." Both such explanations seem to miss the mark. We know that the same Lord who gave the Sermon on the Mount also gave the law of Moses (see 3 Nephi 15:4-5), each one being suited to the circumstances of the people at the time. It would seem that Elijah simply implemented the then existing law of Moses, in fulfillment of its provisions requiring the death of all idolaters (see Exodus 22:20; Deuteronomy 13:6-11, 17:2-7).

Elijah then turned his attention to the king, who at that point must have been at least perplexed, if not shocked and dismayed. The prophet said to him, "Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain" (1 Kings 18:41). Some suppose that all present had been fasting that day because of the nature of the gathering. Perhaps Elijah was mocking Ahab in the sense of "Go, eat and drink after that, if you can." Others have suggested that Elijah invited Ahab to partake of the sacrificial meal. [^3]But would Elijah offer to King Ahab that portion of the offering designated by the law of Moses for sustaining the priests? Were there any other priests of Jehovah in attendance? It seems doubtful. Where would Elijah have found a priest after Jezebel's purges? Had he set aside a portion of the sacrifice before placing the remainder on the altar? There was certainly nothing left of the sacrifice after the fire fell; even the stones were gone. Perhaps Elijah was neither castigating the king nor making an invitation but just acknowledging what he knew Ahab would then do: "You can go back now to your eating and drinking and making merry; go back to your hedonistic life." There is no indication of a call to repentance, almost as if Elijah knew such would be fruitless.

The more significant aspect of Elijah's comment to Ahab is that the king had better go or be overtaken by rain. What rain? Where? When? The sky was still absolutely clear, without a cloud in any direction. The humidity continued extremely low, the ground still lay brown and parched as far as eye could see, and the air around them remained hot and motionless. As evening approached, there arose no breeze to refresh them after a long and stressful day. Even though the sun did not blaze as brightly as it had at noonday, it still hung low in the western sky, casting an ashen glow over all creation, as it had for so many evenings for so many months. What rain? Surely Elijah's hearing the sound of abundance of rain was the "hearing of faith" (Galatians 3:2).

"So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees." (1 Kings 18:42.) Both men were going "up," ascending to their earlier place on the hill from the brook Kishon, where they had just been. But as they went up, their paths separated. One returned to his life of ease and the other went to his knees. In the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin, delivering the words given him by an angel, differentiated between those who remain part of the "natural" world and those who are raised above it by following Christ. He explained: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19). The different responses of King Ahab and Elijah to all that had happened that day clearly indicate who was still the "natural man" and who was the "saint."

Elijah turned away from the king and toward the Lord. Although the record in 1 Kings 18 does not even specifically state that Elijah was praying, he obviously was. Without doubt, he was offering a prayer of thanksgiving for the Lord's miraculous intervention that day. Also, as might be expected, he was praying for the rain that the Lord had indicated to Elijah he was preparing to send (see 1 Kings 18:1). James 5:18 confirms that Elijah prayed for rain. Likewise, in a letter to some of the brethren in Jackson County, Missouri, after the initial violence there had erupted against them, Joseph Smith wrote, "Hold fast that which you have received. Trust in God. Consider Elijah when he prayed for rain. Go often to your holy places and look for a cloud of light to appear to your help." [^4]

Elijah began the day by loudly issuing a challenge to the people and speaking powerfully as God's mouthpiece. In that position, he boldly taunted the raving priests. But when he prayed aloud before the people, asking the Lord to reveal his power, he did so with the humble attitude of a servant, even though he spoke with full voice in order to be heard by all present. Now, when it came time to petition the Lord for rain to end the drought, the multitude had gone. Elijah's voice subsided to a reverent whisper, just as his knees dropped to the ground. Alone, he humbly approached the throne of grace as the spokesman of the people, asking for collective forgiveness and pardon. The difference between those moments when he spoke to the people and those when he spoke with the Lord are remarkable. His changed demeanor depended on his role in relationship to his God. At times he faced the Lord as a suppliant for repentant Israel, while at others he faced the people with the Lord at his side. There is much we can learn from his example. We must ever remember who we are facing and for whom we are speaking in order to keep our words and works in appropriate perspective.

If Elijah then held the sealing power, as we presume he must have, the Lord would have likely promised to temper the elements according to his word. Thus, Elijah meekly approached the Almighty to plead for rain for the parched land and the famished people. He understood that even though the Lord has promised something, that does not exempt us from exerting our most soul-felt and repeated appeals for it. The Lord often waits for us to ask before sending the promised blessing. His doing so reminds us both of his bounteous goodness as the fount of all blessings, and also of our continued, complete dependence on him. Elijah, on his knees that evening so long ago at CarmelCarmel, remember, means "the garden"is a type of the Savior on his knees in another garden, the one called Gethsemane. Just as Elijah received no immediate answer to his prayer but had to return to his supplications time and time again, so we read in Luke that Jesus "being in an agony . . . prayed more earnestly" (Luke 22:44). There is a poignant lesson taught by both those prayers, that there are moments of great need when our pleadings must be more intense, filled with more faith than ever before.

Elijah continued praying. Initially, when he sent his servant to check the western sky, there was nothing. But he did not give up. He returned to his prayer and sent his servant again and again. From the heights of Carmel, the servant had a clear view of the Mediterranean, so that any speck of a cloud would be visible on the distant horizon. At last, on the seventh visit to the top of the hill, the servant reported, "Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand." A hint of a cloud was enough for Elijah. He sent his servant to Ahab with the message, "Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not." (1 Kings 18:44.) Even as the message was being delivered and the horses and chariots prepared, "the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain" (v. 45).

Ahab headed speedily for Jezreel, which lay about seventeen miles away, easterly across the plains of Esdraelon. The city straddled Mount Gilboah. The scripture says, "And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel" (1 Kings 18:46). A person running on foot can cover a given distance in a relatively straight line more quickly than can an entourage in chariots following roads. But even so, the Lord must have given Elijah mighty strength to reach the city before the king. Until modern times when the plains of Esdraelon were drained, parts thereof were very swampy. When the drought occurred, most of those wetlands probably turned to powdery dust. But with the sudden, heavy rains mentioned in the text, the dust quickly turned to deep mud all along Ahab's route to the city. The chariots carrying him and his attendants were undoubtedly driven with great difficulty, being stuck in the mire, having their wheels break, their horses slipping and falling. Elijah reached the city safely, while Ahab was delayed in the mud. That scenario gives rise to images of a similar scene centuries earlier as Moses reached the eastern shore of the Red Sea safely while the Egyptians following him in chariots "drave them heavily" (Exodus 14:25).

Chapter 18 of 1 Kings closes with the end of the day. Jehovah's power in the eyes of the people had been vindicated. The curse was over, the drought ended. At the close of one of the most memorable days in history, it seems most appropriate that the prophet of God should have reached Jezreel first, being placed geographically, as well as spiritually, "before" the king.

---
Notas:
[^1] Vetus Testamentum, vol. 25, fasc. 1, 110.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 149-51.
[^3] Alfred Edersheim, Bible History: Old Testament, 7 vols. (1876-87; reprint, 7 vols. in 1, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), 6:20.
[^4] Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), 288; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation standardized.
