Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Eight

The Revelation at Horeb

Elijah had no time to dwell on the triumph at Carmel, for the clouds of rain were quickly followed by clouds of persecution. Immediately upon Ahab's arrival at Jezreel, he "told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword" (1 Kings 19:1). Note that Ahab attributed all that happened on that eventful day to Elijah, ignoring the Lord's hand in either the original drought or the new-fallen rain. He was sufficiently hardened that he failed to recognize the hand of God in any of these momentous events. His words set the stage for the conflict between Jezebel, the patroness of Baal, and Elijah. As emissaries of their respective deities, they were poised as archenemies. Their names alone stood in defiance to each other. The literal meaning of Jezebel's name is "Where is the prince? (Baal)" or "Baal is prince," while Elijah's name signifies "Jehovah is my God." Upon learning of the events at Carmel, Jezebel sent a messenger to threaten Elijah's life. "So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to morrow about this time" (1 Kings 19:2). And what was Elijah's response? "And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there" (v. 3).

Jezebel sought to destroy Elijah, so he fled for his life. Yet a few verses later, Elijah appears depressed and ready to forfeit his life. Something is incongruous here. The Septuagint, an early Greek version of the Old Testament, translates "he saw" in 1 Kings 19:3 as "he feared." While it would be understandable for most of us to fear if our lives were threatened, would Elijah's reaction be the same? Would fear prompt him to flee after all he knew and after all that had happened previously, particularly the immense display of power on Carmel? Was he just succumbing to normal human emotion or was something else involved? Jacob, the father of the tribes of Israel, fled the wrath of his brother Esau, and Moses, the great lawgiver, fled the vengeance of Pharaoh. Perhaps Elijah's flight foreshadowed the child Jesus' fleeing with his family to Egypt to escape Herod the Great's edict of death. But had Elijah fled from fear alone, he could likely have rested in Judah under the protection of righteous King Jehoshaphat. Instead, he went to Beersheba at Judah's southern extremity and then headed south into the wilderness alone.

After all the miraculous manifestations of the Lord's protecting care in Elijah's life, why would he now succumb to fear? Rather than being driven by fear alone, it appears that Elijah was impressed that he needed to journey southward into the wilderness to commune with the Lord. His journey ultimately led him to Mount Horeb, the sacred spot also known as Sinai, where the Lord had established the covenant with the tribes of Israel in the days of Moses. Perhaps Elijah did not know his exact destination until he left his servant at Beersheba and "went a day's journey into the wilderness" (1 Kings 19:4). Beersheba was the last vestige of civilization before entering the desert to the south known as the Negev. Rather than forgetting the Lord and fleeing out of fear, Elijah seems to have entrusted himself to the Lord's safekeeping, knowing that only faith and trust could keep him from being totally alone on this wilderness journey.

Once again, the recorded acts of Elijah's life prefigure those of the Savior while also echoing the experiences of Moses. The Savior would be led into the wilderness by the Spirit to commune with his Father (see JST, Matthew 4:1). Moses was led into the wilderness of Midian (see Exodus 2:15). As Moses found a bush, so Elijah found a juniper tree. Though Moses' bush burned while Elijah's gave shelter from the sun, each of the two great prophets received divine communication at his respective bush.

Just as human emotions and weakness tempted the Savior while in the wilderness, nagging feelings of depression tempted Elijah. As he journeyed southward, first from Jezreel and then from Beersheba, he had much time to quietly reflect on the momentous events that had happened of late. He probably felt a certain emotional letdown after the strenuous though exhilarating triumph at Carmel. The farther he went and the more he pondered on the lack of commitment of his peoplewho, even at the very time of his journey, may have been wandering back to their old waysthe more depressed he became, almost to the point of despondency. His reaction resembled that of Nephi, the son of Helaman, who, following a miraculous vindication of his role as prophet, was "much cast down because of the wickedness of the people" (Helaman 10:3). Elijah must have wondered, despite the magnitude of what had happened, whether the conversion of those at Carmel would last. How could Ahab not recognize the hand of God? Why is Jezebel still in control? What now of his life? What good was it to continue if there were none to follow him? Why live longer?

Elijah steadily sank into an immense internal conflict exaggerated by physical and emotional exhaustion. He did not know just why he must journey to Horeb, but he was impressed that he must go. However, before he could reach his intended destination, before he could see the light which was sure to appear after his walk of faith through the darkness, his resolve faltered. He lay down under the juniper tree and wished it could all end, saying, "It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers" (1 Kings 19:4).

Perhaps Elijah was already then fairly elderly, which would help explain why he said he need not live longer, or perhaps he felt his mortal mission had ended and he simply wanted to be released, feeling that he could not go on any longer, that he had nothing more to offer. His mention of not being better than his fathers may refer to his spiritual fathers, the earlier prophets, who had likewise been rejected. They had died; why not him? His asking to die showed his acknowledgment that his life was in God's hands, not his own. Elijah's discouragement also mirrors that experienced by Moses when he was discouraged by the hard-heartedness of the people he was called to lead (see Exodus 5:22 and Numbers 11:12-15). Moses had exclaimed, "And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness" (Numbers 11:15).

Elijah momentarily gave in to a feeling of despair, of wanting to give up. But the Lord had more for Elijah to accomplish. Perhaps the greatest trial of Jesus' mortal mission was the temptation to give up in Gethsemane when the pressure was so great that he literally bled "at every pore" (D&C 19:18). But he held on, hour after agonizing hour, until he could exclaim on the cross, "Father, it is finished, thy will is done" (JST, Matthew 27:54). An angel came to strengthen the Lord in the garden in his time of suffering (see Luke 22:43). Likewise, an angel came to Elijah under the tree to strengthen and encourage him at his lowest moment.

Jezebel had sent a messenger to Elijah with a message of death; the Lord now sent him another messenger with a message of life. As Elijah slept under the tree, "an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat" (1 Kings 19:5). Elijah arose to find freshly baked bread and water. He ate, drank, and then lay down again, as if the significance of that miraculous meal had been lost on him. In his state of depression, he seems to have viewed it as his last. The angel "came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee" (1 Kings 19:7). Elijah then knew the Lord would not let him lie there and die. He must go on. So he "arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God" (1 Kings 19:8). Elijah ate bread and water and subsisted miraculously for forty days, like the forty-day fasts of Moses and Christ. It is significant that Exodus 24:18, referring to Moses, and Matthew 4:2, referring to Christ, both have the identical phrase used in 1 Kings 19:8: "forty days and forty nights." The authors, in each case, wish to convey that this was a total fast, not one just from sunrise to sundown. The bread and water Elijah consumed were certainly more than the common substances that go by the same names; they were heaven sent. Of the three forty-day fasts in scripture, only in the instance of Elijah do we specifically find mention of a preparatory meal of bread and water. It is hard to miss the symbolism that points to the modern sacramental emblems with their attendant promise of eternal life.

"In the strength" of that meal, Elijah made the lonely journey to the sacred mountain, Horeb. "And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there" (1 Kings 19:9). In Hebrew, the cave on Horeb is referred to as the cave, using the definite article, an obvious allusion to the "clift of the rock" (Exodus 33:22) where Moses experienced a supernatural display similar to the one Elijah was about to have. Some interpret the word lodge to mean he spent the night and thus infer he was in the cave only one night. However, it seems even more likely that he "lodged" for an extended period, reflecting upon all that had occurred and pondering about the future. Maybe part of the forty days was spent there.

It is easy to envision Elijah struggling within himself. What should he do? Where should he go? Why had he come here? Was he justified in hiding? This period of intense, internal turmoil was inspired by the nagging question which kept coming to his mind, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" As he struggled, the scripture says "the word of the Lord came to him." (1 Kings 19:9.) It most likely came as it comes to all of us who are struggling, with impressions working on our consciences, encouraging us to look inward and prodding us. To maintain his sanity, he may have justified his actions to himself in these terms: "I had to come to save my life. I hoped to be closer to the Lord here. I don't know where to go from here. What does the Lord want me to do next? Have I done all I was supposed to do?" According to scripture, he said, "I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away" (v. 10).

In the midst of his reflection and prayer, worry and wondering, he was impressed that the Lord was coming and that he should go out to meet him. He went forth with a sense of anxiousness. "At last, an answer to my questions," he must have felt. To his surprise, he was met by dramatic demonstrations of the power of God over the elements of the earth. First, there was an incredible windstorm of such velocity as to break the rocks of the mountains around him. Then came an earthquake to rend and crack the earth to its foundation, causing upheavals of everything the wind had left intact. Next, a great fire consumed all around him. In each case, Elijah simply observed, having seen the manifestations of the Lord's power many times before. Anticipating an encounter with Deity, in each instance he acknowledged the Lord's power but realized that "the Lord was not in the wind . . . the earthquake . . . [nor] the fire" (vv. 11-12).

The experience Elijah was to have on Horeb would not be the "idea" of God or the "essence" of God's power seen in nature. Instead, it would be the revelation of a living, personal Being. During this formidable exhibition, Elijah retreated into the cave to avoid destruction by these upheavals of nature. At that point, the spectacular experience changed. Scripture employs the simple phrase, "And after the fire a still small voice" (v. 12). Elijah had been struggling with the impressions of the Spirit for some time. But now, all the mighty external displays of power aside, there spoke to his innermost self the unmistakable voice of the Spirit, quiet, serene, and peaceful. The miracle of the voice of the Spirit superseded all the miracles of the natural elements he had just witnessed. Verse 13 indicates that Elijah "wrapped his face in his mantle." A general reading of this line leads one to picture Elijah showing great humility and reverence at this momentous occurrence, much like Moses' covering his face out of respect in Exodus 3:16. But perhaps there is even deeper meaning being exhibited by such action.

We can imagine Elijah moving slowly from the darkness where he had taken refuge to the mouth of the cave, a large boulder to his side partly blocking the entrance. As he stepped into the light, both physically and spiritually, the weeks of frustration, wandering, and wondering may have given way to a flood of emotion, mingling sorrow and repentance with surpassing joy. Perhaps he could no longer hold back the fountain of tears. Momentarily overcome, he covered his face with his mantle, not just as a sign of reverence, but also to hide his tears from the Lord. At this moment of great emotional release, in tender, loving tones, the Lord again asked, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" Though the recorded words of Elijah's response are the same as those appearing a few verses earlier, there is an impression that humility and grateful commitment have supplanted the previous sense of excuse and self-justification. The furrowed brow and longing voice implied in verse 10 as Elijah reasoned with himself were replaced by the swollen eyes and tear-stained cheeks of the humble seeker whose prayers are answered. The words of verses 10 and 14 are the same; the feeling and meaning conveyed are worlds apart. Elijah's emotional meeting with the Almighty caused his spirit to be confronted with a clear remembrance of who he was, what the Lord had done through him, and of what else he must yet do. Elijah faced his Maker and, simultaneously, his innermost self.

Earlier, King Ahab had expected a dramatic, external demonstration of the power of Jehovah as proof of Elijah's authority. He received it and ignored it. Elijah, on a higher spiritual plane than Ahab, received a manifestation from deep inside his soul. In Elijah's world, an inharmonious multitude of sounds prevailed: the riotous partying of the wealthy drowned out the agonized pleas of the poor, mocking laughter emanated from the royal court in Samaria, the shouted entreaties from the priests of Baal summoned their god, the sonic blast of a firebolt on Mount Carmel launched the thundering sound of a great "abundance of rain" (I Kings 18:41). Yet, in the midst of such dissonance, Elijah heard and obeyed the most impressive sound of all, the still small voice of the Spirit.

It has been proposed that the somewhat obscure Hebrew phrase rendered as "still small voice" should be translated as "a roaring and thunderous sound." [^1]Such a proposal makes no sense in the context of the message contained in chapter 19, nor in light of the Book of Mormon and modern revelation where the phrase is also used and its meaning remains clear (see 1 Nephi 17:45; D&C 85:6). To the contrary, there appears to be great inspiration in the choice of words by the King James translators. The Lord demonstrated to the faithless at Mount Carmel through a dramatic manifestation that he had power over the elements. Although he could, at his command, call the elements to testify of his supremacy, he chose to communicate with his faithful follower through an inward manifestation, a quiet, peaceful voice. Elijah knew then that God at times must resort to calling those otherwise preoccupied, who are dull of hearing, by "the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind" (D&C 43:25). Elijah also knew that the same Being speaks to his servants by "the voice of his Spirit" (D&C 52:1), that "still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things" (D&C 85:6). Elijah learned, as each of us must, that while it may be far from the loudest voice, the voice of the Spirit is undeniably the strongest and most compelling.

The voice of the Spirit thus led Elijah to his personal encounter with Jehovah. Elijah told the Lord he had been very "jealous" for his sake (1 Kings 19:14). The word might be better translated "zealous," as it is in the Douai Bible and the New International Version, which meaning coincides more with our current usage of the two words. To this expression of loyalty, the Lord responded by assigning Elijah three missions: to anoint a new king of Syria, Hazael; a new king of Israel, Jehu; and a prophetic successor, Elisha. There is no recorded instance of Elijah's personally fulfilling the first two assignments. Either he did so and it was not recorded, or circumstances dictated that he confer such responsibilities on his successor Elisha. In fact, the scriptures tell of Elisha's having done both, either as a confirmation of what Elijah had previously done or in fulfillment of the assignment given him by his prophetic predecessor.

In the course of these assignments, the Lord reassured Elijah that he was not alone in his faithfulness to Jehovah. Just as Joseph Smith, who in a moment similar to Elijah's felt discouraged and abandoned, rejoiced to learn that his friends would stand by him (see D&C 121:9), Elijah must have joyfully received the news that there were yet 7,000 in Israel who had not bowed the knee to Baal (see 1 Kings 19:18). He who had felt so alone was not in reality alone. While the specific number 7,000 may be only symbolicseven being a sacred Hebrew number denoting perfection or completenessthe realization that there were many who still worshiped the true and living God must have been good news to the prophet. It is also likely that the news reminded Elijah that whatever he was called to pass through, the Lord would be with him. Elijah's trials could never be greater than those that were yet to be borne by the very God he worshiped. In gentle, understanding, and loving tones, would the Lord not have taught and comforted Elijah in words such as these: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man [shall descend] below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:7-8.)

Some have seen the triumph at Carmel as the high point of Elijah's mortal career. But was not the true high point his communion with the Lord on Horeb? Half a millennium earlier at that sacred place, the Lord confirmed his covenant with his people Israel. Now he confirmed upon Elijah a special responsibility having to do with the continuation and restoration of that covenant. Elijah was assigned to supervise the spiritual future of the covenant people.

Reflect also on the watchful manner by which the Lord brought Elijah to Horeb. The Lord sent ravens to feed him, a widow to supply him with food and lodging during the duration of the famine, an angel to sustain him in his moment of sadness, the voice of the Spirit to encourage and instruct him, and, finally, a visitation from the Lord himself. Faithful obedience to and reliance upon the Lord bring the first Comforter and then ultimately the Second. [^2]

Elijah, obedient as ever, left his mountain temple to find and anoint his successor, Elisha, the son of Shaphat. Elijah probably journeyed back through southeastern Judah to the Jordan River and then north along its winding course to the city of Abel-Meholah, Elisha's home. He found Elisha plowing with 12 yoke of oxen. The large number likely indicates Elisha came from a wealthy family. The text makes no specific mention of a holy anointing, but it undoubtedly took place. The only allusion to the choosing and setting apart appears in the phrase, "and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him" (1 Kings 19:19). The first recorded instance of such a mantle or outer cloak being seen as the symbol of a prophet is found in the story of Samuel. His ministry bridged Israel's transition from an era of rule by judges to the reign of kings. When King Saul visited the sorceress of Endor, she supposedly conjured up the spirit of Samuel. When she described the spirit as "an old man . . . covered with a mantle" (1 Samuel 28:14), Saul immediately recognized the description as that of the prophet. It seems possible that a certain type of garment indicated an individual's prophetic calling and that such a custom still existed in Elijah's day. By casting his mantle upon Elisha, Elijah signaled a transference of spiritual power and authority. From this account of the call of Elisha and its sequel at the time of Elijah's translation arose such phrases as "the mantle of the prophet," "the mantle of leadership," "the passing of the mantle."

At the time of his call, Elisha asked if he might return to kiss his father and mother before following the prophet. It is noteworthy that while the Lord had recently told Elijah that there were many who had not kissed Baal, Elisha should wish to kiss his family as he simultaneously embraced the call to the Lord's service. As we shall see, the mission of Elijah is connected very closely with the sacred covenants that bind family members to each other and to the Lord. Elisha's rapid and eager acceptance of his new assignment confirmed the Lord's promise to Elijah that there were many who had not "bowed unto Baal" (1 Kings 19:18). Having said his good-byes and offered sacrifice and thanks, Elisha "arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him" (1 Kings 19:21). Elijah, who so recently felt so alone, now had someone who ministered to him, a counselor, a student, a friend, and someone to whom Elijah would minister with a special charge to prepare him for his own future prophetic role.

---
Notas:
[^1] Alfred Edersheim, Bible History: Old Testament, 7 vols. (1876-87; reprint, 7 vols. in 1, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1987), 6:48.
[^2] The New English Bible (Oxford and Cambridge University Presses, 1970).
