Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Nine

The Vineyard of Naboth

While Elijah's history prevails as the focal point of chapters 17, 18, and 19 of the book of 1 Kings, chapter 20 discusses King Ahab's military encounter with Syria and its consequences. Chapter 21 returns to the narrative concerning the interaction between Elijah and Ahab. The Septuagint has chapter 21 follow 19, indicating its status as a continuation of the Elijah history. Chapter 21 begins with the simple statement that "Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard." The significance of this vineyard arose from its location "hard by," or next to, "the palace of Ahab king of Samaria." (1 Kings 21:1.) Note that Ahab is referred to as "king of Samaria," a reference to his capital city, not the kingdom as a whole. Why did he have a palace in Jezreel if his capital was Samaria? Because of Jezreel's location at an elevation of about 375 feet, the king and queen presumably resorted there during the cool winter months to absent themselves from the chilly nights that would prevail in the mountains of Israel, where Samaria stood at 1,340 feet. Jezreel may also have functioned as a secondary place of residence where the king and queen could get away from the center of activity. This might explain why the king took such a personal interest in having a plot of land next door to the palace for a "garden of herbs" (v. 2). Perhaps gardening was a hobby.

Whatever the specific reasons, Ahab approached his neighbor Naboth, saying, "Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money" (1 Kings 21:2). To us, that sounds like a reasonable request. He offered to either pay for it with cash or give another vineyard of equal or greater value in exchange for it. We do not know if there were other underlying factors involved or pressure tactics being used. It is, therefore, somewhat surprising to read that Naboth declined the offer: "The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee" (1 Kings 21:3). Perhaps he did not like the king or his queen and so was not inclined to sell his family inheritance. Or maybe there were legal impediments of which we have no knowledge. Or perhaps Naboth was simply content with his circumstances and concerned about a change.

A more probable clue to Naboth's reasoning arises from the fact that, under the law of Moses, property was viewed as hereditary, belonging not only to the owner and his children but also to generations yet unborn (see Leviticus 25:23-28). Property was also viewed as a link to a man's ancestors. The Israelites evidently understood that the land actually belonged to the Lord and that individuals acted only as stewards over it. Under the Mosaic law, it could be mortgaged or sold only with a right of reversion, whereby it would revert to the original owning family in the year of Jubilee (every 50 years). At that time, it would be redeemed or purchased back for a price. The stewardship of Naboth's parcel had probably been in his family for generations. He therefore really could not sell the land, for it belonged not only to him but also to his past and future family.

The possession of such a parcel of land also entailed certain rights and status in society that would have passed to Naboth as a natural inheritance. To give up the land would not only break the link with his forebears but also sever his ties with the society in which he had been raised. What would he then do? Where would he go? How would he reestablish himself in a new community? The ideas of moving one's residence from place to place or changing occupations that are so common in our era would have been very foreign to the people of his day. In certain areas even today, you never have a sense of really belonging socially unless you are born in a town. Even with monetary compensation or another vineyard in exchange for his, Naboth would have to start over. Such a prospect may have seemed overwhelming.

It also appears that without some exigent reason of state, the king of Israel could not unilaterally appropriate privately held land. With all these reasons in mind, Naboth's response to Ahab's proposal was simply no. What legal recourse did Ahab have when confronted with such a refusal? Apparently none. What could he then do, having been deprived of his desire? Exactly what we might expect of someone whose character has been so well portrayed in so few words: he pouted and sulked. "And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And [Ahab] laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread." (1 Kings 21:4.) Ahab's feelings when he returned unsuccessful in obtaining Naboth's vineyard were "heavy and displeased," or, in another translation, "much excited and angry." [^1]The same words describe his reaction in 1 Kings 20:43, upon his being informed by a prophetic messenger that Ahab's life would be forfeited because he spared that of Israel's archenemy, Ben-hadad of Syria. Ahab developed a patterned response to bad news. Indeed, he had a true attitude problem.

Since he stopped eating, it would have been impossible for his queen, Jezebel, not to notice his sulking. She approached him and asked, "Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?" (1 Kings 21:5.) She was undoubtedly familiar with the pettiness of his feelings, but she apparently did not know what had generated this bout. We can envision Ahab lying on his bed, facing the wall, responding with a whiny longing in his voice, "Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard" (1 Kings 21:6). Jezebel responded, "Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel?" (1 Kings 21:7.) This phrase has been understood many ways. Perhaps it expressed defiance: "Who does Naboth think he is to deny the king?" Or perhaps Jezebel was sarcastically chiding her husband for whining over such an insignificant thing. Or maybe the translation of the phrase as "Are you or are you not king in Israel?" [^2]indicates neither disdain of Naboth nor sarcasm but merely a question displaying Jezebel's view of what it meant to be king. Her previous imposition of Baal worship and her later actions regarding Naboth certainly certify that her view of kingship tended more toward absolute monarchy than the traditional Israelite idea of the king being the Lord's servant to govern the people.

Jezebel directed her sullen husband, "Arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite" (1 Kings 21:7). We may assume that Ahab resumed his kingly posture, but are left to wonder if he ever inquired of Jezebel how she intended to fulfill her promise. This record of a pouting king being advised to be of good cheer by an iniquitous woman reminds us of another such account in Ether 8. There Jared, king of the Jaredites, was introduced to secret combinations by his scheming daughter. Jezebel proceeded to write letters in her husband's name, seal them with his royal seal, and send them "unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his city, dwelling with Naboth" (1 Kings 21:8). It seems probable that the well-being of the city leaders and nobility throughout the kingdom depended principally on the wishes of the king. That would have been especially true of those inhabiting a city where one of the royal palaces resided. Without any indication of questioning the royal wish, the city elders carried out the directives contained in Jezebel's forged letters.

And what were those instructions? "Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people: and set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he may die." (1 Kings 21:9-10.) The proclamation of a fast was probably done on the pretext of the need to discover the cause of some local misfortune. In the Old Testament, leaders frequently declared fasts to find the cause of a problem affecting the people or to ward off some impending peril (see Judges 20:20-27; Joel 1:13-15; 2:15-17; Jeremiah 14:1, 12). The meaning of the phrase that Naboth should be set "on high" continues to be a matter of debate. It may signify that he was to be set in front of the people in a high place, as one in the seat of the accused on trial before the elders of the people. Or it could mean that he was to be positioned in a place of honor, so that when the accusation was made against him, it would be even more serious because of his exalted position. This latter approach seems more likely. The "sons of Belial" refers to good-for-nothings or scoundrels, those of low moral character who would perjure themselves for money.

It is interesting that of all the accusations Jezebel might have conjured up to be used against Naboth, she chose blasphemy. Such a charge required no stolen goods or dead body as proof, only the testimony of false witnesses, which could be easily arranged. Ironically, she chose to charge Naboth with the very crime of which she herself was guilty. In a similar way, Laman and Lemuel accused their brother Nephi of the evil designs that were, in reality, their own, not his (see 1 Nephi 16:37-38). There seems to be a human tendency to judge others negatively by seeing in them the evils that lurk in our own hearts. That realization should temper all of us in our inclination to judge, remembering that "with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again" (Matthew 7:2).

Jezebel's plan unfolded according to her desires. On the pretext that he had cursed God and the king, Naboth was falsely identified as the cause of the people's existing or pending distress. He was condemned and subsequently destroyed. 2 Kings 9:26 indicates that his sons were executed with him in conformity with Israelite practice (see Numbers 16:27, 32-33; Joshua 7:24-25; 2 Samuel 21:6). Society seemed to fear that the sons would perpetuate their father's supposed blasphemy, thus carrying out the curse. According to those laws known as "escheat," which still exist today, if there is no surviving heir to property, it is forfeited to the crown. Jezebel's plan worked flawlessly. Yet this whole evil scenario raises a troubling question. In the midst of an era of growth and expansion, was the taking of Naboth's vineyard an isolated incident or just one of many such acquisitions? We do not know for sure. Either way, this act of immorality stands out for its sheer perfidy.

The queen realized her wish and presented the vineyard to her husband. Thus "it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead" (1 Kings 21:15). The scripture gives no clue that Ahab asked how Naboth's death had occurred. He simply seemed pleased to at last get the vineyard. He "rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it" (1 Kings 21:16). It is instructive to see how easily Ahab and Jezebel ignored those of the ten commandments that relate to our relationship with our fellowmen when they had already broken the first two commandments, which concern our relationship to God. Having disobeyed "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" and "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image" (Exodus 20:3-4), it seemed quite natural for them to break the commandments against covetousness, stealing, bearing false witness, and, ultimately, murder. Indeed, they breached all of these within the first 14 verses of chapter 21. According to 2 Chronicles 21:13, they also broke the command to refrain from adultery. This is a powerful lesson to us all and should teach us to remember that if our relationship with God is wrong, nothing else can go right. On the other hand, the lesson from the lives of those who follow the Lord is that if obeying him is our first priority, all else will eventually fall into place.

In some ways, it seems as though this story of taking Naboth's vineyard should end in chapter 21, verse 16. Yet verse 17 is where it really begins. All that precedes seems only to set the stage for the sudden arrival of Elijah. Just as the prophet's initial appearance in Jericho seemed abrupt, Ahab must have felt that Elijah appeared out of nowhere this time. As Ahab happily journeyed to take possession of Naboth's vineyard, "the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it" (1 Kings 21:17-18).

Remember that throughout Ahab's reign, the kingdom of Israel enjoyed relative security and prosperity. Elijah's constant harangues must have discomfited everyone at court. He was continually calling them to accountability. Ahab seemed to be happy only twice in this whole narrative. One of those times occurred when he correctly predicted that Micaiah, another prophet of Jehovah, would prophesy evil against him (see 1 Kings 22:7-18). The other happened when he went to take possession of Naboth's vineyard. The Lord, through his prophets, would not allow Ahab to enjoy happiness in iniquity, "which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38). As Alma so clearly stated, "Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). The Lord was not about to let Ahab forget that. Therefore, his message to the king of Israel on this occasion declared, "Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? . . . In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine." (1 Kings 21:19.)

The meeting between the prophet and the king would definitely not be classified as a happy reunion. Ahab, who once accused Elijah of troubling Israel (see 1 Kings 18:17), now addressed him thus: "Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?" Elijah responded, "I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord." (1 Kings 21:20.) The Lord made a similar accusation in the Pearl of Great Price, indicating that some of Noah's descendants had "sold themselves" (Moses 8:15). In this context, the phrase means to sell oneself short, to give oneself over to one's lusts, to relinquish one's will to evil and thus to voluntarily enslave oneself. Remember that the Lord executes judgment in righteousness and that "if they are condemned they bring upon themselves their own condemnation" (Helaman 14:29). The consequences of Ahab's selling himself to do evil now brought from Elijah's mouth the Lord's decree.

In essence, Elijah confronted and condemned both monarchs for their evils, even though he did not speak to Jezebel in person. The judgment he pronounced assured the gruesome deaths of both king and queen. Not only were they to die, but Jezebel and some of their posterity were to suffer the added disgrace of lacking burial. Additionally, and most calamitous of all, their family line would become extinct. "Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall [that is to say, all living descendants], and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin. And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel. Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat." (1 Kings 21:21-24.) This grim prophecy that Ahab's family would cease to exist, given from the lips of the prophet whose mission pertained to the covenants and ordinances that bind families eternally, causes us to shudder.

As if to remind us of all he had previously written, the author of 1 Kings then reemphasized: "But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up. And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all things as did the Amorites, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel." (1 Kings 21:25-26.) This reminder makes Ahab's response to Elijah's pronouncement nothing less than a miracle: "And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly" (1 Kings 21:27). Of the many types of miracles, none is more remarkable than the changing of a heart.

Ahab indicated his state of sadness and mourning by rending or ripping his clothes, a traditional sign of grief among the Israelites. He wore sackcloth, a rough burlap-like material that would chafe the skin, as an act of penance. He fasted, presumably for the same reasons we do, to sublimate his natural passions and humbly seek the Lord. He "went softly," or sadly or dejectedly. From all appearances, he experienced the sorrow for sin that we term repentance. Given Ahab's history, it is easy to understand why some have questioned his motives. But the Lord, who "looketh on the heart" (1 Samuel 16:7), confirmed to Elijah that it was not just a matter of appearances: "And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house." (1 Kings 21:28-29.) He who alone can judge our hearts decided to postpone the pronounced sentence. After all we have learned about Ahab's character, to see him humble himself before the Lord is to witness the truly miraculous. If Ahab could humble himself sufficiently to obtain a postponement of the pronounced condemnation, will not the Lord also extend mercy to the rest of us if we humble ourselves to "the depths of humility"? (Mosiah 4:11.) Repentance and forgiveness are truly great miracles, and remain available to us only because of the greatest miracle of all, the atonement of Jesus Christ.

We should recognize another important lesson presented here, namely that we are not authorized to pronounce final judgments on anyone, even Ahab. God alone is "the Judge of all the earth" (Genesis 18:25). He has commanded us: "Judge not unrighteously" (JST, Matthew 7:1). Instead, we are to become like him, loving "righteousness and judgment" (Psalm 33:5) and being merciful, or full of mercy. He may have "mercy on whom he will have mercy" (Romans 9:18), but of us "it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10). To be worthy to be called his children, we must acquire even those attributes of justice and mercy alluded to by the prophet Micah: "Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy." (Micah 7:18.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The Holy Bible: New International Version (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1984).
[^2] C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Commentaries on the Old Testament, vol. 6, trans. James Martin (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1949), 287; see also George Arthur Buttrick et al., eds., The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1952-57), 3:191.
