Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Ten

The Deaths of Ahab and Ahaziah

The Lord postponed but did not rescind the prophesied destruction of Ahab's family. It is difficult to gauge exactly how Ahab's penance affected his own demise. His death at the hands of the Syrian army during an attack on Ramoth-Gilead are detailed in the chapter immediately following the one containing Elijah's prophecy. Ahab joined forces with Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, to battle Syria. Ahab entered the battle in disguise but that was not enough to protect him. "A certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am wounded" (1 Kings 22:34). The phrase "between the joints of the harness" refers to the unprotected area between his armor and breastplate, meaning that the arrow pierced him. The narrative continues: "And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot. . . . So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria. And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the word of the Lord which he spake." (1 Kings 22:35, 37-38.) Thus ended the reign and the mortal life of Ahab, king of Israel.

Ahab's son, Ahaziah, succeeded him as king and "did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother" (1 Kings 22:52). About two years into his reign, Ahaziah "fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick." Without more information, it is not possible to reconstruct exactly what accident befell the new king. Houses in the Near East are constructed with flat roofs that serve as either floors for upper stories or porches and patios. It is hard to decipher whether Ahaziah fell through a lattice work on the floor of such an upper story or through some kind of side panel forming a railing. He apparently suffered a major fall and sustained critical injuries. The scripture probably refers to those unhealed injuries when it says he was sick. In this seriously injured state, the king "sent messengers, and said unto them, Go, enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of this disease." (2 Kings 1:2.) Ekron, a Philistine city located southwest of Jerusalem, was a considerable distance from Samaria. The king must have been in great distress to send messengers such a distance for a personal psychic reading.

Strong evidence throughout the narrative about Elijah demonstrates that signs and miracles do not convert. For instance, the miracle of the perpetuation of the meal and oil was not enough to shore up the widow of Zarephath's faith against the loss of her son. Although Obadiah, Ahab's servant, had undoubtedly been blessed by the Lord for hiding the prophets from Jezebel's wrath, he sought further assurances before willfully heeding Elijah's command to announce his arrival to Ahab. Ahab seemed to miss the repeated miraculous messages to repent, or, at least, they never seemed to sink in until near the end of his life when, under penalty of death, he finally began to understand. After all that had happened to his father, Ahab, Ahaziah still sent to Baal-zebub for a sign. Perhaps that very callousness and hard-heartedness also brought upon him the severity of his condemnation. Whereas "signs follow those that believe" because they are the natural result of faith, the Lord warns us against seeking signs, for "he that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation" (D&C 63:9, 7). Ahab's idolatrous family members sought signs and received them, but "only in wrath unto their condemnation" (D&C 63:11).

So, Ahaziah proceeded to seek a sign from Baal-zebub. The name Baal-zebub literally means "the Lord of the flies." Perhaps the name of this Philistine deity referred to the god's supposed power to control weather, of which flies are monitors or harbingers. Or, perhaps the involvement of flies in cases of sickness and death implied that this god had some jurisdiction over them. Or it may be that the original name of the deity was Baal Zebul (Baal is prince), which Hebrew scribes later altered to read Baal-zebub as an insult. It is hard to tell. Regardless of the background of the Philistine idol's name, why did Ahaziah send to Ekron at all? Why not contact the local Baal priests in Samaria? Perhaps he feared divulging the seriousness of his injury to the locals because of intrigues within the government. Or maybe he believed the "grass to be greener on the other side," especially if the Philistine god had a better reputation for healing. It would not be surprising to learn that the Baal of Samaria had proved a poor support to Ahaziah's previous needs. It may also be that the Philistine Baal of Ekron had a reputation for divination (see 1 Samuel 6:2; Isaiah 2:6). The brevity of the scriptural text precludes our having answers to these questions.

Whatever the king's specific reasoning, the messengers departed. As they left on their journey, "the angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Now therefore thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die" (2 Kings 1:3-4). The true God, Jehovah, would answer Ahaziah's question even though the king had not addressed it to him. "Elijah departed" (2 Kings 1:4), apparently encountered the king's emissaries, and delivered to them the message from the Lord. They then returned to the king, who asked them, "Why are ye now turned back?" (2 Kings 1:5.) At that point, the king's messengers became the Lord's messengers, delivering to the king the message communicated to them by Elijah.

Evidently, Elijah had not introduced himself to the messengers, since Ahaziah inquired of them, "What manner of man was he which came up to meet you, and told you these words?" (2 Kings 1:7.) They responded, "He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins" (2 Kings 1:8). The reference to "hairy" could mean that Elijah wore long hair and a full beard or, more likely, refers to his wearing a garment of animal skins covered with hair or wool on the outside. Most individuals in society would have worn clothing made from woven materials instead. It appears that the mantle of the prophet was easily recognizable as something relatively unique because of the way the messengers mentioned it. Their description parallels that given of John the Baptist, who "was clothed with camel's hair, and a with a girdle of a skin about his loins" (Mark 1:6). The description, though seemingly brief and vague, was sufficient to be immediately recognized by King Ahaziah: "It is Elijah the Tishbite" (2 Kings 1:8).

The king then sent "a captain of fifty with his fifty" to Elijah. Ahaziah's intent in doing so can only have been hostile, to either capture or kill the prophet. Elijah's location must have been known to the captain and his company, either because the general area of his habitation was a matter of common knowledge or because Elijah's meeting with the king's messengers pinpointed it. The captain "went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he spake unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down." (2 Kings 1:9.) Apparently without moving from the spot where he sat, Elijah responded, "If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty." The account continues, "And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty." (2 Kings 1:10.)

Ahaziah either received word from someone of what had happened or surmised that something had gone awry when the captain and fifty did not return. He "sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king said, Come down quickly." (2 Kings 1:11.) This second captain, more demanding and more insistent than the first, commanded Elijah to come down "quickly" or "at once." [^1]Elijah's response was the same as that given to the previous request: "If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty." The result was also the same: "And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty." (2 Kings 1:12.) There is a play on words here in the Hebrew. Elijah essentially said, "If I am a man of God"isch Elohim"let the fire of God"esch Elohim"come down from heaven."

The news of the destruction of the first two groups had now reached the king, but he sent a third group of fifty anyway. While Ahaziah may not have understood the message, the captain of the third group of fifty surely had. "And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight. Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my life now be precious in thy sight." (2 Kings 1:13-14.) The attitude of the third captain was totally different from that of the first two. Rather than demanding that Elijah accompany him, he approached Elijah on his knees and pleaded for his life and the lives of his followers, calling them the prophet's "servants." This marked change of demeanor probably would have evoked mercy and forbearance from Elijah under any circumstances, but we shall never know what the prophet's response might otherwise have been, because an angel intervened at that moment. He instructed Elijah, "Go down with him: be not afraid of him." Elijah then "arose, and went down with him unto the king." (2 Kings 1:15.)

Note that Elijah made no move at all to comply with the king's command to come down the first, second, or even third time. The command of the mortal ruler of Israel had no visible effect on him. Conversely, the command of Israel's Heavenly King warranted Elijah's immediate and total submission. While seemingly immune to human pressure, he remained absolutely subservient to the divine will communicated to him by the angel. At his meeting with the king, Elijah did no more than repeat the divine message that had already been communicated to the ruler. "Thus saith the Lord, . . . thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die" (2 Kings 1:16). The text records no verbal response by Ahaziah to the Lord's prophecy through Elijah. He just died.

Some readers have been extremely disturbed by Elijah's actions in calling down fire from heaven to destroy the two groups of fifty sent by Ahaziah. They interpret these actions to be unfair, or a misuse of power, or a tarnishing of his prophetic image. Others see them as acceptable only because of the Old Testament mentality of "an eye for an eye." Christian commentators have tended to view the Lord's rebuke of his Apostles James and John recorded in Luke 9 as a condemnation of Elijah, an indication that under the new law established by Christ, Elijah's actions could not be condoned. [^2]But is such an interpretation of this experience accurate?

The interaction between the Lord and his two Apostles recounted in Luke 9 followed an incident which occurred while they traveled through Samaria. The Lord was on his way to Jerusalem and "sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem." (Luke 9:52-53.) Apparently, the Samaritans refused to receive and assist the Lord because he was headed to Jerusalem and the Samaritans and Jews were not on good terms. When James and John saw this rudeness, they said, "Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did?" (Luke 9:54.) Elias is the translation from the Greek for the Hebrew name Elijah. The Lord responded with a rebuke, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them." (Luke 9:55-56.)

It appears James and John responded inappropriately to the lack of hospitality by the Samaritans. They simply overreacted, for there is no evidence they made the proposal because their lives were threatened as Elijah's had been. The Lord's response indicates that the brothers were not acting out of a sense of zeal to defend the Lord's words or work, nor out of a need for self-defense. Their emotions or reasoning must have been negatively motivated, perhaps by embarrassment or anger. Thus, the Lord's comment to them did not condemn Elijah, but rather rebuked the attitude then animating the "sons of thunder" (Mark 3:17).

Elijah's case was clearly different. The original messengers of Ahaziah, those sent to Ekron, and the last, the third group of fifty, were submissive to Elijah's authority over that of the king. They essentially abandoned their royal commission and obeyed Elijah. To the contrary, the first and second groups of fifty sought to impose the will of the king over that of the "man of God." By threatening the life of the prophet, they sought to thwart the purposes of the Lord. The Lord himself informed Nephi that he "slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes. It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief." (1 Nephi 4:13.) In Nephi's case, it was one man; in Elijah's, it was one hundred.

But was it really the Lord's will that they be destroyed? Apparently, yes. The servant does not superimpose his will over that of the Master. The Lord obviously approved of Elijah's actions, for the Lord sent the fire from heaven. Elijah was a prophet, not a magician. He alone could not make the fire descend; only the Lord could do that. It is also possible that Elijah's words to the two sets of soldiers were not a command for fire to come at all but rather a prophecy of what was about to happen. Throughout Elijah's life, he received great power because of his submission to the Lord's will. Compare the raising of the son of the widow of Zarephath to the demise of Ahaziah. As the Lord's messenger, Elijah had power to speak the words of life or death. It is likely that the Lord at some point had said to him as he did later to Nephi, the son of Helaman, "Behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will" (Helaman 10:5).

---
Notas:
[^1] The Holy Bible: New International Version (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1984).
[^2] C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Commentaries on the Old Testament, vol. 6, trans. James Martin (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1949), 287; see also George Arthur Buttrick et al., eds., The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1952-57), 3:191.
