Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Eleven

The Destruction of Ahab's Family

Thus, in fulfillment of the prophecy of Elijah, both Ahab and his son Ahaziah died. But what of the rest of the family? Ahaziah's brother Jehoram (or Joram) began to reign over Israel in his stead. Of him, the record states, "He wrought evil in the sight of the Lord; but not like his father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that his father had made. Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom." (2 Kings 3:2-3.)

At about the same time, another Jehoram, the firstborn son of righteous King Jehoshaphat, began to reign in Judah. He took to wife the daughter of Ahab, named Athaliah, and "walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab . . . : and he did evil in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kings 8:18). Perhaps because of the influence of his wife or because of his own natural inclinations, Jehoram tried to impose the idolatry of the kingdom of Israel on the inhabitants of Judah. "Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah thereto" (2 Chronicles 21:11).

As a result of this wickedness, Elijah sent him a "writing." We have no other reference to Elijah's being involved with the kingdom of Judah except for his earlier trip through Beersheba, the southernmost city of Judah, on his way to Horeb. Elijah's written words to the king mirror the directness and power of his spoken ones:

Thus saith the Lord God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,

But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were better than thyself:

Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:

And thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day. (2 Chronicles 21:12-15.)

This gruesome prophecy was completely fulfilled. Speaking of Jehoram, the author of 2 Chronicles says simply that he "departed without being desired" (21:20).

Following Jehoram of Judah's ignominious death, his son, Ahaziah (or Azariah), who would have been Ahab's grandson, ascended to the throne. Like his father, this new king "walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kings 8:27). The intermarriage of his father, Jehoram, king of Judah, with the family of Ahab of Israel led to political and military alliances between the two kingdoms. That relationship also caused the evils of false worship to infect and spread throughout the southern kingdom.

During the time spanning all these dynastic changes in the two kingdoms, Elijah's successor, Elisha, arranged to carry out the Lord's directive that Jehu be anointed king of Israel. Elisha sent one of his faithful followers to Jehu, who then served as a captain in the army of Israel. Jehu was anointed with oil and had the following blessing pronounced upon him: "Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of the Lord, even over Israel. And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel. For the whole house of Ahab shall perish." (2 Kings 9:6-8.) Jehu took this charge seriously and proceeded quickly to accomplish it. He drove his chariot "furiously" (v. 20) toward Jezreel, where Ahab's son Jehoram, king of Israel, was recovering from wounds received in a battle with Syria.

It so happened that Ahaziah, king of Judah, was then visiting his uncle Jehoram, king of Israel, at the latter's palace in Jezreel. Upon word of Jehu's approach, both kings went forth to meet him. Jehoram asked, "Is it peace, Jehu?" to which the newly anointed and commissioned captain replied tersely, "What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?" (2 Kings 9:22.) As the full realization of the threat struck Jehoram, he turned to flee, yelling to his nephew, "There is treachery, O Ahaziah" (v. 23). The account continues: "And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his chariot" (v. 24). Jehu commanded that Jehoram's body be cast into the very field that had once belonged to Naboth, "according to the word of the Lord" (v. 26). Ahaziah fled, but not fast enough. Jehu's men caught him, smote him, and the wounded king of Judah fled across the plains of Esdraelon, only to die in the fortress city of Megiddo.

Having dispatched the kings of both Israel and Judah, Jehu continued his journey to Jezreel. At his approach, the queen mother, Jezebel, "painted her face, and tired her head" (2 Kings 9:30). "Tired her head" means she adorned or fixed her hair. She had previously lost her husband, Ahab, and now, in one moment, she lost her son and grandson. Yet, for one such as Jezebel, vanity continued even in the face of calamity. Dressed in all her finery, she looked out her window, which must have been over the wall of the city, and made a sarcastic remark to Jehu concerning an earlier king of Israel who reigned only seven days after slaying his predecessor: "Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?" (v. 31.) Her biting tongue invited her fate. The scriptural record tells it clearly:

And [Jehu] lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my side? who? And there looked out to him two or three eunuchs.

And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode her under foot.

And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king's daughter.

And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.

Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the word of the Lord, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel. (Vv. 32-36.)

In one day, Ahab's wife, son, and grandson died. But more was yet to come. Jehu took charge and commanded in writing that the leaders of the people send forth the best of Ahab's remaining sons to contend with him. The kings of Israel and Judah practiced plural marriage, so Ahab had many sons. Nevertheless, the people feared Jehu, saying, "Behold, two kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand?" (2 Kings 10:4.) The frightened leaders therefore gathered together seventy of the sons of Ahab, beheaded them, and sent their heads to Jehu. Jehu deposited the heads overnight in two piles near the gate of the city. The following morning "he went out, and stood, and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these? Know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which the Lord spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the Lord hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah. So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left him none remaining." (Vv. 9-11.)

Meanwhile, in Judah, Athaliah, daughter of Ahab and widow of Jehoram (who died when his bowels fell out), learned that her son Ahaziah had been slain. She proceeded to take control of the kingdom by ordering the death of "all the seed royal" (2 Kings 11:1), which included her own descendants. One of them was spared, however; a young son of Ahaziah was hidden by his nurse. Eventually, this sole survivor, Joash (or Jehoash), regained the throne and slew Athaliah (see v. 16). Under the tutelage of a priest faithful to Jehovah, this new king repudiated the false worship of his ancestors, Ahaziah, Jehoram and Athaliah, and Ahab and Jezebel. It is recorded of him that he "did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his days" (2 Kings 12:2). Thus, again, the Lord's promises were fulfilled. Not only did he destroy the wicked members of the family of Ahab as prophesied, but he forgave and favored the descendant who returned to him, in accordance with his promise that the house of David, of which Joash was also a part, would not be destroyed.

From a broader perspective, the Lord treated the extended family of Ahab according to general principles he had established centuries earlier for his relationship to his chosen people: "Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them [false gods or graven images], nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments" (Deuteronomy 5:9-10). Clearly, those thousands whom he loves include those children of the wicked "who repent, or the children's children, [who] turn to the Lord their God, with all their hearts and with all their might, mind, and strength" (D&C 98:47). The recitation of Elijah's prophecies to Ahab and their resultant fulfillment are but one of many examples witnessing that the holy scriptures are a record of the verification of the Lord's promises; for he truly fulfills all his words.
