Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Twelve

The Departure

Just as the Lord fulfills his promises, he also verifies the words and works of his prophets. For this reason, he arranged to put a stamp of approval on Elijah's life and mission by orchestrating the prophet's miraculous departure from the earth. Once Elijah had completed all that the Lord assigned him to accomplish, his mortal mission quickly drew to a close. That being the case, he journeyed to the pre-appointed place for his departure.

"And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal" (2 Kings 2:1). The Gilgal mentioned here may not be the same city commonly referred to in the Old Testament, which city lay near Jericho and was the site where Joshua set up camp after crossing the Jordan to enter the land of Canaan (see Joshua 4:19; 5:10). If it was that location, Elijah and Elisha traveled westward from the Jordan valley up into the hills to Bethel and then returned to the valley whence they started. The route seems circuitous unless Elijah received some vital aspect of preparation in Bethel. After all, he did indicate that the Lord specifically "sent" him to Bethel (2 Kings 2:2). Or, it may be that the Gilgal referred to is the one mentioned in Deuteronomy 11:30, which would have been farther to the northwest in the hill country of Samaria. This would suggest that Elijah and Elisha started from the center of the northern kingdom on their route toward the river Jordan, thus arriving at Bethel and Jericho as natural stops along the route. Since the scripture does say they went "down" to Bethel (2 Kings 2:2) and that term in the Hebrew text usually denotes a descent in elevation, either they ascended from the Jordan valley to a point in elevation higher than Bethel and then descended to it, or they went there from another, more obscure location named Gilgal that was situated at a higher level, perhaps the one referenced in Deuteronomy.

Bethel, meaning literally the "house of God," was a sacred site where both Abraham and Jacob communed with the Almighty (see Genesis 12:8; 13:3; 28:19). For some unrecorded reason, Elijah needed to make a final pilgrimage there before his mortal mission was complete. He apparently knew of his coming departure and seems to have wanted Elisha to leave him so he might be alone. "And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Beth-el." But his follower responded, "As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee." (2 Kings 2:2.) Elisha employed a solemn oath invoking the life of God and also, interestingly, the life of Elijah. Usually, when we see such oaths, they are made by the life of God and the life of the speaker. Here, Elisha swore by Elijah's life instead of his own.

When the two arrived at Bethel, "the sons of the prophets that were at Beth-el came forth to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace." (2 Kings 2:3.) The phrase "sons of the prophets," which appears frequently in chapter 2 of 2 Kings, probably refers to followers of Jehovah who obeyed the prophetic message. The fact that they knew so much about Elijah, his apprentice Elisha, and what was about to happen indicates that they received inspiration and also that Elijah may have pursued a ministry among them about which nothing is recorded. Elisha's response to these followers of the prophets shows that he had at least the general idea of Elijah's imminent departure. Whereas Elijah knew he was about to leave the earth, perhaps he did not realize that Elisha knew it also. Maybe Elisha received independent inspiration about his master's leaving, which gave impetus to his insistence on being with him when the moment arrived.

At Bethel, the same interchange again occurred between Elijah and Elisha. Elijah asked his follower to tarry and Elisha responded with an oath that he would not. After descending the hills to Jericho, which lies in the low-lying Jordan valley, Elisha again met the "sons of the prophets," who asked him if he knew that he was about to lose his master. To them, he also answered, "Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace." (2 Kings 2:5.) Upon leaving Jericho, Elijah asked Elisha a third time to remain behind. For the third time, Elisha refused. So "they two went on" (v. 6). Fifty men of the sons of the prophets followed them as far as the Jordan River (see v. 7).

Standing on the west bank of the Jordan, "Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground" (2 Kings 2:8). The mantle of Elijah, with all its symbolic meaning, was used as the instrument to perform this great miracle. Parting the waters and crossing on dry ground obviously evokes memories of Moses' parting the Red Sea (see Exodus 14:13-22), but it also reminds us of Joshua's parting the Jordan when the army of Israel first entered Canaan (see Joshua 3:7-17). Even as Israel crossed westward on dry ground to inherit the promised land, Elijah now crossed eastward to receive the promise of his God.

Speaking of the promised land, the Old Testament prophet Obadiah referred to Gilead and Zarephath as its boundaries (see Obadiah 1:17-21). When first introducing Elijah, the scripture tells us that he was of the inhabitants of Gilead (see 1 Kings 17:1). His travels had taken him from the brook Cherith in Gilead, in the eastern borders of the land, to Zarephath, in the territory of Sidon far to the north, where he was given food and shelter by the widow. He then probably wandered along the western reaches of the promised land from Mount Carmel to Beersheba in the south, then on to Mount Horeb. His return from Mount Horeb brought him up the eastern borders of Judah and Israel toward Syria. His ultimate departure to heaven occurred to the east of the Jordan River, roughly the same location as that of the translation of Moses. Elijah's journeys seem to have circumscribed the boundaries of the promised land. It was as though his very life drew a circle around the area principally occupied by those who had a peculiar covenant relationship with Jehovah, those who needed to turn their hearts again to the covenant. As Moses had gathered the people, brought them to know God, and delivered them to this spot east of Jordan, Elijah had now drawn a circle around that same covenant people and come to this place to return them to their God.

"And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me." (2 Kings 2:9.) Elijah responded, "Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so" (v. 10). Elisha must have been a faithful and obedient follower. Nonetheless, the magnitude of the request made it something that even Elijah could not bestow. The power to grant such a petition belonged to the Lord alone. If Elisha had the spiritual vision to view Elijah's departure, it would demonstrate that he could penetrate the celestial sphere and envision heavenly things. Thus, he would have the power he requested.

At first reading, Elisha's request seems extraordinary. Was he asking to be better and more powerful than his teacher? No, it appears he simply sought "earnestly the best gifts" (D&C 46:8). By asking for a double portion of Elijah's spirit, Elisha requested to be given the status of a firstborn son, who, under the law of Moses, received a double share of his father's inheritance (see Deuteronomy 12:17). Elisha's reference to Elijah as "my father" (2 Kings 2:12) indicates his great respect for his guide and his sense of dependence upon Elijah, much like a child upon a father. In a sense, as Elisha's teacher, leader, and prophetic master, Elijah became Elisha's spiritual father. Elisha thus requested his perceived birthright, asking that he be established as the true successor of Elijah. Perhaps he also pleaded for powers far beyond his own, to truly be endowed with the power of his predecessor.

They continued their discussion as they walked. But suddenly they were interrupted and separated by a most singular event. "And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven" (2 Kings 2:11). A chariot and horses of fire made an instant appearance and a dramatic departure. Since there is no indication of anything actually being burned, the use of the word fire here is probably a reference to the appearance of heavenly glory. The scriptures often refer to the manifestation of glory as fire. Glory is difficult to describe, but seems to have some relationship to physical presence, something akin to pure, divine energy accompanied by light. Contrary to the popular conception of hell as being a place of fire, Isaiah explained that heaven is such a place by asking, "Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire . . . with everlasting burnings?" The answer? "He that walketh righteously." (Isaiah 33:14-15.) Joseph Smith confirmed that "God Almighty Himself dwells in eternal fire." [^1]"And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof" (2 Kings 2:12). Elisha's request was granted, for he had seen his companion depart. Note that Elisha's exclamation refers to "horsemen" as well as the horses and chariot. These horsemen were probably angelic escorts for Elijah. When Joseph Smith said, "Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire and glory," [^2]he was likely alluding to just such appearances as that witnessed by Elisha. The record continues, "And he saw him no more." Finding himself alone, bereaved of his great mentor, the faithful Elisha "took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces." (2 Kings 2:12.) In symbolic fashion, Elisha indicated his profound grief. As so often happens, even though we anticipate a separation, when the actual moment arrives, we seem to be caught completely unprepared and a wave of sadness overwhelms us.

Just as Elijah had left his pupil a spiritual legacy, he also left him a physical symbol of his power. As Elijah rose upward with his heavenly escort, his mantle had fallen to the earth. Elisha reverently gathered up this token of spiritual birthright and "went back, and stood by the bank of Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over" (2 Kings 2:13-14). At times, the Lord grants his prophets a physical object on which to focus their spiritual energy and faith. Lehi received the Liahona, Joseph Smith the Urim and Thummim, and Elisha the mantle of the prophet. With this passing of the mantle, Elisha assumed the role of prophet. "And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha" (2 Kings 2:15). This is the only place in our standard works where the precise phrase "the spirit of Elijah" appears. It was apparent to those waiting for the prophet's return that the mantle had passed to, or that the power of their great prophetic leader had been conferred upon, another. After the account of a futile three-day search by some of his followers (see 2 Kings 2:16-18), the historical references to Elijah in the Old Testament record cease.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 171.
[^2] Ibid., 191.
