Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Thirteen

The Doctrine of Translation

What became of Elijah at this point? It is interesting here to reflect on the difference between having our own way and doing things the Lord's way. When Elijah became depressed during his journey to Horeb, he told the Lord he had had enough and was ready to die. But to die then, according to Elijah's desire, would have been premature according to the Lord's plan. By deferring instead to the Lord's will, Elijah went on to his climactic visit with Jehovah at Horeb and then to the fulfillment of other important assignments. When the moment actually came in the Lord's timetable for Elijah to leave the earth, he departed in a blaze of glory, a far cry from the lonely death in the desert that he had earlier wished for himself. Elijah had trusted the One who knows "the end from the beginning" (Abraham 2:8) to grant him the proper "end."

But was it "the end"? Where had Elijah gone? Why had the Lord orchestrated this miraculous departure? We refer to Elijah's being taken to heaven without tasting death as "translation." Translation is a change in physical condition that allows one to remain active on the earth in a body of flesh and bone while simultaneously not being subject to the powers of the earth. It is intended to continue for an extended duration. A similar state lasting for a brief period of time is referred to in the scriptures as "transfiguration." Moses said of just such a short-term experience: "But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him" (Moses 1:11).

The scriptural references to translation refer to persons being left in that state until their time of resurrection (see D&C 133: 53-55). While inquiring of the Lord about the condition of the Three Nephites, who were in a translated state similar to that of Elijah, the prophet Mormon learned that in order for them not to taste of death, "there was a change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow save it were for the sins of the world. Now this change was not equal to that which shall take place at the last day; but there was a change wrought upon them, insomuch that Satan could have no power over them, that he could not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh, that they were holy, and that the powers of the earth could not hold them." (3 Nephi 28:38-39.) Joseph Smith added, "This distinction is made between the doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory." [^1]Thus, he observed on another occasion, "translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." [^2]Joseph Smith also stated: "Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead." [^3]

Why would the Lord translate Elijah instead of letting the prophet minister in the spirit world? Simply because the gospel was not preached to the spirits in the spirit world before the visit of Christ there between his crucifixion and resurrection. The Lord's visit there turned the key for the beginning of that work. We learn from the Doctrine and Covenants that from among the righteous in the spirit world the Lord "organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead" (D&C 138:30). This means that if we have been faithful, when we die we continue our labors "in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead" (D&C 138:57). But had Elijah died, he would have been unable to preach to the spirits in prison because that labor had not yet begun.

Likewise, had Elijah died, he would have had to wait for the renewal of his tangible, physical body until after the Lord's resurrection. Since Christ was the first to be resurrected, those who died before his time were unable to come forth to perform any labors requiring such a body. Yet, the Lord needed Elijah to continue in the flesh because of the nature of his future mission. Translation provided a means whereby the prophet could retain his physical body and still continue in the ministry. It seems clear, then, that Elijah's being translated did not end his prophetic assignments, but rather preserved him to fulfill a future mission. And what was that to be? The only Old Testament references to Elijah after his miraculous departure are the final recorded words of the prophet Malachi, which tell us, at least in part, why the Lord carried the prophet to heaven in a chariot of fire. "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse" (Malachi 4:5-6). Those two brief verses opened the gate to a veritable flood of speculations and traditions about the return of Elijah.

---
Notas:
[^1] Donald Senior et al., The Catholic Study Bible (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 872-73.
[^2] Ephraim E. Urbach, The Sages: Their Concepts and Beliefs, trans. Israel Abrahams (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, Hebrew University, 1979), 660-61.
[^3] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 335-36.
