Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Fourteen

Elijah in the New Testament

With the closing verses of the Old Testament predicting the return of Elijah, it is not surprising that the New Testament record contains questions about his return. Indeed, it stands to reason that Elijah's miraculous departure combined with Malachi's prophecy would stimulate lively conjecture and expectations among the remnant of Israel that inhabited the land of Judea at the time the New Testament record began. Unfortunately, we have only two records that reveal Judaism's pre-Christian-era expectations regarding Elijah's return in the "last times": the writings of Malachi and those of a second-century b.c. Jewish scribe named Ben Sirach. The latter's apocryphal work contains the following lines:

Till like a fire there appeared the prophet Whose words were as a flaming furnace. Their staff of bread he shattered, in his zeal he reduced them to straits; By God's word he shut up the heavens and three times brought down fire. How awesome are you, Elijah! Whose glory is equal to yours? You brought a dead man back to life from the nether world, by the will of the Lord. You sent kings down to destruction, and nobles, from their beds of sickness. You heard threats at Sinai, at Horeb avenging judgments. You anointed kings who should inflict vengeance, and a prophet as your successor. You were taken aloft in a whirlwind, in a chariot with fiery horses. You are destined, it is written, in time to come to put an end to wrath before the day of the Lord, To turn back the hearts of fathers toward their sons, and to re-establish the tribes of Jacob. Blessed is he who shall have seen you before he dies, O Elijah, enveloped in the whirlwind! [^1]

This indicates a Jewish anticipation that Elijah would come to deflect the Lord's wrath from the house of Israel, presumably by turning the hearts of the people toward righteousness. Some scholars surmise that there is at least indirect evidence of a rabbinic tradition dating from the reign of Herod the Great that Elijah would come to correct injustice. [^2]But the best verification of the existence of such an expectation among the Jews comes from the New Testament Gospels themselves. They confirm that the common people knew of such a tradition and anticipated its fulfillment. It is evident from the questions and comments recorded by the four Gospel authors that the people wondered whether either John the Baptist or Jesus had come in fulfillment of Malachi's promise about Elijah's return.

One of the major confusions affecting our understanding of the New Testament references to Elijah is in the rendition of Elijah's name in Greek as "Elias." Whereas the Old Testament was translated from Hebrew documents, the New Testament was translated from Greek ones. "Elijah" in Hebrew becomes "Elias" in Greek. For most people, that poses no special problem, since they simply assume all such references are to Elijah. But for the Latter-day Saints, it does pose some confusion. We know that in addition to the person named Elijah, whose ministry we are discussing in this volume, there lived another Old Testament personage actually named Elias. The specific identification of this Elias is difficult. We do know he is the person who, along with Moses and Elijah, appeared in the Kirtland Temple in 1836. This clearly distinguishes him from either of them. As recorded by Joseph Smith, Elias "committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). This bestowal of the blessings of the Lord's covenant with Abraham upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery would likely have been done by a person from Abraham's time. Beyond that supposition, we cannot pinpoint exactly who Elias was.

In addition to the need to differentiate between the actual person Elias and the person Elijah in the New Testament, another complicating factor is the gospel-related usage of the term "Elias." In that context, any person sent as a forerunner to build the Lord's kingdom or to prepare the Lord's way or to restore something (see JST, Matthew 17:13-14) may be termed an "Elias." Accordingly, Joseph Smith explained: "The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world. . . . We find the Apostles endowed with greater power than John [the Baptist]: their office was more under the spirit and power of Elijah than Elias." [^3]

Thus, the name "Elias" in the New Testament may refer to someone who has the calling of a forerunner, preparer, or restorer; to the actual Old Testament person named Elias; or to Elijah. The Joseph Smith Translation clarifies that, of the fifteen references to Elias in the New Testament, four of themnamely Matthew 11:13-14; 17:10-13; Mark 9:11-13; and John 1:19-28are referring to persons with the calling of Elias. These references are all to preparers or restorers and not to the person Elijah himself. John the Baptist is specifically designated as an Elias in all four scriptures.

Several other New Testament references to Elias definitely refer to Elijah. Consider, for instance, the reference by James to Elias's prayer for rain (see James 5:17), and by Paul to the Lord's answer to the prophet Elias that there were yet seven thousand in Israel who had not yet bowed the knee to Baal (see Romans 11:2-4). Jesus' own comments regarding Elias and the widow of SareptaZarephath in the Old Testamentalso refer to Elijah (see Luke 4:24-26). Several other references to Elias hint at the widespread public anticipation of Elijah's return. Herod Antipusthe slayer of John the Baptistwas curious as to the identity of Jesus because it was rumored by some "that Elias had appeared" (Luke 9:8). Similarly, when the Lord met with his disciples near Caesarea Philippi, he asked them, "Whom say the people that I am?" (Luke 9:18.) They responded that, among several possibilities, many thought him to be Elias, a probable reference to Elijah (see Luke 9:19; Matthew 16:14). This occasion elicited Peter's famous testimony: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matthew 16:16).

Another important reference to Elijah occurred while Jesus hung on the cross and cried, "Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani?" (Matthew 27:46.) Several bystanders believed that he called for Elias. Jewish traditions recorded later in the Talmud indicate a strong belief that Elijah makes frequent appearances to assist the helpless. Those traditions probably already existed in the Lord's day, explaining why some at the cross said, "Let us see whether Elias will come to save him." (See Matthew 27:47-49.)

That leaves only two more New Testament instances of the use of the name Elias. The first is in Luke 1:17, where the angel Gabriel appeared to the priest Zacharias to tell him he would soon have a son named John who would be later designated "the Baptist." Gabriel said, "And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." Here the mention of the spirit and power of Elias could refer either to Elias or to Elijah. The words "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children" sound specifically like a quotation of Malachi's phrase about Elijah. The entire angelic prophecy can be read to refer to that which Elijah was foreordained to accomplish in the last days in preparing a people for the Lord's second coming. A footnote to the verse in the Latter-day Saint Edition of the King James Bible even indicates that Elias "is the Greek form of the Hebrew name, Elijah." Joseph Smith, however, indicated that John the Baptist's mission fit more under the spirit and power of Elias than Elijah, thereby agreeing with the four Joseph Smith Translation changes in the Gospels mentioned above. [^4]

The verse in Luke might possibly indicate that John was destined to fulfill a dual role under the power of both Elias and Elijah, or that his mission would be a type of the mission to be performed by Elijah in the last days. However, there seems to be no other indication in our literature that John's calling was of a nature other than that of an Elias. Doctrine and Covenants 27:7 clarifies the issue, specifically stating that Zacharias was promised "that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias." Since the Lord referred to Elijah by name two verses later in the same revelation, clearly distinguishing between the two names, it seems apparent that the word Elias in Luke 1:17 should be grouped with those New Testament verses that we read as "Elias" as opposed to "Elijah." The only other references made to Elias in the Gospels are those that pertain to the events on the Mount of Transfiguration.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:119.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 82.
[^3] Ibid., 109.
[^4] Ibid., 84.
