Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Fifteen

Elijah and the Mount of Transfiguration

Nowhere in the scholarly biblical literature concerning Elijah is there a greater lack of understanding than in those commentaries regarding his role in the New Testament. The regular academic world cannot accurately assess those references because it fails to grasp two significant concepts: (1) the existence of a person named Elias, and the role of his spirit as differentiated from that of Elijah (as discussed in chapter 14), and (2) the meaning of "the keys of the kingdom" (Matthew 16:19) and their relationship to Elijah's appearance on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Matthew 17:1-4; Mark 9:2-5; and Luke 9:28-33 contain the three accounts of the events on the Mount of Transfiguration, which events took place about a week after Peter's declaration at Caesarea Philippi that Jesus was the Christ (see Matthew 16: 13-20). Luke mentions that Jesus took the three Apostles Peter, James, and John "up into a mountain to pray" (Luke 9:28). Matthew observes that it was a "high mountain apart" (Matthew 17:1). From these descriptions, the two most likely candidates for the specific mountain where this event occurred are Mount Tabor, situated in the midst of the Jezreel valley, and Mount Hermon, located just north of the ancient city of Caesarea Philippi. While each site has its adherents and its detractors, neither the exact placement of the mount nor all the details of what transpired there are significant for our discussion here. Our concern centers solely upon the coming of Elijah on that occasion.

Latter-day prophets have uniformly declared that the "Elias" who visited the Mount of Transfiguration was actually Elijah. In Doctrine and Covenants 138, President Joseph F. Smith referred to seeing in vision "Elias, who was with Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration" (v. 45). Lest there be any misunderstanding as to which person was meant, he continued in the following verses by speaking of Malachi, who had testified of the coming of Elijah, and briefly discussing the meaning of Elijah's coming (see vv. 46-48). It seems President Smith used the name Elias instead of Elijah simply because the New Testament account of the Transfiguration rendered it thus.

Why did Elijah come on that remarkable occasion? With only the brief New Testament accounts to rely on, most readers surmise that Moses came representing the law and Elijah the prophets. Both came to honor Christ and to speak "of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem" (Luke 9:31). Their coming would also have deeply impressed upon the Apostles the realization of Jesus' true identity. The knowledge that the ancients knew and worshiped the same Holy One that the Apostles followed probably proved to be as powerful a witness of Jesus' messianic role as anything they had previously experienced. The display of the Lord's glory, the reverent, worshipful attitudes of Moses and Elijah, and the voice of the Father from heaven all contributed to the same end. The Apostles thus received three witnesses to Christ's divine sonship. While all of this accurately explains some of the reason behind Elijah's appearance, we must turn to latter-day revelation to gain a more in-depth understanding.

About a week before the events at the Mount of Transfiguration, Jesus promised Peter, "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:19). Here the word keys has a powerful meaning. In general, a person possessing keys has some type of authority. Even today many persons in positions of authority in the Near East carry large numbers of keys. Key rings are often worn on the outside of garments, hanging from a belt or sash around the body or on a chain around the neck, so that they may be visible to everyone. The person who carries such keys is recognized as one who has authority in society.

In Matthew 16:19, the Savior used the word keys in a symbolic way to indicate the holding of authority from God, similar to the way the word had been used previously by Isaiah (see Isaiah 22:22). As a person with a literal key can open or shut a door, so one with "keys" of authority in God's kingdom can symbolically open or shut the doors of heaven by exercising his authority to bind (or seal) or loose on earth and in heaven. The word seal also signifies the placing of a stamp of approval on something. Accordingly, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "These keys of the binding, or sealing power, which were given to Peter, James, and John in their dispensation, are keys which make valid all the ordinances of the gospel. They pertain more especially to the work in the temples, both for the living and for the dead. They are the authorities which prepare men to enter the celestial kingdom and to be crowned as sons and heirs of God." [^1]In essence, as Elder Boyd K. Packer expressed it, these "keys of priesthood authority represent the limits of the power extended from beyond the veil to mortal man to act in the name of God upon the earth." [^2]

To further understand the nature of Elijah's mission on the Mount of Transfiguration, we need to move forward in time to the glorious manifestation received by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. First, the Lord himself appeared to accept the temple, which had been dedicated the previous week. Then, in succession, Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared to confer their keys upon Joseph and Oliver. Moses, known as the great lawgiver, had gathered the children of Israel when they were in bondage in Egypt; led them to Sinai, where the Lord established his covenant with them; and called them to be "a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exodus 19:6). Having been translated like Elijah, [^3]he returned to earth at Kirtland to bestow on Joseph and Oliver the keys of the gathering of Israel, giving them authority to gather scattered Israel in the latter days (see D&C 110:11). Elias then restored "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" (D&C 110:12). Following those visitations, Elijah appeared and bestowed "the keys of this dispensation" (D&C 110:16). These keys that Elijah brought, those of the sacred sealing power, enable their bearer to seal on earth and in heaven and to loose on earth and in heaven, and are equated with the keys of the kingdom of God on earth. To summarize, these keys held by Elijah are, to use Elder Packer's words, "the consummate authority on this earth for man to act in the name of God." [^4]

With this background, it seems clear that Moses and Elijah, the ancient guardians of their respective keys, would have bestowed the same keys on Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. After the Lord's resurrection, these three Apostles presided over the Church. Consequently, they needed the keys held by Moses in order to gather the Lord's people to the sacred covenant in their day, and those of Elijah to render all gospel covenants and ordinances binding throughout both mortal life and eternity. Joseph Smith stated that whenever the Lord has given the priesthood to men in any dispensation, "this power [the sealing power] has always been given" (D&C 128:9). The Lord had promised the Apostles this sealing power just a week before. They received it from Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration.

It becomes apparent that Elijah had been translated to accomplish this express mission. He needed a physical body with tangible hands in order to lay his hands on the heads of Peter, James, and John. The same reasoning also explains Moses' translation and return. Neither could have then appeared as a resurrected being, for the first resurrection had not yet begun. We can only wonder whether the man Elias was not also there, and perhaps others.

But why did the ancient prophets come when the Lord Jesus could have bestowed the keys himself? After all, they were bestowing his priesthood and the keys of his power. Note that the same circumstances prevailed at Kirtland in 1836. On both occasions, the Lord was present but allowed the ancient prophets to bestow the keys. From this we see that the Lord's kingdom is one of order. He had ordained those prophets to hold those specific keys and honored them in having them bestow those keys in both instances. Even though the authority they held originally came from him, he allowed them to fulfill their stewardship by assigning them to pass their authority on to others. This presents a significant lesson we need to understand. The Lord allocates to his chosen messengers, be they angelic or mortal, the duties of administering his kingdom and lets them carry out their divine mandate. He works by delegation.

Similar examples are seen in the conversion of Paul and the life of Joseph Smith. Even though the Lord appeared to Paul on the road to Damascus, he sent Paul to Ananias for baptism rather than doing it himself. The Lord likewise appeared to Joseph Smith in person, but Joseph's subsequent training, his receipt of ordinances, and, ultimately, his receipt of priesthood keys came from the ancient prophets who had been given such responsibilities. Joseph learned much about the linking of dispensations from those experiences. He also learned that those who have already passed through this stage of existence continue to be involved and interested in the affairs of this earth.

Since Elijah was the prophet to whom the Lord delegated the authority to bestow the sealing power on the heads of subsequent generations, he was present at the Mount of Transfiguration. His bestowal of keys on Peter, James, and John validated all ordinances and covenants performed under their hands, thus ushering in the fulness of the holy priesthood in the meridian of time.

---
Notas:
[^1] "O Little Town of Bethlehem," Hymns, no. 208.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 82.
[^3] Ibid., 109.
[^4] Ibid., 84.
