Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Sixteen

The Promise of Elijah's Return Renewed

Within a few short months following the events on the Mount of Transfiguration, that Personage whom Elijah served and honored, namely the Lord Jesus Christ, entered a garden named Gethsemane and underwent the suffering that wrought the infinite and eternal Atonement. At Christmas, we sing a carol that says, "The hopes and fears of all the years are met in thee tonight." [^1]While these words fit the events of Jesus' birth in Bethlehem, they seem even more appropriate in referring to the drama that unfolded in Gethsemane. That sacred night and the subsequent Crucifixion must surely have been the focus of attention for all of God's creations.

Jesus' final words from the cross triumphantly signaled, "Father, it is finished, thy will is done" (JST, Matthew 27:54). At the same moment that Jerusalem, the holy city, experienced darkness and earthquake and the rending of the sacred veil of its temple, the spirit of the Holy One, whose lifeless form hung on the cross, pierced another veil, separating this mortal sphere from the spirit world. There the spirits of righteous men and women of ages past anxiously awaited the arrival of their Lord and Master.

As President Joseph F. Smith pondered over the Apostle Peter's words regarding Christ's visit to the spirit world, he received a glorious vision of that unique event, as recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 138. President Smith saw that "there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality" (v. 12). When he came among them, Jesus "preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance" (v. 19). As he had called and sent forth messengers of these glad tidings on the earth, he also gathered the righteous in the spirit world and "organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead. . . . These were taught faith in God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands." (Vv. 30, 33.)

Amid the vast throng, President Smith saw Adam and Eve, the parents of all mankind, and many of their noble and faithful posterity. President Smith specifically mentioned others whom he saw:

Elias, who was with Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration;

And Malachi, the prophet who testified of the coming of Elijahof whom also Moroni spake to the Prophet Joseph Smith, declaring that he should come before the ushering in of the great and dreadful day of the Lordwere also there.

The Prophet Elijah was to plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to their fathers,

Foreshadowing the great work to be done in the temples of the Lord in the dispensation of the fulness of times, for the redemption of the dead, and the sealing of the children to their parents, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse and utterly wasted at his coming. (Vv. 45-48.)

It is interesting to note that both Elijah and Moses (see v. 41), who had met with the Lord a few months earlier on the Mount of Transfiguration, now mingled with the spirits in paradise. Apparently they had the ability in their translated state to interact with those in the spirit world, anticipating the appearance of the Savior and the time of resurrection.

As earthly time is measured, the Savior was only in the spirit world a short interval before reentering his physical tabernacle, which had lain inanimate in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea. It was the morning of his resurrection, the perfecting of the Atonement. The promised Messiah had overcome both death and hell. As soon as Christ had "risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept" (1 Corinthians 15:20), many of the Saints also arose (see Matthew 27:52). The first resurrection had thus begun. We might expect to find Elijah and others who had been previously translated among those risen Saints. Would they not have taken part in that first resurrection, their translated or terrestrial state being changed to a celestial one? The Doctrine and Covenants confirms this expectation, stating, "And from Moses to Elijah, and from Elijah to John, who were with Christ in his resurrection" (133:55). Hence Elijah, having completed both his Old Testament and New Testament assignments, rose in glory to await his future assignments, including his part in the opening stages of the last and greatest of all dispensations, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Following the Resurrection, the Lord ministered among his Apostles and followers in Jerusalem and Galilee. He was seen of his disciples forty days, "speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God" (Acts 1:3). Among his instructions to those to whom the keys of sealing had been given, the Lord surely would have discussed his visit to the spirit world, explaining how the door had been opened for the preaching of the gospel there and how the necessary ordinances of the gospel could now be performed vicariously for those who had already passed from this mortal sphere of existence. Those who held the keys to bind both on earth and in heaven needed to understand what was going on in both places. Peter's mention of Christ's visit to the spirit world (see 1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6) and the obvious reference by Paul to baptisms for the dead being performed by the early Saints (see 1 Corinthians 15:29) both evidence that the Apostles understood these things.

Sometime after the Savior's resurrection, he also visited his followers in the western hemisphere. Centuries earlier, at the time of Jerusalem's destruction by the Babylonians, he led their forefathers from Jerusalem to the Americas. There they and their descendants established a great civilization, mighty in both righteousness and wickedness. Because of their wickedness many calamities fell upon them at the time of the Savior's crucifixion. Entire cities were destroyed. In the end, the Lord spared only the "more righteous" part of the people (3 Nephi 9:13). It was to this righteous remnant of the people known as the Nephites that the Lord made his wondrous appearance as recorded in 3 Nephi 11-28.

On the second day of his visit to this people, "after he had expounded all the scriptures unto them which they had received, he said unto them: Behold, other scriptures I would that ye should write, that ye have not" (3 Nephi 23:6). Included in those verses, the Savior gave them what we recognize as Malachi chapters 3 and 4. Because the ancestors of the Nephites had left Jerusalem almost two centuries before Malachi made his prophecies, the Nephites did not have a record of them. 3 Nephi 25:5-6 in the Book of Mormon reads the same as Malachi 4:5-6 in the King James Version of the Bible. After reciting these scriptures to the people, the Savior said, "These scriptures, which ye had not with you, the Father commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom in him that they should be given unto future generations" (3 Nephi 26:2). He then explained all things to them "from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory" (3 Nephi 26:3). It seems likely that, having just quoted these verses about Elijah's promised return, the Lord then explained something about Elijah's mission, what it meant and why it was necessary. Because that mission and the keys of the sealing power that form such an integral part of it pertain so much to the sacred work carried on in the holy temples of the Lord, it is not surprising that the text of 3 Nephi does not give us more detail about the Lord's explanations. They were probably things of such a sacred nature as to be learned by us only in the temple. The prophet-editor Mormon simply tells us that "there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people" (3 Nephi 26:6). Mormon also mentions that only the "lesser part of the things which [Jesus] taught the people" (v. 8) were written in order to test the faith of those of us who would receive this book in the latter days. Indeed, God expressly forbade Mormon to write more (see v. 11).

Since Mormon included so little of the Lord's sermons, it is significant that he recorded the entire text of Malachi chapters 3 and 4. The prophecies relative to the Lord's second coming that they contain must have been of special importance to him. Mormon probably would have known of Elijah's mortal ministry in ancient Israel because of the records contained on the plates of brass. The Savior likely explained to the Nephites more about that prophet's special ministry. Certainly the Lord instituted temple work for the living and the dead among the Nephites as he had done among his disciples in Jerusalem. We might even wonder if Elijah himself had at some time come to bestow keys upon the Nephites as he had upon the Apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration. All these things would have been known both by Mormon and by his son, Moroni. After the resurrected Lord's revelation of the plan of salvationincluding the marvelous aspects of Elijah's missionto his disciples in both hemispheres, the preaching of the glad tidings of gospel truth brought immense joy to numerous people. We suppose that the exercise of priesthood keys sealed the blessings of gospel ordinances upon many souls. With the passage of time, however, pride, iniquity, and false doctrine crept into the Church, eventually squeezing out truth and revelation. The dark night of the Apostasy settled over the entire world, awaiting the light of a new dawn.

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Morning Breaks," Hymns, no. 1.
