Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Seventeen

The Dawning of a Brighter Day

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world. [^1]

After centuries of preparation and anticipation, the light of a brighter day dawned; the heavens opened to reveal their splendor early in the spring of 1820 in an obscure location in upstate New York. Centuries of darkness and ignorance were swept away by the brilliance of a visit from the realms of the eternities. In answer to the humble prayer of an earnest fourteen-year-old boy, Joseph Smith, God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, appeared in resplendent glory. The time had finally arrived for the "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21). Young Joseph Smith would be the Lord's instrument to bring about the prophesied restoration of all things.

Joseph wrote that following this miraculous visitationthe opening of a new dispensation of the gospelhe continued to pursue his "common vocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-three" (Joseph SmithHistory 1:27). The Farmer's Almanac printed in Ithaca, New York, for the year 1823 indicates that on that date the weather would have been warm and the moon full. [^2]The 21st fell on Sundaythe Lord's dayduring the time of the autumnal equinox, when the hours of daylight and darkness are roughly equal in duration. Concerning that day, Joseph recorded: "I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one. While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor." (Joseph SmithHistory 1:29-30.)

Joseph's record continues with his description of the angelic being who stood before him, providing us the most detailed portrayal of a resurrected person other than the Lord to be found in our scriptures. Joseph then recounted, "He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do" (Joseph SmithHistory 1:33). The personage at Joseph's bedside was the resurrected Moroni, who possessed "the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim" (D&C 27:5). Moroni told Joseph of a book written on gold plates and described to him where it could be found. Joseph's subsequent translation of these plates by the gift and power of God we now know as the Book of Mormon. Moroni next quoted several Old Testament prophecies. Joseph's account states:

He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (Joseph SmithHistory 1:36-39.)

Moroni recited various other verses of scripture to seventeen-year-old Joseph, but it is significant that he first quoted these verses of Malachi predicting the return of Elijah. Moroni returned twice more that night and again the next morning, each time quoting the very same verses in the same way. What a powerfully deep impression those verses about the return of Elijah must have made on young Joseph's mind! Yet it would be many years before he began to fully understand their message.

There is no need here to review Joseph's visits to Cumorah, his tutoring by the prophet Moroni, nor the translation of the plates and the publication of the Book of Mormon. Nor is there need to discuss the many other momentous events of Joseph's young life, including the miraculous visitations of other angelic ministers, Joseph's marriage to Emma Hale, the many moves and persecutions he endured. Those are all treated at length in other books and articles. [^3]

The restoration of the priesthood does warrant mention because of the nature of Elijah's power and mission. Joseph Smith wrote that on the 15th of May, 1829, he and his scribe in translation, Oliver Cowdery, in the course of translating the Book of Mormon,

went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (Joseph SmithHistory 1:68-69.)

The messenger "said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us" (Joseph SmithHistory 1:72). One result of the long era of apostasy was that no living mortal held authority to officiate in the ordinances of the priesthood. That situation necessitated John's visit. At his direction, Joseph and Oliver baptized and ordained each other. The power of the Aaronic Priesthood was again upon the earth. Sometime during the following month, Peter, James, and John also visited Joseph Smith just as John the Baptist predicted. Holding the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, the ancient presidency conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood upon Joseph and Oliver and ordained them Apostles. (See D&C 20:2-3; 27:12.)

With the power and authority of this higher priesthood, Joseph Smith possessed the ability to formally organize the Church of Christ. As directed by the Lord, that special event took place in Fayette, New York, on April 6, 1830. In the course of that organizational meeting, the Lord designated Joseph Smith as "a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ" (D&C 21:1). With the translation of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the organization of the Church accomplished, missionaries bearing the glad news of the Restoration sought to proclaim it near and far. Many people seeking to know the truth joined the fledgling body of Church members as the Holy Spirit inspired them to do so. Gradually, the Church's tiny congregation grew in numbers and strength. The message of the Restoration spread to ever-widening circles, and many were drawn to its light.

Doctrine and Covenants 29:7-8 contains the first reference to the responsibility of the Church to "gather" to a certain location: "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts: wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked." That revelation was given in Fayette, New York, in September 1830. Just three months later, in December, the Lord commanded Joseph to "go to the Ohio" and that the Church "should assemble together at the Ohio" (D&C 37:1, 3), the first recorded location designated for gathering in this dispensation.

During this time, Joseph was busy receiving revelations, conducting conferences, sending forth missionaries, producing an inspired translation of the Bible, and avoiding persecution from his enemies. At a conference in Fayette in January 1831, the Lord explained the reason for going west to Ohio, stating that the wicked were plotting to destroy Joseph Smith and the Church (see D&C 38:11-13, 31-32). In this revelation the Lord indicated he would soon give his law to the Church. He fulfilled that promise in the revelation known as section 42, given February 9, 1831, in Ohio. In Fayette, the Lord also promised that, after going to the Ohio, the Saints would "be endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:32). The Lord, therefore, desired his people to gather in Ohio so as to both protect them from persecution and grant them an "endowment," or gift, of power from on high.

The Church members began to gather in the area of Kirtland, Ohio. There the Lord revealed to the Prophet the "law of the Church," section 42, and revealed many other significant principles and doctrines. Indeed, the heavens were opened and Joseph received a veritable flood of revelations concerning both spiritual and temporal matters. In the relatively early stages of the gathering to Kirtland, the Lord also revealed that the ultimate place of gathering would be in Missouri (see D&C 57). Consequently, on the third of August, 1831, Joseph Smith and several of the brethren met at a spot a little west of the courthouse in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, and dedicated that site for the construction of the great temple of Zion to be built in the last days. [^4]But even following the designation of that important place, the Lord chose to maintain Kirtland as a "stake" of Zion (D&C 82:14). The word stake comes from the writings of the prophet Isaiah, who pictorially described Zion as a tent held in place by numerous stakes (see Isaiah 54:2; 33:20).

The Lord's revelation regarding establishing a "school of the prophets" given in December 1842 foreshadowed the construction of the first temple of this dispensation in Kirtland, Ohio (see D&C 88). That school was to be a place of learning and revelation for those purified from the sins of the world. In June 1833, the Lord chastened the Saints for having not proceeded more expeditiously with building what he termed "mine house" (D&C 95:3). We can sense the importance of such an undertaking from his words: "Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; for this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem" (D&C 95:8-9). The Lord then revealed to Joseph the pattern of this first latter-day temple [^5](see D&C 95:13-17).

Actual construction of the temple began in June 1833the very month that the Lord commanded it be erected. The cornerstones were laid July 23, 1833, [^6]and construction continued throughout the next two and one-half years. The early Saints sacrificed much to complete the sacred edifice. As the building approached completion in early 1836, spiritual blessings and manifestations began to be poured out upon the Saints.

On Thursday, January 21, 1836, the First Presidency met with the patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., in the temple attic, where they anointed and blessed one another. In the course of these blessings, the heavens opened and Joseph the Prophet "beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof." He viewed "the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son." (D&C 137:1, 3.) Joseph saw Adam, Abraham, his own father and mother, and his deceased brother Alvin. Joseph stated that upon seeing his brother in the celestial kingdom, he "marveled" (v. 6), because Alvin, having died before the restoration of the gospel and the priesthood, had not been baptized. Joseph then recorded: "Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying: All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom" (D&C 137:7-8). The Prophet also learned "that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10).

Note the significance of the Lord's revealing these important doctrines to Joseph in the context of his own family. Joseph saw his father and mother in the celestial kingdom, even though they were then still living; indeed Joseph's father was with him on the occasion of the vision! Rather than being taught the great doctrine regarding the redemption of the dead in some abstract way, Joseph saw his own deceased brother Alvin enjoying the blessings of celestial life. Joseph acknowledged the reality of what he had seen, although he probably failed to fully understand the method and power the Lord would employ to bring about those blessings. In other words, the full import of Elijah's mission had not yet been revealed to Joseph. He certainly remembered Moroni's words and knew that Elijah's mission had something to do with families, with turning the hearts of fathers to children and the hearts of children to fathers. But on that January 21, Joseph received the additional insight that all who would have fully accepted the gospel will receive celestial blessings. Perhaps the Lord's words about "children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability [being] saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 136:10) were even related to the Prophet's concern about the children born to him and Emma who had previously died. What better way to prepare the Prophet for Elijah's coming than by relating Elijah's mission to Joseph's own family?

The long-awaited day of dedication for the Kirtland Temple arrived on Sunday, March 27, 1836. The Saints gathered early in the morning and the dedicatory service began at 9:00 a.m. The crowd was so great that they held a second such meeting the following Thursday for those unable to gain entrance on Sunday morning. The service continued for several hours. Its high point was the prayer of dedication, which the Prophet received by revelation (see D&C 109). That prayer expressed thanksgiving for the Lord's blessings and then prayed that this temple, constructed by his people, would be acceptable to him. Following the prayer, the congregation sang "The Spirit of God," a hymn written by William W. Phelps specifically for the temple dedication, and partook of the sacrament. The service then concluded with the sacred Hosanna Shout. That evening a special meeting for priesthood holders also took place. The entire day was one of a pentecostal outpouring of the Spirit. The "sound of a rushing mighty wind" filled the temple. People prophesied, spoke in tongues, and saw angels. [^7]At last, "a house of God" (D&C 88:119) had been constructed and dedicated according to the Lord's direction. This temple had been erected "that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people" (D&C 109:5). The anticipated manifestations began when the Lord appeared just seven days later.

---
Notas:
[^1] Stephen D. Ricks, "The Appearance of Elijah and Moses in the Kirtland Temple and the Jewish Passover," BYU Studies 23 (Fall 1983): 483-86. See Appendix F herein.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:127.
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, The Lord God of Joseph Smith, Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah, 4 January 1972), 1.
[^5] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 172.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:129.
[^7] Boyd K. Packer, "Ordinances," in 1980 Devotional Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Fireside Addresses (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), 16.
