Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Eighteen

The Visitation of Elijah at Kirtland

Sunday, April 3, 1836, remains one of the most momentous days in the history of this earth. For the first time in many centuries, the Lord visited his temple, the temple that his people had prayerfully dedicated to him one week earlier. April 3 fell on both Easter Sunday, the day celebrating Christ's resurrection, and the weekend of Passover, when Jews worldwide celebrated the deliverance of their forefathers from bondage in Egypt. [^1]Thanks to ancient traditions that linked Elijah's coming to the time of Passover, the scattered Jews had awaited the arrival of Elijah at that special season for several centuries. While their expectation as to the timing of his arrival proved to be accurate, he did not come to the homes of those observing Passover. Instead, he visited the house of God reared by the Latter-day Saints in Kirtland, Ohio.

After the Sunday afternoon service in the temple, Joseph Smith, accompanied by Oliver Cowdery, went behind the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpit on the west end of the building to pray. They lowered a veil or curtain to be afforded privacy. Following prayer, they experienced the remarkable visitations recorded in Doctrine and Covenants section 110. First, the Lord appeared before them in glory. He introduced himself, forgave their sins, and declared:

Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen. (D&C 110:6-10.)

After that vision closed, Moses, the ancient lawgiver, appeared in order to bestow the "keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (v. 11). He was followed by a prophet named Elias, who "committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (v. 12). Last of all came Elijah, saying, "Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachitestifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord cometo turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a cursetherefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (vv. 14-16).

Thus, following the Lord's appearance, three of his special servants came, each bestowing a special blessing or endowment of power and authority. The Lord himself certainly could have granted these blessings, since he is the source of all goodness and power. But, as previously discussed, he delegates. Therefore, Moses came to bestow keysthose rights of presidency, of presiding authorityconcerning the gathering of scattered Israel. Then, as Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote, "Elias came, after Moses had conferred his keys, and brought the gospel of the dispensation in which Abraham lived. Everything that pertains to that dispensation, the blessings that were conferred upon Abraham, the promises that were given to his posterity, all had to be restored, and Elias, who held the keys of that dispensation, came." [^2]Last of all came Elijah in fulfillment of all the prophecies that foretold his coming before the great and dreadful day of the Lord. He did not institute something new in turning the hearts of the fathers and the children, but, as part of the restoration of all things, he merely restored something that had disappeared during the era of apostasy. Specifically, he came to restore God's children to their previously existing relationships with one another and with their Heavenly Father.

In accomplishing that mission, Elijah granted unto Joseph Smith "the keys of this dispensation" (D&C 110:16). Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "The Lord gave unto Elijah the keys of presidency in his timethe keys of the kingdom, the keys of the sealing power; and it is that sealing power which gave him the right and authority to officiate. And the Lord said unto him, ÃThat which you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.' That is how great his power was, and in that day Elijah stood up and officiated for the people in the sealing power." [^3]This helps explain why, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated, "for three thousand years, instead of speaking of him [Elijah] as a prophet, he has always been known as the prophet." [^4]The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. ÃAnd I will send Elijah the Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord.' etc., etc. Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." [^5]

Although Joseph said that "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood," it appears that others after Elijah's time also held some keys that validated the gospel ordinances effected during their administrations. Consider the prophets of ancient Israel who followed Elijah and those among the Nephites. Did they not need priesthood keys to properly fulfill their prophetic responsibilities? And what of the specific reference made in Helaman 10 about the bestowal of the sealing power upon Nephi, the son of Helaman? Perhaps Joseph meant that Elijah was the last to hold all the keys, or that he was the last prophet to hold the fulness of the keys of the priesthood over all the tribes of Israel before the Lord began to scatter them in the eighth century b.c. Or maybe Joseph meant that Elijah is the last prophet holding the keys of the priesthood who would come to restore them. Whatever the full meaning of Joseph's statement may be, Elijah clearly was the one chosen to restore those keys in this last dispensation, just as he had restored them to Peter, James, and John. The Prophet Joseph's statement further signifies that, without the authority possessed by Elijah, "the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." This indicates that anyone who professes to administer saving ordinances without possessing the sealing power restored by Elijah does so in unrighteousness and renders the ordinances invalid.

A deeper consideration of Elijah's coming reveals another profound reason for his return. Just as Peter, James, John, and their nine companions were ordained as Apostles early in Jesus' ministry, long before the bestowal of keys to the three on the Mount of Transfiguration, Joseph was also ordained an Apostle long before Elijah's visit. In both cases, the bestowal of the keys to seal and bind on earth and in heaven seems to have been the final endowment of power to act in the Lord's behalf on earth given to the leaders of his church. It may be that part of Elijah's coming was, in the words of Malachi's prophecy as quoted by Moroni, to "reveal unto you the Priesthood" (Joseph SmithHistory 1:38), or to reveal how the priesthood should be administered, to make known dimensions of its power and dominion beyond what had been previously comprehended. Also, if, as Elder Joseph Fielding Smith indicated, the sealing power bestowed by Elijah places the Lord's "stamp of approval upon every ordinance that is done in this Church and more particularly those that are performed in the temples of the Lord," [^6]that would indicate that ordinances performed by the Church before Elijah's visit awaited that stamp of approval. In confirmation of that, Elder Boyd K. Packer has stated: "Thirteen years after Moroni appeared, a temple had been built adequate for the purpose, and the Lord again appeared and Elijah came with Him and bestowed the keys of the sealing power. Thereafter ordinances were not tentative, but permanent. The sealing power was with us. No authorization transcends it in value. That power gives substance and eternal permanence to all ordinances performed with proper authority for both the living and the dead." [^7]The time of tentativeness was over; the time of permanence had arrived.

Similarly, the gathering of the Saints before Moses restored the keys pertaining to gathering had been fairly slow and comparatively small. Following his visitation, the Church sent missionaries to Great Britain and the great gathering began, first to Nauvoo and then to the valleys of the West. As to both the scope and speed of gathering and the validity of eternal ordinances, all that occurred prior to the bestowal of the respective keys in Kirtland seems to have been only preliminary. Remember that the Lord did not bestow the keys upon Peter, James, and John at the time of their original ordination. The ordinances they originally performed must have also waited for final approval or permanence until they received the sealing keys.

Some have wondered why Peter, James, and John did not bestow the keys of the sealing power on Joseph Smith in 1829. The ancient Apostles undoubtedly possessed those keys and had as much priesthood as Elijah. But it is one thing to have keys and quite another to be chosen to bestow them. The Lord gave the latter privilege to Elijah. The same holds true for Moses, as the Lord reserved the responsibility of restoring the keys of gathering specifically to him. Suffice it to say that in both dispensations the Lord commissioned Elijah to bring those consummate keys.

What else happened at Kirtland that day? Were other angels present? For that matter, had others also been present at the Mount of Transfiguration? Elder Joseph Fielding Smith indicated that he believed Peter, James, and John "received their endowments on the mount." [^8]Did something similar occur to Joseph at Kirtland? Would one be given all the keys of the priesthood without being endowed? Our records indicate that up to that time only preliminary aspects of what we now know as the endowment had been administered. Was more then revealed to the Prophet?

As brief as Doctrine and Covenants section 110 is, it tells us all we need to know. And as for Elijah, his appearance and ministration fulfilled the prophecy recorded in all four of our standard works (see Malachi 4:5-6; 3 Nephi 25:5-6; D&C 2:1-3; Joseph SmithHistory 1:38-39).

Over a year after these glorious events took place at Kirtland on that Easter Sunday, the Lord addressed the leaders of his Church: "For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times. Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; for verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you." (D&C 112:30-32.) As we have seen, those holding keys truly had come: Moroni; John the Baptist; Peter, James, and John; Moses; Elias; and Elijah. But why did so many angelic ministers from so many past ages all converge at one time and place, and upon one person, the Prophet Joseph Smith? All their keys, powers, and glories flowed into this latter-day era and to its prophet to create the fulness needed in this dispensation to prepare the world for the Savior's second coming. As the Lord explained, "For therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may receive honor and glory" (D&C 124:34). The restoration of all things for the eventual honor and glory of the children of God was at last under way.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed., rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:184.
[^2] Joseph Smith, The Words of Joseph Smith, comp. and ed. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook (Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1994), 240; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation standardized.
[^3] Ibid., 335; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation standardized.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 307-8.
[^5] Quoted in Joseph Smith, Words, 49.
[^6] Robert L. Millet and Joseph Fielding McConkie, The Life Beyond (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), 90.
[^7] Joseph Smith, Teachings, 179.
[^8] See discourse of Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 5:85.
