Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Nineteen

Line upon Line

Though unnoticed by the world, the coming of Elijah to Kirtland and his bestowal of the sealing keys of the priesthood were events that affect all who have lived or will yet live in this world. Yet, even after the bestowal and receipt of this power, it does not seem that Joseph Smith had a full realization of the significance of what had occurred. His visionary understanding of the breadth of this power, evidenced by his well-known sermon given in Nauvoo, Illinois, on March 10, 1844, did not materialize instantaneously. During the almost eight years between Elijah's appearance at Kirtland and the famous sermon, it appears Joseph's understanding of this sublime doctrine grew "here a little, and there a little" (Isaiah 28:10), in accordance with the Lord's promise, "For [I] will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith" (D&C 98:12).

Up until the time of Elijah's arrival, the Church primarily had been developing organizationally, in quorums and congregations. Elijah's mission to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (Malachi 4:6) dramatically altered the direction of the Church from that time forward by laying a doctrinal foundation that shifted the course of the Church toward the family. The sealing power turned the key to unlock the door to the exaltation of the family unit. The Church, thereafter, became a temple-building church in order to seal together families, not congregations. Perhaps Joseph Smith first glimpsed this new doctrinal direction when he received a vision of the celestial kingdom in the Kirtland Temple on January 21, 1836. There he saw the fathers, Adam and Abraham, and also his own father, mother, and brother. This vision of his family probably helped prepare him for Elijah's coming to turn the hearts of all families.

Joseph's initial understanding of the promise of Elijah's return may have caused the Prophet to think along the line of caring for our family members. Moroni added a new dimension to that understanding with an additional phrase, saying that Elijah would "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers" (Joseph Smith History 1:39) before the children's hearts would turn. This added statement indicates that the turning of hearts would have something to do with a newfound awareness of the covenants made with the fathers of oldthe patriarchsand of our relationship with them as well as with our more immediate fathers. While speaking in reference to the promise of Elijah's coming, Joseph said, "Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal." [^1]Both of these words denote permanent attachment. In this case, they signify being attached both to the covenants and to the people involved. As to the prophecy of Elijah's return, Joseph remarked, "In the end [the earth] shall be burned and few men left [see Isaiah 24:6]. But before that, God shall send unto them Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal unto them the covenants of the fathers with relation to the children and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers, that they may have the privilege of entering into the same, in order to effect their mutual salvation." [^2]

Joseph's recorded discourses indicate that his understanding of the meaning of Elijah's mission apparently moved from "turning hearts" to "planting promises" to "binding or sealing." This progression seems symbolic of the order of the transmission of priesthood keys. Remember that Moses first restored the keys of gathering, symbolically turning us toward one another. Elias then brought all the promises and blessings incident to the Abrahamic covenant. Once the people were gathered, they could be taught and blessed, having the promises planted in their hearts. Elias's power was to draw us to the new and everlasting covenant of eternal marriage and to organize us in family units. However, his power and promises were conditional, as they needed the sealing power brought by Elijah to give formal approval to those marriages and those families, removing their conditional status and making them eternal. Hence, Joseph declared: "This power of Elijah is to that of Elias what in the architecture of the temple of God those who seal or cement the stone to their places are to those who cut or hew the stones, the one preparing the way for the other to accomplish the work. By this we are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, i.e., Elijah." [^3]

Returning to Church history, a review of events during the three years following the visitations at Kirtland in April 1836 reveals the hand of the adversary seeking to derail and destroy the Church. Imprisonments, mobbings, murders, financial distress, apostasy, and excommunications plagued the Church. Were not these persecutions an attempt by the adversary to stop the further understanding and implementation of all the keys and powers bestowed at Kirtland? But his plan failed. In the midst of those difficult days, the Lord inspired Joseph Smith to send the first missionaries to Great Britain. The keys brought by Moses were utilized in raising the gospel standard in that distant land and resulted in a flood of converts who accepted the message of the Restoration. Most of them descended from Ephraim, the son of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. Israel was being gathered in fulfillment of the ancient promises. In retrospect, we see that it was necessary to employ the keys of gathering first, before the keys of sealing could be fully exercised. As Joseph explained: "What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? . . . The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose." [^4]The Saints were gathered so that they could build temples where their families could be sealed for eternity.

By May of 1839, Joseph was residing in Commerce, Illinois, which he later renamed Nauvoo. Both Saints who had been driven from Missouri and new converts flowed into the city. As time passed, the Lord gradually prepared them for the revelation of the full meaning of the keys Elijah had restored several years earlier. Then, on August 15, 1840, Joseph first preached the doctrine of baptism by proxy for one's dead ancestors who had not been privileged to receive the gospel during mortality. Joseph gave the discourse at the funeral of Seymour Brunson, a member of the Nauvoo high council. Simon Baker later recorded:

I was present at a discourse that the prophet Joseph delivered on baptism for the dead 15 August 1840. He read the greater part of the 15th chapter of Corinthians and remarked that the Gospel of Jesus Christ brought glad tidings of great joy. . . . He also said the apostle [Paul] was talking to a people who understood baptism for the dead, for it was practiced among them. He went on to say that people could now act for their friends who had departed this life, and that the plan of salvation was calculated to save all who were willing to obey the requirements of the law of God. He went on and made a very beautiful discourse. [^5]

The newly revealed doctrine was thrilling news to those who were spiritually receptive. For example, about a month following this sermon, Joseph Smith, Sr., passed away. Just before his death, he asked that someone be baptized for his deceased son Alvin. Hyrum fulfilled his father's request and was baptized by proxy in behalf of Alvin. [^6]

Joseph continued teaching the doctrine of baptism for the dead that fall in the Church's general conference and also referred to it in a letter to the Twelve dated December 15, 1840. In that letter, he said, "The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison." [^7]The Saints were thrilled with this new doctrinal understanding and began performing baptisms. [^8]

It is not surprising that the very same month the doctrine of baptism for the dead was first preached publicly the First Presidency indicated the time had come to build another temple to the Lord. [^9]The Saints were then struggling to establish themselves after their losses in Missouri. Knowing their circumstances, the Lord stated in a January 1841 revelation that the ordinance of baptism for the dead was to be performed in a holy house erected for him and that "only in the days of your poverty" (D&C 124:30) would he allow the ordinance to be performed elsewhere. In the same revelation, he declared: "Build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein. For there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood." (D&C 124:27-28.)

This word fulness has great meaning. We refer to the era in which we live as the "dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 124:41), an era when the knowledge and powers of all past ages come together into a fulness or completeness. The word also refers to the blessings of the priesthood being made available to a fulness of people, meaning everyone who has ever lived. In its ultimate sense, fulness denotes the receipt of "all that [the] Father hath" (D&C 84:38), or exaltation and glory, "which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" (D&C 132:19).

During the construction of the temple in Nauvoo, the Lord continued to instruct Joseph, line upon line, precept upon precept, until the fulness of priesthood blessings, covenants, and ordinances had been revealed so that exaltation might be made available to all of the Father's children. Elijah had restored all the power needed to complete Joseph's mission, but it took time and revelation for Joseph to fully understand how to use that power. Near the close of Joseph's mortal ministry, in his sermon at the partially completed temple, he insightfully observed, "Now for Elijah. The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God." [^10]He further declared that "this is the difference between the spirit and power of Elias and Elijah; for while the spirit of Elias is a forerunner, the power of Elijah is sufficient to make our calling and election sure." [^11]Referring to the sealing of those on earth to those beyond the veil, he concluded, "This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah." [^12]With this power now fully understood and in use, the Lord had made all the covenants and ordinances necessary for salvation and exaltation available to his people.

Today, the sealing power and the ordinances flowing therefrom remain in full force and effect in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They continue to be available and administered in holiness in the sacred houses of the Lord dedicated in many lands. Those holy temples play a central role in Latter-day Saint life. We go to them to receive sealing blessings for both the living and the dead, and look to them to receive the fulness of God's blessings made available by Elijah's return. In President Joseph Fielding Smith's first address to the priesthood as President of the Church on April 4, 1970, he affirmed:

I do not care what office you hold in the Churchyou may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest, or anything elsebut you cannot receive the fullness of the priesthood and the fullness of eternal reward unless you receive the ordinances of the house of the Lord; and when you receive these ordinances, the door is then open so you can obtain all the blessings which any man can gain.

. . . You can have [the fullness of the Lord's blessings] sealed upon you as an elder, if you are faithful; and when you receive them, and live faithfully and keep these covenants, you then have all that any man can get.

There is no exaltation in the kingdom of God without the fullness of the priesthood. [^13]

As noted by President Smith, the fulness of the priesthood comes only in the temple. Exaltation cannot exist without it. That is why temples stand at the center of the spiritual strength of both the Church and Latter-day Saint families. For that reason, President Howard W. Hunter requested that we make the temple "the great symbol of [our] membership." [^14]That is why, as he said, we must point ourselves "toward [the Lord's] example and toward His temples." [^15]And that is why each of us should seek to be enlivened by the "spirit of Elijah," so that in due course we may be able to receive that fulness.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 3:130.
[^2] Brigham Young, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 1846-1847, ed. Elden J. Watson (Salt Lake City: Elden J. Watson, 1971), 530.
[^3] John A. Widtsoe, "Elijah, the Tishbite," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 27 (April 1936): 54.
[^4] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed., rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 6:184.
[^5] Ibid., 6:254.
[^6] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:124-25.
[^7] Ibid., 2:127-28.
[^8] Ibid., 2:44.
[^9] Boyd K. Packer, "A Tribute to Women," Ensign 19 (July 1989): 74.
[^10] Joseph Smith, Teachings, 337.
[^11] Ibid., 338.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] 13. Joseph Fielding Smith, "Magnifying Our Callings in the Priesthood," Improvement Era 73 (June 1970): 65-66.
[^14] 14. Howard W. Hunter, " ÃExceeding Great and Precious Promises,' " Ensign 24 (November 1994): 8.
[^15] 15. Howard W. Hunter, "The Great Symbol of Our Membership," Ensign 24 (October 1994): 5.
