Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Twenty

The Spirit of Elijah

The phrase "spirit of Elijah" occurs only once in scripture, when the ancient prophet Elisha returned toward Jericho after having witnessed the translation of his predecessor, Elijah. The "sons of the prophets" said, "The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha" (2 Kings 2:15). In the context of the discussion presented in the last two chapters, the word spirit used in this verse seems to be synonymous with power. As commonly used today, the phrase "power of Elijah" refers to the sealing power currently held by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which gives eternal validity to all ordinances performed in the Church. It particularly refers to the ordinances performed in the holy temples.

The phrase "spirit of Elijah," however, enjoys a broader meaning that denotes the turning of the hearts of all people to their familial ties. In this context, the word heart refers to our innermost self and our deepest affections. Therefore, when our innermost thoughts and desires turn toward our family members, living or dead, we are said to feel the "spirit of Elijah." In the Church, we use the word dead only to signify those who have passed on from this mortal sphere to the spirit world. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "I think sometimes we look at this work for the salvation of the dead rather narrowly. It is a wrong conception to think of the people for whom we are doing work in the temple of the Lord as being dead. We should think of them as living; and the living proxy but represents them in receiving the blessings which they should have received, and would have received in this life, had they been living in a gospel dispensation." [^1]

In a vision of Brigham Young's in which he saw Joseph Smith nearly three years following Joseph's martyrdom, Joseph instructed: "Be sure to tell the people to keep the Spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our Father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion." Brigham Young continued: "Joseph then showed me the pattern, how they were in the beginning. This I cannot describe, but I saw it, and saw where the Priesthood had been taken from the earth and how it must be joined together, so that there would be a perfect chain from Father Adam to his latest posterity." [^2]Only through Elijah's mission can such organization be established out of the confusion seen by President Young. For this reason, the "message of Elijah," or "temple work," has been called "the keystone of the Gospel Arch." [^3]

Without the spirit and power brought by Elijah, the calamitous confusion of peoples so prevalent throughout history would continue, and "the whole earth would be utterly wasted at [the Lord's] coming" (D&C 2:3). The first verse of the fourth chapter of Malachi says, "For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." Malachi foresaw that those who willfully reject Christ and the eternal life that he alone can offer will be left without either root or branch, which here symbolically represent ancestry and posterity. Elijah's mission thus pertains to roots and branches, or fathers and children. Who are the fathers? Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and their families certainly fit, but so do all those who have gone before us, both those here and those in the spirit world. Who are the children? Both those of our posterity now living on the earth and those yet to be born. To be left without roots and branches signifies having all family ties severed and being left alone.

To follow Malachi's symbolism a little further, Christ indicated that he is the true vine (see John 15:1-5). The keys of gathering allow people, or branches, to be gathered to the vine. Similarly, the keys restored by Elias bring those gathered people to the covenants and ordinances of the gospel, thereby symbolically grafting them to the vine. As the vine, Christ binds all together and gives life to all who are attached to him, including both roots and branches. The sap of the vine might represent Christ's sacrificial blood, flowing through all and giving life through gospel covenants and ordinances. If the graft does not succeed or the branch brings forth evil fruit, the branch dies, is cut off, and is cast out. If, however, the grafted branches receive nourishment from the life-giving sap and grow and bear good fruit, the power of Elijah binds or seals them permanently to the vine. If individuals, families, or whole societies reject Christ, it remains impossible to form that binding link. The proud souls who do not wish to bow to his will and refuse to be a branch attached to him, desiring instead to go their own way, eventually become lost, for that which "seeketh to become a law unto itself . . . cannot be sanctified" (D&C 88:35). They can never bear good fruit, nor will life be found in them. Were it not for the restoration of the spirit and power of Elijah, none of the branches could be permanently bound to the vine and the whole world would suffer utter destruction. However, the earth will not be utterly wasted precisely because the Lord's people are readying themselves to meet him at his second coming by receiving the sealing ordinances in his holy temples.

Elijah's mission encompassed not only the bestowal of formal priesthood keys upon the Lord's prophets but also the pouring out upon the world of a spirit that would assemble and prepare a people for the Messiah by causing their hearts to turn lovingly to their families. The very presence of the keys Elijah brought emanates that spirit of love and kinship, and has the ability to draw out our hearts towards our loved ones. Responding to a question regarding the object of Elijah's mission, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion." [^4]In this statement, he juxtaposed the priesthood keys and the spirit of Elijah. The latter flows naturally from the former. Similarly, he said, "The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchisedec Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all." [^5]Thus, Elijah's arrival marks the final preparations of the Lord's people in readiness for his glorious return.

This spirit of Elijah has touched people throughout the world. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "Before the year 1836 there was very little, if any, research being made anywhere in this world in behalf of the dead. It is true that here and there some man may have been searching out a genealogical record, but what was his object? To prove title to some estate. There were no genealogical societies; there were no genealogical organizations." [^6]What a change has occurred in the world since Elijah's return in 1836! Today genealogy is one of the most actively pursued hobbies worldwide, and genealogical societies flourish. The spirit of Elijah has truly turned people's hearts without regard to their nationality, race, or religion.

The presence of this spirit among the Latter-day Saints causes them to gather so that temples may be built. It then prompts them to attend the temples regularly to both worship God and perform saving ordinances for themselves and in behalf of their deceased loved ones. It also inspires them to search out and verify the records of their ancestors. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith noted:

The fathers are our dead ancestors who died without the privilege of receiving the gospel, but who received the promise that the time would come when that privilege would be granted them. The children are those now living who are preparing genealogical data and who are performing the vicarious ordinances in the temples.

The turning of the hearts of the children to the fathers is placing or planting in the hearts of the children that feeling and desire which will inspire them to search out the records of the dead. Moreover the planting of the desire and inspiration in their hearts is necessary. This they must have in order that they might go into the house of the Lord and perform the necessary labor for their fathers, who died without a knowledge of the gospel, or without the privilege of receiving the fulness of the gospel. [^7]

The bestowal of Elijah's keys and the spirit emanating therefrom have thus not only unlocked the doors to exaltation in the celestial kingdom but also unlocked our own hearts. Instead of desiring to enter that kingdom alone, the spirit of Elijah prompts us to want to go there together with those we love most and teaches us how that can be done. The keys he brought transform the possibility of an eternal family unit into a reality. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith observed: "If you want salvation in the fullest, that is exaltation in the kingdom of God, so that you may become his sons and his daughters, you have got to go into the temple of the Lord and receive these holy ordinances which belong to that house, which cannot be had elsewhere. No man shall receive the fulness of eternity, of exaltation, alone; no woman shall receive that blessing alone; but man and wife, when they receive the sealing power in the temple of the Lord, if they thereafter keep all the commandments, shall pass on to exaltation, and shall continue and become like the Lord. And that is the destiny of men; that is what the Lord desires for his children." [^8]Speaking of the sacred sealing of a man and a woman in eternal marriage, Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "And the highest ordinances in the House of the Lord they receive together and equally or not at all!" [^9]The keys of Elijah make that supernal sealing possible; the spirit of Elijah motivates us to seek it with all our hearts.

In summary, the spirit of Elijah is that still small voice that whispers deep inside us the word family. It beckons to all of us, "Come home." Come home from extraneous temporal concerns, come home from worldly preoccupations, break off the consuming material chains with which you are bound. Leave sin and error behind and come home. Please, come home! That quiet yet powerful voice is both a call to be united forever with our earthly families and an invitation to attend a reunion with the family of God, our Eternal Father, and form part of his divine, eternal family. If your thoughts turn backward to the lives and deeds of parents, grandparents, and unknown ancestors with feelings of warmth, gratitude, and a desire to know them better and be bound to them by sacred covenants through eternal power, you are awakening to the spirit of Elijah. If your thoughts turn forward with love to siblings, children, grandchildren, and posterity, and to the covenants and promises which can bind you eternally to them, you are feeling the spirit of Elijah. If love and gratitude for the one with whom you have knelt at a sacred altar in a holy temple and with whom you have made solemn and eternal covenants overwhelm you, you are experiencing the spirit of Elijah. And if you do not currently enjoy any such feelings, you need to get on your knees and prayerfully plead for them until they come!

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, "What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children About the Temple," Ensign 15 (August 1985): 6-10.
[^2] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 6:295.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, address at Washington Temple dedication, 19 November 1974, as quoted in Theodore M. Burton, God's Greatest Gift (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 269. See also Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 539.
[^4] Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 238-39.
[^5] Joseph F. Smith, in Conference Report, April 1916, 2, 3.
[^6] Spencer W. Kimball, quoted in Neal A. Maxwell, "Spencer, the Beloved: Leader-Servant," Ensign 15 (December 1985): 17, 19.
[^7] Melvin J. Ballard, Three Degrees of Glory [pamphlet] (Ogden, Utah: Neuteboom Ptg., 1929), 30.
[^8] John A. Widtsoe, "Genealogical Activities in Europe," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 22 (July 1931): 104.
[^9] See discourse of Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 19:230.
