Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Chapter Twenty-One

Whither Goest Thou, Elijah?

The mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to bring all men and women to Christ. That mission revolves around three significant principles: (1) the gathering of the Saints, (2) the perfecting of the Saints, and (3) the redemption of the dead. The gathering is that part of the mission involved with the preaching of the gospel of Christ worldwide. The greatest part of this work of gathering, conducted under the keys Moses restored to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple in 1836, will yet occur in the future. Similarly, the perfecting of the Saints, while currently under way, will largely see its fruition in the future as ever larger numbers gather, receive covenants and ordinances, and learn to "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (D&C 84:44). The keys restored by Elias encourage all to come to the new and everlasting covenant and be perfected. The sealing keys brought by Elijah, giving permanence to all gospel ordinances and covenants, operate today under the direction of the President of the Church. Their use shall continue and expand as Church membership grows and as temple construction and utilization accelerate.

It is humbling to contemplate how the fulness of priesthood blessings will be made available to men and women of all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples because the Lord sent a simple, faithful messenger from ancient Israel and clothed him with great power. As Elijah dwelt in a cave on Mount Horeb over 2,800 years ago, the voice of the Lord asked him, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" (1 Kings 19:9.) So might we ask of him, "Whither goest thou, Elijah?" Having learned about his mortal mission and his post-mortal ministry in dispensations following his own, and having a glimmer of the meaning of the spirit of Elijah, we might query, "Where now, what next, thou prophet of the covenant? What does the future hold?"

As we reflect on Elijah's life and mission, we must also wonder where the spirit and power he bestowed is now leading us. We have some idea of the efforts being exerted on this side of the veil by those who have been touched by the spirit of Elijah. Our hearts are being turned ever more completely to our families. We yearn to be with them, to bless them, and to love them. The more we feel of that spirit, the closer we draw to our immediate family members and the more anxious we become to find the distant ones and help them. In the recent past, President Spencer W. Kimball initiated a period of accelerated temple construction and genealogical activity. He was followed by President Ezra Taft Benson, who set an example for us by attending the temple weekly and who instructed us in its meaning in his great discourse, "What I Hope You Will Teach Your Children About the Temple." [^1]President Howard W. Hunter then asked that we make the temple the symbol of our membership. President Gordon B. Hinckley has already dedicated more temples than any other man in this dispensation, or probably any preceding one. As the pace of temple service increases, it seems that all we have thus far seen constitutes only the beginning of the fulfillment of the work initiated by the restoration of keys by Elijah. The greatest era of temple building and redemptive work still lies ahead.

President Brigham Young prophesied:

You will enter into the Temple of the Lord and begin to offer up ordinances before the Lord for your dead. . . . Before this work is finished, a great many of the Elders of Israel in Mount Zion will become pillars in the Temple of God, to go no more out: they will eat and drink and sleep there; and they will often have occasion to say"Somebody came into the Temple last night; we did not know who he was, but he was no doubt a brother, and told us a great many things we did not before understand. He gave us the names of a great many of our forefathers that are not on record, and he gave me my true lineage and the names of my forefathers for hundreds of years back. He said to me, You and I are connected in one family: there are the names of your ancestors; take them and write them down, and be baptised and confirmed, and save such and such ones, and receive of the blessings of the eternal Priesthood for such and such an individual, as you do for yourselves." This is what we are going to do for the inhabitants of the earth. When I look at it, I do not want to rest a great deal, but be industrious all the day long; for when we come to think upon it, we have no time to lose. [^2]

More recently, President Spencer W. Kimball stated: "The day is coming, not too far ahead of us when all the temples on this earth will be going day and night. There will be shifts and people will be coming in the morning hours and in the night hours and in the day hours, and we may reach the time when we will have no (temple) vacations. . . . There will be a corps of workers night and day almost to exhaustion, because of the importance of the work and the great number of people who lie asleep in the eternity and who are craving and needing the blessings we can bring them." [^3]With the sense of urgency inspired by such comments, we sometimes wonder where we should start. Elder Boyd K. Packer wrote:

Sometimes this work may become a little discouraging. How can we seek out all of our progenitorsand all the others? One day while pondering prayerfully on this matter I came to the realization that there is something that any one of us can do for all who have died. I came to see that any one of us, by himself, can care about them, all of them, and love them. That came as a great inspiration, for then I knew there was a starting point.

Whatever the number, we can love them and desire to redeem them. Any one of us has within him the power to expand his concern to include them all. If a billion more are added, we can care about them also. At least we can do that.

If the assignment seems impossible, we must move ahead. If the process is tedious, we must move ahead anyway. If the records have been lost, if the obstacles and opposition seem overwhelming, we will move ahead anyway. When we determine to do as the Lord commands, we move ahead. [^4]

Such are the statements of those whose vision of this work has truly been magnified by the spirit of Elijah.

As we reflect on all that is happening here, we cannot help but wonder what activities are occurring on the other side of the veil. Are the hearts of those in the spirit world turned toward us in fulfillment of the prophecies about Elijah's mission? Have they too felt that spirit? Concerning them (and specifically past Church leaders and faithful Saints), President Joseph F. Smith said: "I believe they are as deeply interested in our welfare today, if not with greater capacity, with far more interest behind the veil, than they were in the flesh. . . . I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever." [^5]In 1958, Elder Spencer W. Kimball said the following at a family reunion of the descendants of his grandfather President Heber C. Kimball:

When I was asked to say a few words tonight I wondered what Grandfather would say if he were here, and I decided to let him say what I think he might:

I AM YOUR GRANDFATHER, HEBER C. KIMBALL. I am a very busy man on the other side of the veil. You know this veil is a little like modern glass which admits vision from one side but is opaque on the other. I can see you but cannot be seen by you. I saw the family association leaders busy preparing for this reunion and thought I would drop in.

I bring you greetings from your grandmothers, the loveliest women in any world.

I have been present with you many times, but you did not know. When each of your grandmothers was buried I came for her, and as my own children began to leave mortality I was not so far away. I came to take them and to welcome them to the world of spirits. They are all on that side now and some of my grandchildren are arriving. I have looked in at the family reunions each year and noted those of my children who were loyal to and proud of their ancestry and cousins. I was never called on to speak before.

My beloved, I can stay but these few minutes. But remember that I, too, was successful in business, and I held high office in politics. I helped in building many communities and an empire. I had houses and lands, and livestock, but I left them all on the earth. I knew, as I hope you will know and realize, that money cankers, livestock dies, houses deteriorate, stocks and bonds may come to naught. But the things which I did not leave on earth were the eternal verities: my spirit, my knowledge of the divinity of the work of the Lord for which we of that generation sacrificed so much.

I want you to know that I KNOW that God lives and that His Church is here and that to observe every directive of God is the most important thing for you. I plead with you to "SEEK YE FIRST THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS" and all other things will follow. [^6]

The impression given in these lines by Elder Kimball, and similar expressions given by many others, is that those on the other side not only are interested in us but have some influence upon us. Elder Melvin J. Ballard remarked:

I have said that when any man or woman goes into this work [the work for the dead] earnestly the Lord will provide ways and means for them to obtain the information they seek. Our understanding will be opened and sources of knowledge will be made manifest. Why? Because the dead know a great deal more than we do about existing records.

Why is it that sometimes only one of a city or household receives the Gospel? It was made known to me that it is because of the righteous dead who had received the Gospel in the spirit world exercising themselves, and in answer to their prayers elders of the Church were sent to the homes of their posterity that the Gospel might be taught to them and through their righteousness they might be privileged to have a descendant in the flesh do the work for their dead kindred. I want to say to you that it is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children than that our hearts are turned to them. [^7]

Elder John A. Widtsoe made this additional reassuring statement: "I have the feeling . . . that those who give themselves with all their might and main to this work receive help from the other side, and not merely in gathering genealogies. Whoever seeks to help those on the other side receives help in return in all the affairs of life." [^8]

These are marvelous insights about what the spirit of Elijah means on both sides of the veil and where it is leading us. But as wonderful as all this is, we must turn from the spirit of Elijah to again consider Elijah himself. Once again, we ask, "Whither goest thou, Elijah?" As others who have held special stewardships in ages past have exhibited continuing interest in events happening in our world, we may expect that he is both looking on and actively participating in the scenes preparatory to the glorious second coming of the Savior. If the Millennium is to be a time devoted to the accomplishment of a monumental amount of temple work continually overseen and directed by the keys of the priesthood that Elijah restored, [^9]will the prophet's interest and involvement not continue until all that is needful has been accomplished and, in Joseph Smith's words, "the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done"? [^10]Where is Elijah now? Is he among those commissioned to preach the gospel in the spirit world? Or is he involved in verifying and recording details about the ordinances made possible by his bestowal of keys in 1836? Is he overseeing the work currently being carried on in the temples of the Church? Is he helping those who are actively searching for records of their departed loved ones? Is he involved in strengthening individual families throughout the world, preparing some for the blessings of sealing and helping others maintain covenants already made? Or is he participating in all of the above, while fulfilling other assignments that we cannot even now imagine?

He will undoubtedly attend the great meeting to be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman, where, as Joseph Smith explained, Adam "will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council." [^11]He shall also be present at that momentous gathering where, the Lord promised, "I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth . . . ; and also with . . . Elijah, unto whom I have committed the keys of the power of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, that the whole earth may not be smitten with a curse" (D&C 27:5, 6, 9).

Truly, the crowning achievement of Elijah's lengthy ministry will have been to "turn the hearts" of so many both to each other and, through the everlasting covenant, to the Lord their God. Referring to the prophet Moroni's wording of the promise of Elijah's return, John A. Widtsoe wrote, "The beginning and the end of the Gospel is written, from one point of view, in Section 2 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants." [^12]That statement cannot help but elicit a smile, for the wonderful message of the restored gospel affirms that because Elijah came as prophesied in section 2, there will be no end to gospel nor life nor family! Joseph Smith was present in Kirtland that Easter Sunday in 1836 to witness the glorious appearance of Elijah and receive from his hands the sealing keys of the holy priesthood. As Joseph's understanding of the significance of that event deepenedor, perhaps more appropriately, heightenedas he envisioned its meaning for all the living and the dead, he joyfully exclaimed:

Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free.

Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers! (D&C 128:22-23.)

Elijah, our thoughts turn again to you. We are overwhelmed with gratitude for the lessons we have learned from studying the example of your life, faith, and obedience. We wish to thank you for helping us remember the importance of the new and everlasting covenant, and for helping to engrave that covenant upon our hearts. Thank you for restoring the sealing keys of the holy priesthood to make permanent and eternal the ordinances that bind us to those we love. Thank you for helping guide us back to the One who gave you this assignment and this power, the Lord Jehovah himself. You came to prepare us for his second coming. Being filled with love and the glorious vision of this work, we thank you, Elijah. By our lives of love, service, and obedience, may we each demonstrate that our hearts have turned, so that we will be ready for that approaching great and dreadful day. Looking forward with joy and anticipation, may we echo the final prayer of the beloved disciple John, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus" (Revelation 22:20).

---
Notas:
[^1] Frieda Clark Hyman, "Elijah: Accuser and Defender," Judaism 39 (Summer 1990): 288; see also Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909-38), 6:316.
[^2] Ginzberg, Legends, 6:317.
[^3] Ibid., 5:96; 6:317.
[^4] Ibid., 6:317.
[^5] Ibid., 4:196.
[^6] Ibid., 4:197.
[^7] Ibid., 6:318.
[^8] Ibid., 4:197. Tradition also states that the boy could have been the Messiah ben Joseph (ibid., 6:317).
[^9] The Jewish Encyclopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1901-6), 5:122; see also Ginzberg, Legends, 4:198.
[^10] Ginzberg, Legends, 4:198.
[^11] Ibid., 4:199; see also The Jewish Encyclopedia, 5:123.
[^12] Ginzberg, Legends, 6:320; 4:199.
