Byron R. Merrill, Elijah: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow ( 1997)

Appendix C

Jewish Traditions About Elijah as a Teacher and Revelator

As part of his responsibilities to help mankind, Elijah is reported to have taken it upon himself to train and instruct mortals. His experiences in this capacity range from the teaching of simple moral stories to the revelation of profound celestial secrets. For instance, he taught lessons about humility and revealed the power that can be unlocked by the prayers of the righteous. Through this tutelage many great men and women were molded, enlightened, and brought nearer to their God. In this sense, Elijah served as a teacher and revelator.

As a teacher, Elijah retained much of the strictness and zeal that had won him fame in Old Testament times. Furthermore, his campaign against idolatry continued as he worked to keep the Jews free from its taint. Elijah was very strict with his associatesany wrong move on their part could result in the alienation of Elijah and the cessation of his visits. [^1]One rabbi commented that Elijah was "passionate and irascible." [^2]

Elijah's zealousness was generated by his devotion to Deity as seen in the following legend. After the destruction of Jerusalem by Rome in a.d. 70, Elijah walked the rubble-strewn streets in an attempt to ascertain whether the people had deserved this calamity. He came across one little boy who was alone, lying on a dungheap, and promised the youth that he would live if he merely recited the words of the "Shema." (The Shema is a Jewish prayer recited in the morning and evening and at night just before going to bed. It is considered important because it declares the monotheism of God and refutes idolatry. [^3]However, as Elijah began reciting the Shema, the youth refused to participate and subsequently died hugging and kissing his idols. [^4]

Elijah, as the tutor of numerous rabbis, was very interested in helping them understand the importance of humility and the cankering effects of pride. He taught one of the rabbis an important lesson one day as they walked past a decayed carcass that smelled terrible. The rabbi, gagging from the putrid smell, plugged his nose until they passed, but noticed that Elijah remained unaffected. A short time later, the pair walked past a proud and haughty man; this time Elijah plugged his nosean action that perplexed the rabbi. Elijah later explained: "The proud man is worse than the carcass; if one touches a carcass, he becomes defiled only until sunset; but contact with the proud generates impurities lasting for a long time." [^5]

As a teacher of heavenly truths, Elijah revealed attributes that would enable one to secure a place in the world to come. He taught this lesson to Rabbi Joshua ben Levi as they entered a crowded marketplace and the rabbi asked Elijah who would have a place in the heavenly realm. Elijah at first responded that none of those whom he saw would have a place in the world to come, but he then changed his mind upon spotting two jesters and a jail warden. He explained that the jail warden would have a place there because he preserved the chastity of the men and women inmates. The two jesters would also find a place in the world to come because they made it their daily activity to lighten the mental burdens of the people by telling jokes and making them laugh. [^6]

We see one of the greatest demonstrations of Elijah's power as a teacher in another experience he had with Rabbi Joshua ben Levi. Because of the rabbi's faithfulness, Elijah granted him any wish he desired. Rabbi Joshua explained to Elijah that the only thing he really wanted was to accompany Elijah on his travels throughout the world. After pondering the proposal, Elijah consented but stipulated that the rabbi must never question his actions. If he did they would have to part ways. As they traveled, they first came upon an elderly couple who possessed little more than a cow. As Elijah and the rabbi passed the couple, the rabbi noticed that Elijah was praying that the cow would die. This greatly confused Rabbi Joshua, but he said nothing at the moment. The next stop was at the home of a wealthy but very proud and inconsiderate man. Much to Rabbi Joshua's surprise, Elijah magically rebuilt a broken wall in the man's expansive house. They then came upon a faithful congregation of pious believers that received them with tremendous hospitality. The rabbi again found it odd that Elijah prayed that the congregation would produce but one leader. The next congregation they encountered was just the opposite of the first; it consisted of proud and arrogant men and women who treated Elijah and the rabbi with very little respect. This time Elijah prayed that the congregation would have many leaders.

At this point Rabbi Joshua could no longer contain his bewilderment. Elijah agreed to explain why he had acted in each situation as he had. In the first case, Elijah prayed that God would allow the man's cow to die rather than his wife, for she was on the brink of death. When they came to the house of the rich man, Elijah prayed that the wall would be rebuilt so that the rich man would not find the treasure buried beneath it. The first congregation was blessed to have only one leader because a congregation having only one leader will enjoy peace and harmony. He blessed the second congregation to have many leaders, which would cause strife and division among the people. Thus, Elijah's blessings were in a sense cursings, and the apparent cursings were truly blessings. [^7]

Even though he was zealous in his teaching, Elijah was wise enough to let men choose for themselves and then face the consequences of their decisions. For example, Rabbi Joseph della Rosa sincerely believed that he could redeem man by defeating the angel of death. Elijah counseled him on many occasions that this was not a wise approach to the redemption of man, but Rabbi Joseph was so persistent that Elijah agreed to tutor him in the tactics and strategies he would need in order to defeat the angel of death. Despite all the training and tutoring, when Rabbi della Rosa finally faced the angel of death, he made a fatal mistake that cost him his life. [^8]

As part of being a teacher, Elijah revealed sacred truths to those whom he deemed worthy. When he felt that he could not provide adequate answers, he was even willing to refer diligent disciples to a higher source. On one occasion he arranged for an interview between the Messiah and Rabbi Joshua ben Levi. At the time of the interview, Elijah also showed Rabbi Joshua a pair of "precious stones" that were so bright that they would replace the sun in giving light to Jerusalem during the messianic time. [^9]

One tradition recounts the time when Elijah revealed too much about celestial events. On one of Elijah's daily visits to the academy of Rabbi Judah ha-Nasi, he arrived late, explaining that the delay arose from some complications in the waking of the three patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob for their daily prayers. The task was rather time-consuming, since Elijah had to prepare each patriarch individually and at a separate time to offer up his prayers. They prayed at different times because if they prayed together, their petition would be so strong that God would be forced to send the Messiah before the appropriate time for his coming. Rabbi Judah listened intently to Elijah's explanation and, seeing an opportunity, asked Elijah if there were any three people on earth that could combine their prayers in such a way that the effect would be the same as the combined prayers of the patriarchs. Elijah confirmed that there were three such people and identified them as Rabbi Hayyah and his two sons. Rabbi Judah wasted no time in gathering Rabbi Hayyah and his two sons for a day of fasting and prayer. Their combined prayer was so powerful that when they mentioned "wind" a great storm arose. Rain also instantly fell when they prayed for it. When Elijah and the rest of the heavenly host realized that disaster was impending, Elijah appeared in the form of a she-bear and broke up the praying congregation. [^10]

---
Notas:
[^1] John Bowman, "Elijah and the Pauline Jesus Christ," Abr-Nahraim 26 (1988): 16.
[^2] Ibid., 5; see also Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909-38), 6:201, The Jewish Encyclopedia, 12 vols. (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1901-6), 5:123, and Gustav Davidson, A Dictionary of Angels, Including the Fallen Angels (New York: Free Press, 1967), 104.
[^3] Ginzberg, Legends, 4:159.
[^4] Ginzberg, Legends, 6:323; 6:37; see also The Jewish Encyclopedia, 5:123. It is interesting to note the tradition that Elijah and Moses are not in heaven but near it and that they are still involved with affairs on the earth. This seems reminiscent of the doctrine taught by Joseph Smith that translated beings exist in a terrestrial state as opposed to a celestial state and that they have been reserved for future missions. See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1938), 170, 171, 191.
[^5] Davidson, Dictionary of Angels, 257.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Ibid., 104.
[^8] Ibid., 257.
[^9] Bowman, "Elijah," 5.
[^10] Ginzberg, Legends, 6:324; 6:201; see also Davidson, Dictionary of Angels, 257, and Bowman, "Elijah," 10.
