Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

1 ELAINE CANNON [^1] ÂIf You Consider Me a Mother in IsraelÂ Lucy Mack Smith

1775Â1856

At the October 1845 general conference of the Church, a 70-year-old woman speaker had inspired the congregation with her particular style of moralizing. As she described rearing her large family to be God-fearing, she pointedly reminded the Saints that they were accountable for their childrenÂs conduct. Parents should take control of their own posterity, she said, rearing them in righteousness, warning them never to do in secret what they would not do in the presence of millions. Then suddenly, unabashedly, Lucy said, ÂIf you consider me a mother in Israel I want you to say so.Â Immediately President Brigham Young arose and invited all who considered Lucy Mack Smith a mother in Israel to signify it by saying yea. Loud outbursts of support filled the Nauvoo Temple, which, although not yet completed, had been opened for congregational worship several days before this conference meeting. [^2]

A Âmother in IsraelÂ has come to mean an exemplary mother within the Church in mortality and in the company of exalted beings in eternity, for whom the family unit continues. [^3]Israel is often used to mean Âone who prevails with God,Â or is a true believer regardless of lineage. [^4]For Lucy this was an incredible, confirming tribute. People loved as well as revered her.

Or was the rousing shout an act of condescension to age? Not many survived so long in the rugged life of a besieged Latter-day Saint in AmericaÂs frontier. Perhaps the enthusiastic response was because the majority present hadnÂt known this womanÂs family since their beginning. Many had come into the Church later and were awestruck in the presence of the martyred ProphetÂs mother. It had been about 25 years since young JosephÂs first vision and the subsequent total involvement of his mother as a defender of the faith. Likely the response for the feisty little lady who stood before them was because she was the mother who had nurtured their beloved and still bereaved Prophet.

Lucy probably did not ask for public opinion at the conference because she wanted reassurance of who she was, but rather because she had a deeply rooted need to prod the Saints into practicing Christian principles more diligently, using herself and her family as an example. She always had taken every opportunity to remind people of JosephÂs role in serving the Savior and of the SaintsÂ work yet to be done on earth.

As a professional writer all my life I have been interested in quality people and how, with a particular set of guiding principles, their lives play out against the backdrop of events and conditions in their day. It has been with keen curiosity that I have looked deeper into the personality and the eternal spirit that dictated the choices of Lucy Mack Smith. I found her worth the work! I had considered her important because of the role she filled on earth as the mother of Joseph Smith, the Prophet. But now I find her a marvel and one worth emulating. She juggled her life happenings and her skills with amazing grace. You see, not only was Lucy a leader among her associates but she was a resourceful and passionately loving mother as well. Lucy was an activist, but she needed no particular revelation to remind her how to honor her husband, being meek and quick with consoling words.

Lucy was a working woman-she labored inside her home andout, for love and also for recompense. Her life was full not of murmuring but of adventure and enthusiasm for the challenge ahead. She was close to God and reminiscent of the finest women the world has ever honored. I call her indomitable because of her attitude of courage in the face of the Martyrdom. Mothers are supposed to die before their children, arenÂt they? IÂve buried some of my own and was deeply touched that Lucy, Mother of Martyrs, set about becoming the biographer of the slain.

Lucy Mack Smith has been described with several titles of honor-Mother Smith, a mother in Israel, a most singular woman, mother of Joseph, the Âmatriarch of a Church patriarchy,Â a dynamic contributor to the infant Church, the first woman of the Church. [^5]In truth Lucy holds the uncontested role of First Woman of the Restoration. Mother Smith prepared Joseph from infancy and taught him the virtue of knowing, believing, and trusting in God, of the possibility of visions and spiritual experiences, and of the need to continue the relentless search for GodÂs will and his way instead of following the fabrications and suppositions of man. Lucy was first on record to speak to her son following his vision revealing that God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ were two separate beings and that they had appeared again on the earth. She was among the first to embrace all that was brought forth by Joseph, and it is significant that Lucy was decisive in her loyalty to the Restoration movement in every instance.

In spite of opinion to the contrary among strident women in recent years, careful scrutiny of history through all ages reveals that God indeed values his daughters on earth. The impact of experience upon the character of a woman is the same, though societal situations may differ. This is in the sense that GodÂs principles are eternal for his creations in every generation of time. It follows that growth and even glory for a woman as a human being are dependent upon her own core reaction to what happens to her, and how she applies GodÂs principles to her life events. Her worth as a person, her power for good, her enduring honor-or the opposite-come not because of or in spite of the fact that she is a woman. These shining qualities develop because of her grasp of life as she processes her challenges.

LucyÂs Background and Family Life

It is distinctly stunning to study key women of all time who have been, still are, and will continue to be examples to all females. We view such women with wonder, hoping they will be type and shadow to our own quality of being. However else they may be limited at any given moment, women make their choices in the sanctity of their hearts. Such decisions of action and reaction make all the difference.

LucyÂs life indicates that she was always God-fearing, seeking the Holy Ghost as she meshed the new religion with her own careful reasoning of what was good for a person. Lucy was a woman of her day, born to help the Restoration emerge for the great blessing of mankind. She learned the sacred role of women from her own mother, Lydia Gates Mack, a Congregational deaconÂs daughter. LucyÂs grandfather was a man of means who saw that his daughter had a fine education. Lydia in turn furthered the culture and education of her own daughter, Lucy Mack. LucyÂs father, Solomon Mack, was a hero in the French and Indian Wars. Reared in an atmosphere of religion and adventure, education and fine-tuned family relationships, LucyÂs noble spirit was enhanced in ways suitable for her place as the mother of the Prophet of the momentous Restoration.

On 24 January 1796 Lucy married Joseph Smith Sr. About six years later, after miraculously being blessed to recover from a serious illness, Lucy increasingly turned her attention toward religion. She prayed about her husbandÂs unwillingness to affiliate with one of the religious institutions in the community. Lucy put God first and was faithful to him. Her husband couldnÂt see much truth in what was being practiced in the name of Christianity. Even though Lucy was patient and loyal to her husband, she chose to be baptized by a minister who agreed to leave her free to join any church. On one occasion, after earnestly praying in behalf of her husband, she at last was given in a dream a spiritual answer that her husband would grow like a Âpliant treeÂ in responding to GodÂs Spirit. [^6]Ultimately he did, accepting wholeheartedly every revealed truth that his son, the Prophet Joseph, later taught him.

In the midst of ridicule from neighbors, heartbreak, illness, fresh failures, and new starts, LucyÂs home was permeated with charity and disciplined living. There was obvious affection among husband, wife, and children. Relationships in the family of Mother and Father Smith were based on Biblical charity and loyalty. Thus the twigs were trained by the pliant tree and his lively, religious wife. Such a family provided a protective cocoon for a young Prophet increasingly unpopular with those stirred up by the adversary to thwart GodÂs work.

The Smiths seem a rare example for todayÂs many dysfunctional families. How did they do it? We look to heritage. Both Lucy and Joseph were nurtured in large families with traditions of depending upon each other and seeking GodÂs help in solving problems, preserving health and life itself, and providing joy in daily duties and pleasures. LucyÂs father, Solomon Mack, was a daring military man who credited his wife, Lydia, with creating a home atmosphere of piety, gentleness, and reflection. In LucyÂs own home with Joseph Smith Sr., all sought truth and strove to behave as Christians.

Lucy had three daughters and eight sons, including two who died in their infancy. Of the six sons she reared to manhood, five of them preceded her in death. One daughter was miraculously spared by LucyÂs incredible fortitude and faith. Sophronia had been ill for many weeks, and finally she stopped breathing. Those present called Lucy crazy for pacing back and forth holding the child against her chest. In remembering this experience Lucy later wrote, ÂAre you a mother who has been bereft of a child? Feel for your heart-strings, and then tell me how I felt with my expiring child pressed to my bosom! Would you at this trying moment feel to deny that God had Âpower to save to the uttermost all who call on himÂ! I did not then, neither do I now.Â At length the child sobbed. Lucy still pressed her to her breast and continued to walk the floor. This Lucy did until the child sobbed again and finally breathed normally. Lucy explained that her soul was satisfied but her own body was weakened, Âcompletely overpowered by the intensity of my feelings.Â [^7]

Lucy, a Working Woman

At various times in the struggle to make a living the Smiths were in merchandising, farmed, ran a coopering business to repair or make wooden barrels and tubs, kept a small shop, planted orchards, managed a maple sugar operation, and even painted patterns on oilcloth with which to cover furniture. When they all had to work together, ages and abilities varying, Lucy saw to it that chores were done diligently and amicably, with some laughter and games, and frequently to the accompaniment of their own hymns. This amazing mother recalled, ÂWhilst we worked with our hands we endeavored to remember the service of [God] and the Welfare of our souls.Â [^8]

Lucy was a working woman. There was rarely a time when she was not earning some sum of money. She worked alongside Joseph Sr. at whatever his trade for their keep. When he died she moved into the Mansion House with Joseph and Emma, where, with JosephÂs blessing, she established a small museum in a lower room. People usually paid a quarter to see the curiosities she had collected with $6,000 of her own money, such as four ancient mummies that were kept in a cabinet. [^9]

Lucy and God

LucyÂs realization of her dependence on God was focused when, as mentioned, she was a critically ill young mother. She spent a frightening night near death. During this crisis she made a vow with God that if he would extend her life so that she could be a Âcomfort to her husbandÂ and rear their family together, she would serve him to the best of her ability. [^10]Lucy never forgot that vow. She deliberately practiced Christian principles even in the hardest of times, inviting herself into the lives of others to support and help sustain them. Her quarters, be they lean-to, campsite en route to a new location to escape the mobs, or a new cabin, were often filled with the sick and afflicted. Even while she was a heartbroken widow, her heart, arms, and larder knew no bounds. Hers were physically threatening times, and many people owed their very lives to her nursing skills, generosity, and compassion. [^11]

This was the core of Lucy-she was totally consumed, passionate, practical, and undeviating in her relationship with God. She trusted him. She expected to be blessed and given witness, and to be sustained through all the experiences in her life. The marvelous point to reap is that Lucy applied eternal principles to life and she inevitably gave credit to God. She was an enlightened woman. Because she was privy to the glorious continuing revelations given through Joseph as well as the gospel truths from the Book of Mormon, Lucy Mack Smith grew into a fulfilled person who was herself a light.

In the beginning of marriage and family life, Lucy had led the way for the Smith familyÂs search for religion, studying the Bible and discussing their findings. Many years later, when Father Smith lay dying, the tender family circle about him showed the literal pattern of their lifestyle according to the Word. Just before he died Father Smith followed the exemplary pattern of bestowing a fatherÂs blessing upon each child individually and having it recorded as did Jacob of old, and Alma, who Âcaused that his sons should be gathered together, that he might give unto them every one his charge, separately, concerning the things pertaining unto righteousnessÂ (Alma 35:16).

Joseph Smith Sr., a father in Israel, had been LucyÂs loved husband and tender companion. Many times he had been torn from her, even imprisoned, by the angry mob. Before he died he gave tribute to Lucy as Âone of the most singular women in the world,Â cherishing her with a depth that assured an eternal relationship. [^12]They both were strong personalities, vulnerable in turn but valiant spirits, intelligent and capable. That Lucy succeeded so stunningly as a wife and mother, as an independent leader, is part of what makes her fascinating to a student of character. She excelled in relationships and had rousing ovations in large congregations to prove it.

Lucy, a Dedicated Mother

It has been said that the Prophet Joseph had little formal schooling. True enough. However, he reaped the blessing of having a mother such as Lucy, whose intelligence is evidenced in herspeeches and in her published history of her prophet-son. Lucy taught her children much, and she saw to it that Christian values were instilled in the normal dayÂs routine. She was resourceful, and what she could not figure for herself, her relationship with the Lord would supply. The Bible was the familyÂs favorite text, and the children learned its contents well.

As a young mother Lucy set her course of discipline. ÂI said in my heart that there was not then upon earth the religion which I sought. I therefore determined to examine my Bible and, taking Jesus and His disciples for my guide, to endeavor to obtain from God that which man could neither give nor take away.Â [^13]

It was under the tutelage of Lucy and Joseph Sr. that young Joseph became comfortable with studying the Bible for answers to his own searching for religious affiliation. He had learned from scripture and put James 1:5 to the test. When he asked for GodÂs help, the answer to his prayer was a vision that changed the world. And we have been forever blessed.

JosephÂs experiences spread like the proverbial wildfire. As a result, the whole Smith family suffered through cruel misunderstandings and the keen interest of the adversary in their affairs. When continuing visions and revelations triggered hostility among their neighbors, Mother Smith stood valiant-even vocal in defense not only of her son but of the truth and beauty of what was being revealed through him. Lucy chose not to be bitter or resentful, but she was not one to remain silent when Joseph was persecuted for what he espoused. On one occasion Deacon George Beckwith counseled Lucy, ÂI wish, that if you do believe these things, you would not say anything more on the subject-I do wish you would not.Â

LucyÂs reply was typical of her other choices and stance on such matters. She did not negotiate but rather stoutly replied, ÂDeacon Beckwith, if you should stick my flesh full of faggots, and even burn me at the stake, I would declare, as long as God should give me breath, that Joseph has got that Record, and that I know it to be true.Â [^14]

Lucy the Activist

Immediately Lucy became an activist in the work of young Joseph. She knew her son. At each unfolding of his work for the Lord she was solace and service, never doubting him. She steadfastly followed him, always urging others to do the same. This is reminiscent of Mary, mother of Jesus, who said to the servants at the wedding in Cana, ÂWhatsoever he saith unto you, do itÂ (John 2:5).

When the Book of Mormon was published Lucy was tireless and self-sacrificing in working for the cause of the Restoration. She wrote numerous letters and actually took time to make personal visits proclaiming its validity. While in Michigan her nieceÂs husband introduced her to his minister. The man of the cloth forgot, for the moment, his Christian calling to love all GodÂs children. He took LucyÂs hand limply as he sneered, ÂAnd you are the mother of that poor, foolish, silly boy, Joe Smith, who pretended to translate the Book of Mormon.Â Through the Holy Ghost, LucyÂs testimony of the sacred work cloaked her in confidence. She simply said, ÂI am, sir, the mother of Joseph Smith; but why do you apply to him such epithets as those?Â The minister answered that he knew Joseph thought he could overthrow other churches with that simple Mormon book. When Lucy asked if the minister had ever read the book the man mumbled that such a thing was not worth his time. Now Lucy was in her element. She quoted from Paul about an open-minded person proving all things. She bore her personal testimony that the Book of Mormon had been Âwritten for the salvation of your soul, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost.Â Still the man discounted the whole idea and declared that he was not afraid that any member of his intelligent congregation would be led away by such stuff.

Lucy shocked the minister with a prophetic declaration: ÂNow, Mr. Ruggles, mark my words-as true as God lives, before three years we will have more than one-third of your church; and, sir, whether you believe it or not, we will take the very deacon, too.Â This prophecy was fulfilled, a score for the unique intuitiveness and spirituality that often seems to come more easily to women. [^15]

Lucy the Leader

This dainty-looking person had invincible drive. Hardship, stress, frustrations, inconveniences, difficult personalities, and mob violence notwithstanding, LucyÂs position was in the thick of things, like a Joan of Arc, a Florence Nightingale selflessly serving others.

Lucy herself led a company of Saints leaving for Kirtland during the early part of 1831. When they had boarded their boat, Lucy asked an older gentleman to lead the company. He refused the assignment, saying that she should take charge, affirming that he would do whatever she said, and suggesting that others do the same. There was a unanimous vote of agreement.

LucyÂs leadership style was a mix of practical tactics and spiritual nurturing. She conducted daily devotionals with plenty of hymn singing, knowing that a distracting round of hymns is good for the inner soul. She frequently pointed out that they all were traveling by commandment from God, and that they were to be solemn, lifting their hearts continually in prayer. All of this won the respect of the captain, whose wife, out of prejudice, had not wanted to board with the Mormons.

The journey was beset with challenges. Ice blocked their sailing. People had come ill-prepared and were hungry, uncomfortable, bored, full of complaints. Mother Smith attended to all their needs, using her own resources to get supplies from the shipÂs crew. But when the murmuring and grumbling and even mild flirtations got out of hand, Mother Smith went to the helm. She preached about their calling themselves Saints, removing themselves from the rest of the world for the purpose of their unique worship and strict way of life. She scolded, ÂWill you, at the very onset, subject the cause of Christ to ridicule by your own unwise and improper conduct? . . . You are even more unreasonable than the children of Israel were. . . . Where is your faith? Where is your confidence in God? Can you not realize that all things were made by him, and that he rules over the works of his own hands? And suppose that all the Saints here should lift their hearts in prayer to God, that the way might be opened before us, how easy it would be for him to cause the ice to break away, so that in a moment we could be on our journey!Â Lucyinvited all in her company to join in prayer about the ice. Immediately there was a deafening sound as the ice parted just enough for the passage of the boat. [^16]

Lucy, a Woman of Courage

Salvation came at a high price for Lucy and her family, even though her faith bolstered her courage. One day Joseph was sitting in his parentsÂ home when a large group of crazed mobbers pounded on the door. Undoubtedly it was LucyÂs habit to utter a quick prayer for connection with God under such circumstances. When Lucy opened the door and inquired of their business, the wild men boisterously announced that they had come to kill Joseph the Mormon prophet. Joseph, hearing the commotion, stalked to the door in all his manly strength and handsome majesty. The mobbers quailed at his presence. Lucy formally introduced Joseph as the man they sought, and Joseph urged them to come into the house, where he talked earnestly with them for a time about persecuting the Saints. These would-be destroyers were so impressed by Joseph that they insisted on giving him a protective escort to his own home. As they left one of the men said to another, ÂDidnÂt you feel strange when Smith took you by the hand?Â His companion replied, ÂI could not move. I would not harm a hair of that manÂs head for the whole world.Â [^17]

Near his own 28th birthday Joseph said of Mother Smith: ÂAnd blessed . . . is my mother, for she is a mother in Israel, and shall be a partaker with my father in all his patriarchal blessings. . . . Blessed is my mother, for her soul is ever filled with benevolence and philanthropy; and notwithstanding her age, she shall yet receive strength and be comforted in the midst of her house: and thus said the Lord. She shall have eternal life.Â [^18]

All of JosephÂs life Lucy was seldom far from him. She had reared him and nurtured him to be stable, innocent, God-fearing (as she frequently explained-even proclaimed). Imagine the inimitable emotion for a mother to hear about the appearances of God, of angel visits, angel instructions; to learn the wonderful fulness of the gospel through the Book of Mormon; to marvel when Josephallowed her to handle and examine the Urim and Thummim, which he used to translate the records from the metal plates! Thus joy filled her heart and repeated evil persecutions were overshadowed. These things were the answers to her early searching for truth that would bring a changed heart. After the manner of the strongest women, Lucy made a thoughtful, important choice and willingly suffered the consequences, though humanly she wrote that if she indulged her feelings on certain occasions, her strength might not support her. [^19]

The Indomitable Lucy

Lucy had proven herself indomitable. Speaking out as she did at the October 1845 general conference may have seemed a daring thing to do, though surely Lucy was confident in the company of the presiding priesthood. The unusual request she made at that conference came after many other audacious outbursts in defense of the Restoration movement.

A frequently-referred-to incident took place in Far West, prefacing the ProphetÂs martyrdom by almost six years. During a scene of stark horror Joseph was taken captive by Missouri forces, who then terrified the Saints with their Âhorrid yellingsÂ and vows to kill the Prophet. ÂHad the army been composed of so many bloodhounds, wolves, and panthers, they could not have made a sound more terrible,Â said Lucy. The following day Hyrum also was taken prisoner, and the two brothers were put into a canvas-covered wagon that would transport them to Independence. As the motley parade moved out of town they passed through throngs of rioters rimmed by stricken Mormons. Lucy, unable to press through the angry crowd, cried out, ÂI am the mother of the Prophet-is there not a gentleman here, who will assist me to that wagon, that I may take a last look at my children, and speak to them once more before I die?Â One man helped her make her way to the wagon, where she grasped JosephÂs hand which he had thrust between the canvas and wagon bed-that hand that she knew and loved so well, that hand that had been placed upon her head many times to bless her. ÂJoseph, do speak to your poor mother once more-I cannot bear togo till I hear your voice.Â There was a sob in JosephÂs voice as he cried out, ÂGod bless you, mother!Â And the moving wagon wrenched their hands apart. Speaking later of the heart-breaking incident, Lucy testified that she was not left to suffer alone. ÂIn the midst of my grief, I found consolation that surpassed all earthly comfort. I was filled with the Spirit of God.Â [^20]

We have spoken of courageous choices. Sadly, there were those who made choices that brought death and carnage to the innocent. On the morning of 24 June 1844 LucyÂs life changed drastically. Of the Martyrdom she wrote, ÂIn the morning [the mob] rushed into Carthage, armed and painted black, red and yellow, and in ten minutes fled again, leaving my sons murdered and mangled corpses!Â [^21]

Lucy, Mother of Martyrs

Granted that while many women pass through life without even noticing the tiny perfect nails on a new babyÂs fingers or hunting shooting stars in a summer sky, Lucy dramatized even small situations. But her inimitable first-person account of the aftermath of the Martyrdom has been heartrending to millions of Latter-day Saints over succeeding generations. It is a sobering gift. What if an account of MaryÂs grief, written in her own words, were available to us?

Lucy had braced her every nerve to face the sight of her wounded sons. She had cried out to God for all the proper feelings at such a time, and for physical strength, and for the unwavering faith that restores peace in such a situation. The bodies were washed, dressed, and laid out for the mourners. Lucy said:

When I entered the room and saw my murdered sons extended both at once before my eyes and heard the sobs and groans of my family and the cries of ÂFather! Husband! Brothers!Â from the lips of their wives, children, brothers and sisters, it was too much; I sank back, crying to the Lord in the agony of my soul, ÂMy God, my God, why hast thou forsaken this family!Â A voice replied, ÂI have taken them to myself, that they might have rest. . . .Â My mind flew through every scene of sorrow and distress which we had passed, together, in which they had shown theinnocence and sympathy which filled their guileless hearts. As I looked upon their peaceful, smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say, ÂMother, weep not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendancy is for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph.Â

I then thought upon the promise which I had received in Missouri, that in five years Joseph should have power over all his enemies. The time had elapsed and the promise was fulfilled. [^22]

If only every motherÂs son could be beyond the power of his enemies, including Satan! LucyÂs comfort came in her spiritual affirmation that, as Mother Smith, hers was a job well done. She was just as certain that the evil men would get their just punishment in the end.

When the Saints traveled west to the Salt Lake Valley, Lucy remained in Nauvoo. Discussions are still lively about why she did not make the journey. The suggested reasons range from her age, to the fact that the bones of so many of her family were buried in Nauvoo, to her pity for Emma. LucyÂs choice resulted in her deeply missing the beloved brethren and their families. She was no longer in the center of things, though Lucy herself explained that, like Naomi, she would have the watch care of her daughter-in-law in Nauvoo. She remained active to her death and never used eyeglasses even for the smallest print. Lucy died on 14 May 1856.

Lucy Mack Smith lived two centuries ago, but her choices and actions-based on valid principles as fodder for endurance, happiness, and exaltation-are guidance for women today with families whose interests are like seeds in the wind. LucyÂs very life-her example of turning hardship into growth experiences and choices into valued consequences, of keeping faith in God even when his answers to prayers were not what was hoped for-makes her worth careful study.

One looks at a portrait of Lucy Mack Smith painted by English artist Sutcliffe Maudsley about two years before the Martyrdom. After the manner of Whistler, a serene, puritanical Lucy is shown sitting in a carved and curved rocker beneath a framed image from the book of Abraham. Symbolically, Lucy holds a Book of Mormon on her knee. The resemblance to the Prophet is clear. What is not revealed in this hooded, dark profile figure is the vitality and unfailing acumen that was still evident in elderly Mother Smith, who spoke approximately three years later in general conference when the congregation declared her a mother in Israel.

Notes

1 See History of the Church 7:470-72; Ronald W. Walker, ÂThe HistoriansÂ Corner: Lucy Mack Smith Speaks to the Nauvoo Saints,Â BYU Studies 32 (Winter and Spring 1992): 276-84.

2 See Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 517.

3 LDS Bible Dictionary, s.v. ÂIsrael.Â

4 See Lucy Mack Smith, The History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, ed. Preston Nibley (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), p. 313.

5 Smith, History, pp. 36, 43-45.

6 Ibid., pp. 51-53.

7 Martha Jane Knowlton CorayÂs preliminary manuscript, as cited in Encyclopedia of Mormonism 3:1357.

8 See Richard S. Van Wagoner and Steven C. Walker, A Book of Mormons (Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1982), p. 312.

9 Smith, History, pp. 33-35.

10 See Andrew Jenson, comp., Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (1901- 36; reprint, Salt Lake City: Western Epics, 1971), 1:691.

* Elaine Cannon, a University of Utah graduate, has been an instructor for Brigham Young UniversityÂs Continuing Education program, a daily columnist for the Deseret News, a freelance writer for national publications, and an associate editor of Church magazines. She was Young Women general president from 1978 to 1984. Elaine is married to D. James Cannon of Salt Lake City. They are the parents of six children and have numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren. Elaine wrote about Lucy Mack Smith because she feels that Lucy exemplifies the ideal Latter-day Saint woman.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
