Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

4 BEPPIE HARRISON [^1] ÂThe Lord Will Support UsÂ Mary Fielding Smith

1801Â1852

ItÂs not that itÂs so hard to find a determined woman. We see them all around us: the older woman resolutely keeping up with youngsters who could be her grandchildren, finally working on her degree after years devoted to family; the young woman, tomato-splattered and flustered, intent on canning every single one of the tomatoes she grew and brooding over the zucchini surplus; the mother who has made up her mind that her offspring are going to have the musical advantages she missed, even if it means insisting on and supervising unenthusiastic practice sessions from now until the far side of forever. A lot of women are blessed with determination. A lot of men joke about it, looking nervously over their shoulders lest they find themselves overtaken by a resolute female person intent on her own business.

Mary Fielding Smith would have outdone them all. ItÂs a matter of historical fact that she overtook a good many men in her day. Even in a field of determined women she would have stood out. Born in England, she was converted to the restored Church in Canada with her brother and sister, and with them came to Zion, which at that point was Kirtland, Ohio.She went on to become the wife of the second Patriarch of the Church, mother of the sixth president, and grandmother of the tenth, but it is not solely her relationship with the men of her family that makes her memorable. After her husband, Hyrum, was murdered by the mob with his brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith, Mary Fielding Smith-over the resistance of Smith family members who pressed her to remain in Nauvoo-gathered up herself and her possessions, her children, stepchildren, and several other miscellaneous dependents, and set off to travel west with the body of the Church.

The captain of her company, a man named Cornelius P. Lott, was so unenthusiastic about the idea of including her assortment of women, children, and half-broken wild steers and half-grown oxen in his company that he told her bluntly that she should go back to Winter Quarters and stay there until someone could take charge of her. If she persisted in her attempt to travel west, he said, she would never make it to their destination and would be a burden to everyone else in the company as far as she might manage to get.

Her son Joseph F. Smith, not yet 10 years old at the time, was standing with his mother as Captain Lott explained to her what he saw as the realities of the situation. There they stood, the young boy, the testy but powerful captain, and the indomitable woman. It was obvious to her son, if not to the captain, that Mary saw the realities rather differently. Joseph F. might not be very old, and she might be a widowed woman, but she had faith and determination, and Joseph Smith had promised her before his death that the Lord would take care of her.

When the captain finished, Mary said what she had to say. She told the captain that she would beat him to the Valley and would ask no help from him while she was doing it. Then, without further discussion on the subject, she went ahead and did exactly what she told him she would do. She got there a day before he did, and she got there without his help.

Mary was a Smith by marriage but a Fielding by birth, and the Fieldings had never been known for their wishy-washy stands on principle. When she, her brother, and her sister, with their Methodist minister, John Taylor, encountered a Mormon missionary in Toronto named Parley P. Pratt and recognized the truth of whathe taught, the FieldingsÂ first hope was that they would be able to take that message and share it with their five brothers and sisters still living in the north of England. When her brother, Joseph Fielding, was later actually able to go to that very part of England as a missionary himself, he discovered to his and his sistersÂ disappointment that the English branch of the family wanted nothing to do with the Church and, consequently, nothing to do with him either. With true Fielding determination, the English Fieldings planted themselves as resolutely on the old faith as the American branch planted themselves on the new. Neither side would budge, and eventually they died as they lived from that time forward, estranged.

My family is descended from those Fieldings in a direct line from Joseph, and itÂs not only my mother who has remarked on the fact that the Fielding determination apparently rides on exceedingly dominant genes down to the present generation. We are three, four, and five generations away from Joseph and his resolute sisters now, and you can still see the shadow of their set chins in the set chins of my mother, my sisters, and my children when something they believe in is challenged or declared to be impossible.

Mary Fielding SmithÂs chin must have been set like that when, during her long march across the plains, one of her best oxen collapsed in the yoke, apparently dying. Captain Lott-not particularly grieved by the situation, one gathers-came to see what was going on and announced that the animal was obviously dead and they would just have to figure out some way to take the widow along, a burden on the company just as he had predicted.

Mary said nothing. (Unlike many of her collateral descendants, she appears to have been a woman of few words.) Instead, she went to her wagon and collected a bottle of consecrated oil, and then went to her brother Joseph, who was also part of the company, and told him he was needed to administer to the ox.

According to family legend, Joseph was somewhat taken aback by the request. Up until then he had apparently not seen administration to animals as one of his priesthood opportunities. His sister, however, was firmly determined that that was exactly what was going to happen, and Joseph took the oil from her and with another elder administered to the ox.

The ox, still in the yoke, got up and walked. The wagon jolted along after it, and so did Mary. What the captain said or thought is not recorded.

I think about the Fielding determination sometimes, and about how it led the English branch of the family to remain stubbornly close-minded to what the two sisters and brother in the New World recognized as revelation that opened all the promise and meaning of the dispensation of the fulness of times. I think about how that same Fielding determination worked to enable Mary to withstand the persecution she and her family endured in Ohio, in Missouri, and finally in Nauvoo, the determination that held her close to the strength of the gospel when the lifeless body of her husband was returned to her after the carnage of Carthage Jail. Would it have been easier to have thrown up her hands and taken her children and fled back to England, to sanity and safety? I donÂt know, but apparently the possibility never occurred to her. Mary Fielding Smith determined to live for the Church as her husband had died for it, and, alone among the Smith family, transferred her loyalty and her obedience to the new leaders and went west, as they did, to Deseret.

That determination had enormous consequences for herself and her descendants. Because she was prepared to do whatever was necessary to follow the direction of the new leaders, she managed to get her children and stepchildren across the plains to the Valley, where her family could grow up and prosper. Her son and grandsons matured into leadership positions within the Church, unlike their cousins who had stayed in Nauvoo and followed their own paths, rejecting the revelations directing the move west because they came to Brigham Young and not to the ProphetÂs own son. In a sense, the Smith family that stayed behind was determined too, but determined to follow their own course of action, without reference to the authority of leadership that rested in the Apostles. What made Mary Fielding SmithÂs determination remarkable was that it was determination tempered by obedience and humility. She was determined, all right, but ready to accept counsel on the direction in which that determination should be exercised.

I think about that distinction as I look around at the world I live in today, 150 years after the days when Mary Fielding Smith wasfighting her battles with unfortunate oxen, skeptical men, and inexorable geography. I think about myself and my sisters: we certainly seem to have no problem in making up our minds about things. But do we always remember, in small things as well as large, to ask for counsel on what we should do, and, having asked for the counsel, actually wait to find out what it is before charging off into action? I wonder. Sometimes it seems so much easier just to get going on whatever appears to be the most obvious thing to be done.

Oh, of course there are things we do that I know Mary Fielding Smith would understand and approve of fully. I think of one of my sisters, who lives, as I do, well out of the Valley and the heartland of the Church, and who has, over the course of four long school years now, bounded out of bed at some incredible hour so that she can be dressed and prepared-not at home, but over at the stake center-to teach seminary at six oÂclock in the morning. Mary would have nodded approvingly and understood exactly why it was important to do that, even on the most uninviting wintry dawns. Mary knew about cold, and fighting fatigue, and instructing adolescents who might not fully appreciate the instruction at the time. She also knew it had to be done.

But then I think about some of the other examples of determination in our time. I think of the stage mothers who are absolutely set on their young daughters finding fame and fortune, and who are not particularly concerned about the quality or moral principles or levels of violence in the productions within which they struggle to place their daughters. I think about some of the world-class women athletes who place every other consideration after their goal to achieve success in sports, and how marriages have been known to founder as a direct result. I think about women here at the tail end of the twentieth century who, whether their opportunities are in the commercial world or in charitable ventures or in political action, either postpone having their families until some vague future time when they might get around to it, or else, being encumbered with motherly or wifely responsibilities or both, work a patchwork of temporary arrangements and substitute child care and microwave dinners left with a hasty note of instruction or money on the kitchen counter for pizza. None of their achievements (and clearlythey do achieve) are possible without determination, and none of them succeed in their chosen fields (and clearly they do succeed) without being determined in a way that is a shadowy reminder of Mary Fielding Smith.

But only a shadowy reminder. Viewed from the outside, the choices many women of today are making, however determined the women are, donÂt appear to be the choices that Mary would have made, given what we know of her and her character. Of course, itÂs true that as outsiders we are in no position to evaluate the choices of others or to pass judgment on whether they sought divine guidance and what that divine guidance might have been, or ought to be, according to our frame of reference. Still, perhaps I can learn from MaryÂs example something about my own choices and my reasons for making them.

First of all, thereÂs that business of praying about choices and then paying attention to the answers, whether the answers seem wrongheaded and off base or not. I should learn from experience; I have a long history of apparently wrongheaded answers to prayer that worked out to be the best possible blessings that could have been given to me. Trusting that that will happen seems to be a lesson I need to learn over and over again.

Second, thereÂs the point that I need to be very, very sure that I am really listening to the Spirit when itÂs necessary for other people to sacrifice something so that I can do what I believe I ought to do. That I myself should sacrifice for what I want is perfectly all right. But when I ask my children to get along on their own for a bit while I get whatever it is under control, or figure that my husband and I donÂt really need to spend all that much time together right now because weÂre both busy (at least I think heÂs busy-I havenÂt really had time to inquire), or decide my mother is doing just fine-she always seems to be pottering around comfortably when I get a minute to pay attention-and IÂll just get these things done and then IÂll spend some time with her-well, I guess when I think about Mary Fielding Smith and how busy she was and the choices she made, I think IÂd better evaluate my choices very, very carefully.

True, her children had a rough time crossing the plains. It wasnÂt easy for anyone. But would staying in Nauvoo necessarilyhave been any easier? After all, it was from Nauvoo that her husband (and their father) went off to Carthage and his death. The choices Mary Fielding Smith made with such determination were for their better good in the long run, not primarily for hers.

True, she left her husbandÂs mother behind, but at the time she left, Lucy Mack Smith had agreed to come west, if when she died her body could be brought back to Nauvoo for burial. That was promised to her, but she just never actually started the journey.

The person who sacrificed most for Mary Fielding SmithÂs determined fealty to the church and what she believed she was directed to do was Mary Fielding Smith herself. She was a woman in the prime of her life, in her forties when she crossed the plains. Not only did she make the journey but she had to make a home, quite literally, once she reached the Salt Lake Valley. She and her family built a two-room adobe house first, and cleared land for a farm. None of it was easy work. Mary had been a tall, attractive young woman; by the time she was working on the farm in the Salt Lake Valley she had become a strong but careworn old woman, her hair graying, shoulders stooped, hands rough and hardened by manual labor.

When she had done what she had to do-her children and stepchildren had a home among the Saints, safe in the West-her iron determination could support her no further. She had pushed her body relentlessly, month after month, year after year. In the end, her resistance crumbled. She caught what was described as a cold, and steadily worsened. In 1852, only four years after coming into the Valley, Mary Fielding Smith died. She was then 51 years old.

When I consider her accomplishments, there is only one possible verdict: she was one determined lady. More important, she seemed to know by instinct what the rest of us sometimes forget. Determination is a strong horse that needs to be harnessed by humility and obedience if it is to take us where we need to go. Mary Fielding Smith knew that. She organized her life around that truth, and she passed a rich heritage on to those of us who would come after, fighting different battles in different times but needing exactly the same principles that she lived by through good times and bad.

Mary Fielding Smith once wrote to her sister, ÂThe Lord knowswhat our intentions are, and He will support us and give us grace and strength for the day, if we continue to put our trust in Him and devote ourselves unreservedly to His service.Â [^2]Not only did she write it, she believed it and she lived it. She tamed the horse of determination simply by placing the reins in the hands of the Lord, as each of us can do.

And then she hung on tight, and rode.

Notes

1 Mary Fielding, letter to Mercy Rachel Thompson (no date), Canada, as quoted in Don C. Corbett, Mary Fielding Smith: Daughter of Britain (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), p. 35.

* Beppie Harrison, who was born in California and raised in Hawaii, received her B.A. degree from the University of California at Berkeley. She is married to Geoffrey Harrison; they are the parents of four children and live in Birmingham, Michigan. She is the author of many books for both the LDS and the national market. Beppie chose to write about Mary Fielding Smith because of MaryÂs forthright, determined personality traits that can still be observed in her descendants today.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
