Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

6 LITA LITTLE GIDDINS [^1] ÂWonderful, Unfailing FriendÂ Jane Manning James

1821(?)Â1908

October 7, 1979-that was the day I was finally baptized and confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I was 18 years old. I say I was ÂfinallyÂ baptized, because I had been introduced to the principles of the gospel about two years before that time. Unfortunately my mother and my stepfather had not granted me their permission to enter into that covenant until I was 18. So, I waited.

During those two years I learned so many wonderful things that enhanced my life and helped to make it more fulfilling. For example, I learned about the purpose and need for the various auxiliaries of the Church. I began to understand certain doctrinal aspects and to appreciate the ChurchÂs history. I also began to realize that countless other Saints had endured the pains of having to wait for their long-promised day. Shortly after my baptism I realized that I had embarked upon a spiritually guided journey to happiness, and that the journey would lead me safely into the eternities if I would but choose to travel its course to the end. I know that fact to be true now more than ever before.Thus, my formal entrance into the Church was well worth the wait.

As a convert I learned of Latter-day Saint pioneers whose contributions were significant in the reestablishment of the LordÂs church. From their stories I gained a great appreciation for the ongoing sacrifices they made, the trials they endured, and the capacity they exhibited to give of themselves continually for the LordÂs cause. Now as a wife and mother, I have been touched many times by stories of pioneer women having to care for their sick children during the trek to the Great Salt Lake Valley. My heart has often been saddened to learn of the deaths of so many of those children who never saw the place where the kingdom of God would be established.

There is another population among our early pioneers that I have come to value highly: our early black pioneers. I feel as I do about that distinct group of people for several reasons, one of which being that I too am black. As a result of that commonality my heart and my soul have been touched by the stories of these pioneers in a manner that is very real and very personal. More important, I have come to value their experiences because they can be a strength not only to me and my family but to all members of the Church.

I was a senior at Brigham Young University and attending a class titled ÂBlacks in the Mormon CultureÂ when I first learned some of the histories of our black pioneers in greater depth. So few know the stories behind such names as Samuel and Amanda Chambers, Green Flake, the Grice family, or the Leggroan family, to name just a few, though all were black pioneers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and all had stories worthy of being told, retold, and valued by Church members. But for now, this essay is about one particular black pioneer. It is about her character and her contribution to the Church and its members, past and present; about a woman who helped to pave the way for me. Her name is Jane.

Jane Elizabeth Manning was born in the small town of Wilton, Connecticut, to Isaac and Eliza Manning in the early 1800s. She and the members of her family were born free. They were fortunate enough to have escaped the unimaginable pains of slavery that their ancestors had suffered, but what they did not escape was the never-ending unpleasantness placed upon them because of the color of their skin.

After Jane and other family members joined the Church, they possessed a tremendous desire to gather with the Saints in Nauvoo. So in the fall of 1843, their journey began. There must have been excitement coupled with great anxiety as Jane and her family started on their way. But they soon encountered opposition, which made for a difficult trip. In her own words Jane tells of the experience: ÂWe started from Wilton, Conn., and travelled by Canal to Buffalo, N.Y. We were to go to Columbus Ohio before our fares were to be collected, but they insisted on having the money at Buffalo and would not take us farther. So we left the boat, and started on foot to travel a distance of over eight hundred miles.Â [^2]

I am humbled by JaneÂs determination and persistence to continue on her journey to a place where she had never been. I am strengthened by her faith to embark on that unforeseen quest to reach Nauvoo, with an assurance that God would protect her and her loved ones.

When I left for England as a full-time missionary I had no idea what experiences awaited me. I remember feeling prepared and anxious to do the LordÂs will, but at the same time feeling nervous about what I would find once I arrived. As I look back I feel joy in knowing that the mission I served for the Lord was a successful one. But I will never forget the times of persecution I faced because I was a representative of the Church and because I was black.

In one of the areas in which my companion and I had been tracting, a group of young people threw rocks at us as we swiftly pedaled away. The obscenities and familiar yet hurtful racial slurs from my spirit brothers and sisters were ringing in my ears for days thereafter.

I try with all the energy I can muster to not let such experiences pain me too deeply. Nevertheless, there are times when the hurt seems to have more power than I do. When Jane had similar experiences she seemed to maintain a firm hold on the power that is greater than us all-the power of the Lord.

As I continue to push ahead on my own unforeseen journeys of life, I know that I will often be confronted with displeasing situations, whether they be due to race, religion, gender, or other factors. I pray that I will someday acquire the determination, persistence, and power that Jane possessed in order to carry on.

During the course of the ManningsÂ trek to Nauvoo, it became hard for them to continue because their feet were in so much pain. Jane shares the following: ÂWe walked until our shoes were worn out, and our feet became sore and cracked open and bled until you could see the whole print of our feet with blood on the ground.Â [^3]

It is difficult to lead a group of people when one is physically weak, and much more so when those being led are suffering as well. Jane had that role but witnessed to us all how difficult tasks can be tackled. She continues her account: ÂWe stopped and united in prayer to the Lord, we asked God the Eternal Father to heal our feet and our prayers were answered and our feet were healed forthwith.Â [^4]The 10th edition of Merriam-WebsterÂs Collegiate Dictionary defines the word forthwith as meaning Âimmediately.Â ThatÂs powerful-to know that Jane and her family had such a fitting miracle occur to them because they offered a sincere prayer of faith to their Father in Heaven.

To successfully continue their journey, Jane and her family needed their feet to be healed, and that need was met. So often I look at the miracles or blessings others have received and I wish for similar, if not the same, miracles to come my way. I think many of us are guilty of this. But I am realizing that when my needs and the needs of my family are met, a fitting miracle has occurred, even if it is much more subtle than the miracle that the Manning family received. And if I show my gratitude by recognizing all of the blessings that Heavenly Father gives to me in my daily life, when my journey is through and I am blessed to behold him, that great moment will be even more wonderful as a result of my having acknowledged him in all things.

At last Jane and her family arrived in Nauvoo, where they could be among the Saints. O blessed day! Good fortune had it that the Prophet Joseph, along with his wife, Emma, were waiting for them, and they welcomed the Mannings into their home. It was they who greeted the Mannings in Nauvoo and extended the invitation to Âcome in, come in!Â [^5]

That was the beginning of what marked JaneÂs longstanding relationship with the Prophet Joseph and Emma Smith, with whom she stayed until shortly before the Martyrdom. The Prophet assured Jane that she was among friends and promised her that she would be protected. That promise was never broken.

In 1846 Jane, her husband, Isaac, and son Sylvester were among those who left Nauvoo, endured the perils of Winter Quarters, then made the move to the Rocky Mountains. Another son, Silas, was born along the way.

Once established in the Valley, Jane, like the other Saints, must have eagerly awaited the completion of the Salt Lake Temple. She made many inquiries of Church leaders regarding the temple of the Lord. Although she had not received much of a formal education, she did gain a spiritual education pertaining to the gospel of Jesus Christ after she was baptized, and because of her understanding and appreciation of the plan of salvation, one of her strongest desires was to enter the house of the Lord to receive her own endowment. Although she was able to participate in baptisms for the dead, her desire to receive her endowment was never granted because her skin was black. [^6]

I can recall the day I went to the temple to receive my own endowments like it was only yesterday. It was 3 May 1986, one month before I was to enter the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah. I shall never forget that day. As a person of color it is difficult for me to feel accepted in many places, but in the house of the Lord I felt fully accepted for the first time in my life. I felt acceptance and love from my Heavenly Father and his son, Jesus Christ, and the eternal vision concerning my relationship to them finally began to unfold for me. Maybe Jane wanted to feel that too before she died. Still, her faith was unfailing, whereas my faith is sometimes weak.

In spite of JaneÂs disappointment in being denied the privilege of receiving her endowments, she remained strong, and continued to Âpress forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all menÂ (2 Ne. 31:20).

Many of the Saints in the Valley were very needy and had little to subsist on individually, let alone enough to impart to others. Jane experienced prosperous years but more often her means were small; nevertheless, even during these difficult times she exhibited a generous spirit. Eliza Lyman relates a story in support of JaneÂs loving heart. At this particular time ElizaÂs husband, Elder Amasa M. Lyman, had gone with Porter Rockwell on a mission to California. She writes: ÂHe left us without anything from which to make bread, it not being in his power to get it. Not long after Amasa had gone, Jane James, thecolored woman, let me have two pounds of flour, it being half of what she had.Â [^7]Jane was a woman who understood the meaning of charity. She understood what it means to love God with all of our hearts, and to love our neighbors as ourselves.

My familyÂs means are small. We are always blessed to have enough to sustain us, and we are grateful for that. I must admit, though, that it has been a challenge for me to not have a great deal of substance to give to others. But, like Jane, I want to learn how to give what little we do have and to feel good about that. I know that itÂs not really what one gives but how one gives that matters. The Savior gave of his heart and of his soul. I believe Jane followed his example as closely as she knew how. I am seeking to do the same.

When Jane died in 1908 her funeral was attended by a large number of friends whose lives she had touched. In tribute to Jane, the Deseret News printed the following statements:

Few persons were more noted for faith and faithfulness than was Jane Manning James, and though of the humble of the earth she numbered friends and acquaintances by the hundreds. Many persons will regret to learn that the kind and generous soul has passed from the earth. [^8]

The house was crowded, many in the congregation being of her own race. Flowers in profusion were contributed by friends who had learned to respect the deceased for her undaunted faith and goodness of heart.

A sketch of her life, as dictated by Mrs. James, was read by Mrs. Elizabeth J. D. Roundy, and the speakers were President Joseph F. Smith and Bishop T. A. Clawson. [^9]

Jane was buried in the Salt Lake City Cemetery.

Gospel music and hymns are an important part of my life and my heritage. They probably were important in JaneÂs life as well. During a trip to Southern California my family and I were able to visit my grandmother, who is a member of a Pentecostal church where gospel hymns are sung a great deal. While looking through her hymnbook I found a song that was suitable in describing Jane. She mentioned in her ÂLife SketchÂ how she and her family sang hymns and praisedGod for his goodness as they walked to Nauvoo. Perhaps a hymn titled ÂWonderful, Unfailing FriendÂ was one that her family sang:

There never was a truer Friend than Jesus, He hears me when my heart for mercy pleads; (for mercy pleads) And no one knows my burdens like my Jesus, For He alone can understand my needs. There never was a truer Friend than Jesus, My sorrows He will always with me share; (with me share) And since He bore His cross, my blessed Jesus, There is no cross He will not help me bear. Wonderful, Unfailing Friend is Jesus, He fills my soul with singing all the day; Wonderful, Eternal Friend is Jesus, And HeÂll go with me all the way. (all the way) There never was a truer Friend than Jesus, He is my life and strength, my all in all; (my all in all) Upon the strong and loving arms of Jesus My soul shall rest, and never, never fall. Wonderful, Unfailing Friend is Jesus, He fills my soul with singing all the day;

Wonderful, Eternal Friend is Jesus, And HeÂll go with me all the way. (all the way) [^10]

Jane Elizabeth ManningÂs life can inspire anyone who strives to be a follower of Christ. She is a woman to look to as one who bore her own cross and was worthy to be called JesusÂ friend. How grateful I am that her life can teach me how I might be a better friend to my Savior.

JaneÂs life reminds us all that itÂs not the color of the skin that matters; itÂs the quality of the heart. She gives us hope in knowing that through the power of the Spirit, we may overcome. Her life was a testimony of that.

Notes

1 Jane Manning James, ÂLife Sketch of Jane Elizabeth Manning James,Â in Henry J. Wolfinger, ÂA Test of Faith: Jane Elizabeth James and the Origins of the Utah Black Community,Â Clark Knowlton, ed., Social Accommodation in Utah (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1975), p. 152.

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid.

4 Ibid., p. 153.

5 See ibid., pp. 148Â51.

6 Ibid., p. 131.

7 Deseret News, 16 April 1908, as quoted in Kate B. Carter, The Negro Pioneer (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1965), p. 11.

8 Deseret News, 21 April 1908, as quoted in Carter, The Negro Pioneer, p. 11.

9 Albert Simpson Reitz, ÂWonderful, Unfailing Friend Is Jesus,Â in Paul Rader, comp., Tabernacle Hymns No. 2 (Chicago: Tabernacle Publishing Co., 1921), p. 197.

* Lita Little Giddins earned a bachelorÂs degree in sociocultural anthropology and a masterÂs degree in social work from Brigham Young University, where she performed with the Young Ambassadors. She has made vocal recordings and performed on stage, on television, in commercials, and in Church videos. A native of Chicago, she now lives in Athens, Ohio, with her husband, Kevin Giddins, and their two daughters. Lita has been inspired by Jane Manning James and considers herself related to Jane as Âa mutual sister in Zion.Â

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
