Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

7 ARDETH GREENE KAPP [^1] ÂI Shall Know They Are TrueÂ Susan Kent Greene

1816Â1860

Why donÂt you become great, like your great-grandmother?Â questioned Edwin Kent Greene of his 15-year-old daughter, Shirley, who had just made this stirring declaration of her intent: ÂI want to make the world turn, and I want it to turn sharply!Â

In a tone of surprise, not being aware of any evidence that might have classified her great-grandmother as one who made the world turn, Shirley asked her father, ÂWhat did she do?Â After a moment of silent reflection, he responded to his daughterÂs earnest question.

ÂWhat did she do?Â He repeated the question, and then, looking tenderly at this young woman who wanted to make a difference, leave a mark, break a record, simply said, ÂShe loved the Lord, kept a good home, and raised a fine family.Â

Shirley turned away without comment, not satisfied with the answer but unable to let it go. Like a seed planted in fertile soil, hardly noticed at the time of planting, the thought took root and began to grow. Today, with years gone by, Shirley now stands where her great-grandmother stood,and better comprehends. She loves the Lord, has a good home, and has raised a fine family of eleven children; and the married ones love the Lord, have good homes, and are raising fine families. The last lines of a poem written by her daughter Rebecca give evidence that the seed is still growing: ÂAn inheritance supreme I gained from Mom-my great ambition: just to pass it on.Â

The Apostle Paul, wanting young Timothy to understand about the gifts of the Spirit, a legacy of faith passed from one generation to the next, spoke in these words: ÂI call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee alsoÂ (2 Tim. 1:5).

My family also has a legacy of faith. In significant measure, this legacy has root in the life of a pioneer woman, Susan Kent Greene-great-grandmother to my sister Shirley and my two other sisters, my brother, and me.

There is a lineage, a continuity, an eternal fabric that is carefully woven over time into a dynamic tapestry that is passed from one generation to the next. The tapestry of our family has been woven from some of the same fabric as that of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The threads portray historic events ranging from the building of the Kirtland Temple in Ohio to the first breaking of sod for the Cardston Temple in western Canada by SusanÂs son, Daniel Kent Greene, to my participation in the Utah statehood centennial celebrations in 1996.

On Memorial Day, 27 May 1996, I stood at the graveside of Daniel Kent, SusanÂs father, in Chester, Ohio, just a mile or two from Kirtland. The inscription on the broken headstone was hardly readable: ÂDaniel Kent, born December the 31st, 1778; died July 23, 1853.Â Daniel KentÂs wife and SusanÂs mother, Nancy Young Kent, was Brigham YoungÂs sister. She was born 6 August 1786 in Vermont, and died 22 September 1860 in Salt Lake City, Utah. Susan was the sixth child and fifth daughter born to Daniel and Nancy, 3 April 1816, in Genoa, Cayuga County, New York.

To that hallowed ground in Kirtland, Ohio, where testimonies of faith were forged in the fire of adversity, Susan and her husband, Evan, a schoolteacher, had come soon after their marriage in 1835.There, a temple of God was built by Latter-day Saints, led by a prophet of God, under extreme conditions of sacrifice and faith. Susan and Evan were acquainted with the Prophet Joseph. They were among the favored early members of the Church who helped with the building of the Kirtland Temple and received glorious manifestations, gifts, blessings, and promises in that holy edifice.

On that Memorial Day weekend as I stood at Daniel KentÂs grave, it seemed that the clock stopped and the calendar rolled back for a brief moment, allowing a glimpse into the past. Within the walls of the Kirtland Temple, a marvelous choir united their voices in singing ÂThe Spirit of God.Â I thought of the words of Zebedee Coltrin, who spoke of the wondrous events that occurred in the temple in 1836: ÂI have seen the power of God as it was on the day of Pentecost. . . . I saw the Lord high and lifted up. The angels of God rested upon the Temple and we heard their voices singing heavenly music.Â [^2]

We sat in those historic pews where earlier Saints had sat for such a short time before being driven out. We saw the pulpit where Jesus Christ had appeared. We reviewed Heber C. KimballÂs account of Sidney RigdonÂs plea to the Almighty: ÂLooking at the sufferings and poverty of the Church, [Sidney] frequently used to go upon the walls of the building both by night and day and frequently wetting the walls with his tears, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building.Â [^3]

From the life sketch of Susan Kent Greene, written by her daughter Lula Greene Richards, we learn of her part and her faith in those early days of the Church:

ÂSusan was nearly sixteen years old when tidings of the religious works of the prophet Joseph Smith were brought to the notice of her near kindred and herself, who were strict Methodists. Her uncle Joseph (Brigham YoungÂs brother), in the Young family, was a man of such saintlike characteristics and angelic life that when Susan heard that some of her uncles and aunts and their father, John Young Sr., were investigating the new religion, she said emphatically, ÂIf Uncle Joseph accepts those new teachings concerning religion, I shall know they are true.Â That proof of the genuineness of the new religion was soon made manifest; but there were also other proofswhich were readily accepted by this sincere young worshipper of God and seeker after his pure saving laws. Her father, Daniel Kent, like other real Methodists, believed in prayer; and morning and evening called his family together, and they all knelt and unitedly gave thanks for all blessings bestowed by our Heavenly Father and asked for continued help and guidance. After a careful reading and studying of the Book of Mormon, the following beautiful testimony of its truth was given to that honest worshipper and his devoted family: One morning while they were engaged in family prayer, the head of the household as usual voicing their united petitions, his speech was suddenly changed to another language, new and not understood by any of the family but the speaker himself. This remarkable and unexpected manifestation of an unseen power, before the petition was ended, simply changed again to the supplicantÂs usual manner of speech, giving a clear interpretation of the words which had been spoken in the unknown language. That interpretation was a strong and powerful declaration of the truth of the Book of Mormon and the divinity of the calling and the work of the prophet Joseph Smith.

ÂSusanÂs conviction of the truth of the Gospel restored to the earth in latter days was so strong that she could not reject it, although to join the hated and reviled Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints cost her so great a sacrifice that it came near taking her life. For two days and nights, friends and the family of which she was a favorite member all mourned her as dead. The sacrifice that she had to make [in becoming] one of the despised and persecuted Mormons was the giving up of a young man to whom she had given her maiden love with very high hopes of future happiness, but whose worldly pride would not let him have anything to do with one who favored the Ânew religionÂ of whom he had heard so much evil spoken. When Susan became convinced of this fact concerning her lover, so deep was the wound occasioned to her sensitive heart that she could partake of no nourishment, and after some days she lapsed into a coma so profound it had the appearance of actual death, and was so considered and mourned over by those about her. But at five oÂclock on the afternoon of the second day of her death-like sleep, as the clock was striking, SusanÂs eyes opened;and she said to her mother, who was bending over her, ÂFive oÂclock-how long have I slept?Â On April 14th, 1832, Susan was baptized a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.Â [^4]

In her tender years Susan Kent covenanted in the waters of baptism to stand as a witness of God at all times and in all places, not knowing then where those places would be or what would be required in faith and endurance. Again from the writings of her daughter Lula:

ÂTwo years after SusanÂs baptism, her cousin, Evan M. Greene, visited the town in which the Kents resided, and engaged employment there as a schoolteacher for a year. Soon after his arrival in the place he attended a testimony meeting of the Latter-day Saints, in which Susan bore a strong and interesting testimony in evidence of the truth of the Gospel as restored to the earth through the instrumentality of the prophet Joseph Smith. By listening to the young womanÂs talk, the feeling came to Evan that he would certainly be happy to become the husband of a girl who had so clear an understanding of and so great a love for the Gospel of Truth, as his cousinÂs remarks bore witness of, and that if he could win her affections he would certainly marry her and take her to Kirtland with him when he should return to his parentsÂ home in that place. After gaining the consent of the parents, he asked Susan if she would accompany him as his bride to Kirtland, the then gathering place of the Saints. And Susan concluded that she loved her cousin Evan and the work of the Lord to which he was so ardently devoted sufficiently well to be true to them always, and so she accepted his proposal. At the time SusanÂs father said that she would not live a year as her health had always been so poor. She was very small, never weighed 100 pounds in her life. Two children were born to Evan and Susan while they remained with the Church in Kirtland, a daughter and a son. The daughter died when she was two years old and was buried in the Mormon graveyard there, which was the beginning of their real personal sorrows.Â [^5]

Returning from Kirtland to my home, in full view of the Bountiful Temple, I wondered, Is it possible to comprehend the blessings that come so easily to us today, available only through the endurance and faith of those who built up the kingdom in those early years? Their tests were constant, and their afflictions great. As we learn of the faithof those whose blood now courses through our veins, will we take their torch and hold it high as we learn from the past and face the future?

LulaÂs narrative continues:

ÂThey went with the body of the Church to Missouri and from there to Nauvoo, Illinois, where they again had the privilege of assisting to build a temple to the Lord and of receiving their blessings therein. They also witnessed the manifestation showing that the office and calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith had fallen upon Brigham Young. Their testimonies were strengthened even while their faith was tried. . . .

ÂSusan and Evan were among the first of those driven from Nauvoo to reach Mt. Pisgah, Iowa early in the summer of 1846. As soon as Evan had selected a spot of ground upon which to place their tent, for they were so fortunate as to possess one, he pitched it and there left with it his wife and their little ones while he went with his team and wagon to aid in bringing forward some of the Saints who were without means of their own and depended upon their brethren for assistance. Evan and Susan had, then, five living children. She, with her little ones, was left with no near neighbors. Almost as soon as her husband had gone, the baby, a lovely eleven-month-old girl, became very ill. Under those sad conditions she watched her little one grow weaker, until on the 16th of June, 1846, the gentle spirit was released. When Susan saw her baby grow cold and lifeless in her lap, she began to realize the utter loneliness of her situation more keenly than she had done before. To add still to the distress through which she was passing, it was a dark, rainy evening when the child died. She could only trust and pray earnestly that God would not forsake her and her children in that hour of extreme sorrow and helplessness. Her prayers were answered. About ten oÂclock a young man came to the door of the tent. The young man remained during the night and watched with the bereft mother over her dead, and the next day he made a little coffin for it. Susan had to prepare her dear dead child herself for its last long retreat. The young man dug the grave, and the babe was buried, which may have been the first Mormon burial on the noted Mt. Pisgah.

ÂHere at Mt. Pisgah, just a year after her baby had died, another baby was born, Melissa Greene Homer, in June of 1847.

ÂIn the coming years, Susan would continue to carry her burdens dutifully, and lend strength to others not yet fully converted.

ÂAt the time, President Brigham Young and his associate officers in the Church were making experimental efforts to have the United Order, or Order of Enoch, more fully established among their people. Susan and her family were among the converted ones, hence her favorite allusions to the subject.

ÂThis letter was sent to her daughter, Lula Greene Richards, in Salt Lake City, when Lula was first editor of the WomanÂs Exponent, . . . and it was published in that paper.

Smithfield, Cache County, Utah

May 20, 1874

To My Dear Sisters, Women of the Latter-day Saint Church, . . .

. . . I can bear testimony that this uniting of the people together is of God for in his mercy and in his Holy Spirit he showed me the order more than twenty-seven years ago. The winter after we left Nauvoo when we were stopped at Council Bluffs and were destitute, often of even daily bread, when our men had to go to Missouri and work for a little corn and bacon to keep their families alive, while the women would stay at home and pray and fast-the latter they were sometimes obligated to do, I can speak for one at least-then we trusted in the Lord. We had nothing else to trust in. One day I got so faint and weak I had to lie down on the bed and my heart was drawn out in prayer and supplication to our Heavenly Father. I began to think how many good things there were in the world, how many people lived in pride and luxury while others were famishing for the commonest necessities of life, and a vision was opened to my mind. The Lord showed me the time when the Saints shall inherit the earth, when the spirit of the Lord shall be poured out upon them and the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom shall be given to them and they shall possess it forever.

The contemplation of this has often been a great consolationto me since that time in days of poverty and distress and in the darkest hours I have never doubted that the Lord will yet do for his people what he then showed me he would do. But I will tell you further what he did for me at that time. How true it is he never forsakes them that trust in him. There was ÂA Good SamaritanÂ at hand. A sister who was living about three-quarters of a mile from me was impressed to come and see how I was getting along, knowing that I was alone with my little ones. In obedience to the impulse she came bringing with her a prairie chicken, one of several which they had caught in a trap. It was all dressed ready for cooking and she was not long in preparing me some broth, just what I needed in my weak and delicate state. And did I not thank Heavenly Father and that dear sister for their kindness to me. Can I doubt that GodÂs care has been over his Saints or that he will cease to care for them?

Signed: Susan Kent Greene

Â. . . As soon as Evan was released from his mission they came on to Utah, arriving about the first of November, 1852. They had oxen and a wagon, but the oxen were poor and the wagon heavily loaded; and Susan had so much pity for the oxen that she could not ride and see them burdened so, so she walked most of the way and when there was an ear of corn to spare she would walk in front of the oxen and show them the corn once in a while, letting them take a little nip of it to encourage them on. They left about July 15, 1852, and arrived around the first of November, 1852.

ÂWhen they reached Salt Lake City they thought their journey was ended, but not so. Brigham Young requested Evan to go on to Provo and open a high school. Worn out as they were with their long journey across the plains, it seemed hard to travel on three or four more days longer; but on they went to Provo, and after reaching there Susan was very ill for a long time with a nervous fever from the effects of her travel.

ÂLater the Greenes were called to help pioneer other areas. In the late fall of 1863, Evan and Susan were called to move to Bear Lake, Idaho. Of the thirteen children Susan bore only seven were living after the Idaho storms had taken their toll.Â [^6]

Susan inherited the faith of her mother, Nancy Young, who inherited the faith of her mother, Nabby Howe, who was also the mother of Brigham Young. The faith passed to Susan Kent Greene was reflected in the faith and dedication of her sons and daughters. Her eighth child, Lula Greene Richards, would play an important role among the women of the Church in those early years. In the May l969 Improvement Era, historian Leonard J. Arrington writes of Louisa Lula Greene Richards:

[Louisa] felt impressed that the young girls in the Church should have their own magazine. . . . Louisa wrote Eliza R. Snow, president of the Relief Society of the Church and a relative, asking for counsel. . . . [Sister Snow] wrote to Louisa that she would broach the matter to President Brigham Young, and suggested a plan of finance. President Young not only relayed his sanction, but, in LouisaÂs words, said Âhe would gladly appoint me the mission and bless me in it.Â. . .

. . . The WomanÂs Exponent was the first publication owned and edited by Latter-day Saint women. It was also the first magazine (with one fly-by-night exception) published by and for women west of the Mississippi River. [^7]

Lula was a great source of comfort and joy to her mother, Susan. It was from her motherÂs life journey, her courage and faith, that Lula was prepared to face her own frontier, to be guided by the Spirit, to respond to any request made of Church leaders, and to walk by faith.

Susan Kent Greene died on 17 April 1888, but her influence lives on. She has been a part of my strength and faith as I live my life and carry out the responsibilities placed upon me.

On 6 January 1981, just prior to my 50th birthday, I was reading and pondering Great-Grandmother SusanÂs journal. I thought of her life, her faith, her endurance, and I was drawn to read and reread an entry she had made at age 59 on the front page of her journal, dated 3 February 1875:

I make this covenant to do the very best I can, asking God forwisdom to direct me in that I may walk with Him in all righteousness and truth. I much desire to be pure in heart that I may see God. Help me, Lord, to overcome all evil with good.

Signed: Susan Kent Greene

This covenant with the writings on this page is written with my blood and I have not broken my covenant and trust shall not.

Signed: Susan Kent Greene

On that day I wrote the words of Susan Kent Greene on the first page of my journal for 1981 and signed my name, with this additional thought:

I will look forward to one day seeing Great-Grandmother Susan Kent and trust I can tell her I have followed her path, kept the faith and all of the covenants.

Signed: Ardeth Greene Kapp

In April 1984, when I was sustained in general conference as the ninth Young Women general president, I felt an overwhelming sense of continuity from one generation to the next. I found myself reaching back in history for faith and confidence and courage from those who had gone before.

I remembered one afternoon after my father had passed away when I had contemplated whether those who have gone before are aware of what we do. I thought I heard my fatherÂs voice speak to my mind: My dear, you have your privacy, but we know all of the important things.

I thought on this occasion that surely those to whom I owed so much would be mindful of my thoughts, my needs, and my prayers. I did not need the strength required to cross the plains in an oxcart. Mine was a new and difficult frontier, but the Âfaith of our fathersÂ-and our mothers-would be needed.

As I spoke in the afternoon session of that general conference, I felt connected with loved ones on the other side of the veil. In my brief remarks I spoke of the heritage left us by those in years gone by, and of how, on the threshold of today, I felt my heart saying, ÂOyouth of the noble birthright, carry on, carry on, carry on!Â [^8]

I quoted from the lines of a poem:

If ye break faith with us who die We shall not sleep, though poppies grow In Flanders fields. [^9]

I felt as though I were speaking to my mother, to my grandmother, and to Great-Grandmother Susan Kent Greene. I felt the spirit of commitment as I spoke on that occasion:

WeÂll not break faith, none of us. This is a generation of hope and faith and aspirations; and as leaders of young women throughout the world, our prayer is to live so that GodÂs divine intervention will be felt in our hearts, in our actions, in our attitudes, and in our deeds, and that our receptivity to the priesthood power and direction will be sensitive and responsive. The forces of evil are so real today, and the subtleties of deceit would strive to divert us from the promises and blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

. . . WeÂll work to have every young woman throughout the Church stand in the valiant ranks of loyalty, commitment, and dedication. Mothers, stand firm; and fathers, have courage to be strong. Leaders, support those great parents. And together in unity weÂll prepare a generation that will be prepared for the LordÂs commendation, that he may have a house of worthy members when he returns.

To this solemn and sacred trust, I commit all of my energies and my efforts. [^10]

There are many sunrises and sunsets before that glorious day when the veil will be taken from our eyes and we will see and know and love each other and express words of gratitude for the legacy of faith passed on from one generation to another-living water that quenches spiritual thirst.

In 1996, citizens of Utah extended that legacy of faith as part of the centennial statehood celebration. A great groundswell andawakening occurred for many while preparing for the rededication of the ÂThis Is the PlaceÂ state park in Salt Lake City, Utah, on 28 June. President Gordon B. Hinckley would be directing and dedicating the park; the Mormon Tabernacle Choir would be singing. New buildings, replicas of the past, had been erected to commemorate UtahÂs history and values that can be lost in one generationÂs time if not preserved and passed on.

My direct participation in renewing the legacy began in January 1996 when I was asked to be responsible for producing the costumes to be worn by the volunteers at the park, using authentic patterns and materials from the period of 1847 to the year 1869, when the railroad came to Utah.

I was asked to produce Âapproximately 700 items of clothing,Â and more if possible. The fact that I know hardly anything about sewing was incidental to the major problem. It seemed like an overwhelming and impossible task. But I had been asked, and I had been taught in my youth from my mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother that the task is never too hard, the road never too long, the sun never too hot, and the request never too difficult if we turn to the Lord.

In quiet meditation I thought of my great-grandmother Susan Kent Greene and others, and the price they paid to get to the valley of the Great Salt Lake. ThatÂs it, I thought-or was it her thought that was whispering to me? I can honor Great-Grandmother and other early pioneer women by having the costumes represent them. Then the volunteer women who wear the dresses in the park can develop a pioneer spirit.

Yes, yes, I thought. I knew what to do, how to do it. I would have an authentic pioneer dress made both in pattern and fabric. Inside the dress there would be a label-an official centennial label with my great-grandmotherÂs name attached inside the hem of the skirt. Accompanying this dress when it would be presented to the park would be a brief history of this great womanÂs life, her commitment, her dedication, her legacy of faith. Yes, Susan Kent Greene would be represented at the park, and so would hundreds, maybe thousands more if we could spread the word. ÂMake or donate a dress made in honor of your ancestor and give a brief history of herlife to be filed in a register at the park,Â was the message. ÂOn the inside of the hem of the dress will be an official centennial logo with your grandmotherÂs or your great-grandmotherÂs name as identification and your name as the donor.Â We called our project ÂStitching History.Â

When I would speak about the dress made in honor of my great-grandmother Susan, it was as though the Spirit carried the message. We were not just sewing dresses; we were stitching history, preserving history, making history, celebrating history.

Over 1,700 articles of clothing, including dresses, bonnets, aprons, petticoats, trousers, and frock coats, were stitched and ready by 28 June. These articles of authentic clothing would help preserve, protect, and perpetuate the story of Utah and the faith of its people. One woman expressed with some emotion: ÂEvery time I sat down to sew I felt my grandmotherÂs presence, as though she were there with me and knew I was making the dress in her honor.Â

A brother who donated money to have a dress made in honor of his great-grandmother said: ÂAfter I researched a brief history initially motivated only by the desire to support ÂyourÂ project, I have become engrossed in reading my family history, which has now become ÂmyÂ project.Â

It has been 150 years now since Susan arrived in the Valley, but her legacy of faith remains. The life of Susan Kent Greene is perhaps best defined in the words of her grandson Edwin Kent Greene to his daughter Shirley: ÂShe loved the Lord, kept a good home, and raised a fine family.Â

God bless you, Susan Kent Greene.

Notes

1 Zebedee Coltrin, in minutes of the Salt Lake City School of the Prophets, 10Â11 October 1883, as quoted in Karl Ricks Anderson, Joseph SmithÂs Kirtland (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), p. 175.

2 Heber C. Kimball, Times and Seasons 6 (15 April 1845): 867.

3 Lula Greene Richards, ÂLife Sketch of Susan Kent Richards,Â typescript, in authorÂs possession.

4 Ibid.

5 Ibid.

6 Leonard Arrington, ÂLouisa Lulu Greene Richards: Woman Journalist of the Early West,Â Improvement Era, May 1969, p. 30.

7 Ruth May Fox, ÂCarry On,Â in Hymns, no. 255.

8 John McCrae, ÂIn Flanders Fields,Â in Hazel Felleman, comp., Best Loved Poems of the American People (New York: Doubleday, 1936), p. 429.

9 Ardeth Greene Kapp, ÂYouth of the Noble Birthright,Â Ensign, May 1984, p. 77.

* Ardeth Greene Kapp was Young Women general president from 1984 to 1992 and then served with her husband, Heber C. Kapp, who presided over the Canada Vancouver Mission from 1992 to 1995. She now teaches institute and is a temple ordinance worker and gospel doctrine teacher. She has had a long career in the field of education and has written 10 books, as well as educational guides and articles for Church magazines. Born in Cardston, Alberta, Canada, she now resides with her husband in Bountiful, Utah. Ardeth says she has been strengthened by the endurance and unwavering testimony of her pioneer descendant Susan Kent Greene.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
