Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

8 ANN WHITING ORTON [^1] ÂSweep the CornersÂ Maria Jackson Normington Parker

1820Â1881

It was the end of August 1969. The time for relocation had arrived. After 20-some years as a resident of Utah, I was leaving my home state for a graduate school experience in West Lafayette, Indiana. I felt like a pioneer in reverse: withdrawal from all that was familiar to travel from the mountains of Utah to the unknown territory of Indiana. I sorted, packed, shipped, and stored, finally confining my lifeÂs accumulations to a tiny U-Haul trailer. I was not traveling with my belongings-they went ahead with my husband while my two-year-old son, Greg, and I moved in with my parents to await the imminent arrival of a second child. My doctor would not allow me to travel the plains of Wyoming and Nebraska with delivery expected in two weeks. Neither would airline regulations permit me to fly to my new and distant home.

After the much-delayed arrival of a second son, Jeffrey, and a subsequent recuperation attended by my loving family members, I bundled my two babies, boarded a plane, and arrived at my new home in mid-November. The journey seemed impos-sible at the time: a newborn, a two-year-old, and four hours of flying time.Somehow my weary body arrived in Chicago, then drove on to our student apartment in West Lafayette.

It was another summer: 1856. My great-great-grandmother packed her belongings into a few bulging bags and joined the Saints en route to Zion. Grandma Maria Jackson Normington left England on 22 May of that year, docking in Boston, then arriving in Iowa City on 8 July. She traveled in company with her husband, Thomas, four children, and what some records indicate was another child anticipated in the fall. Other records note that little Daniel, MariaÂs eighth child, was about a year old at the time of her immigration. She left three babies behind in England, each deceased at a young age. By the end of July, provisions were gathered and her little brood joined the Martin handcart company, departing for the Salt Lake Valley on 28 July.

IÂve often wondered if Maria was as apprehensive as I was about leaving her native countryside for an unknown world. Did she question the decision to travel with her tiny flock, especially after sheÂd laid three to rest? Were the meager savings she and Thomas accumulated after working together in a cotton mill enough to sustain the family on the journey? Did she imagine what a home in the desert could be after the lush green countryside of her homeland? What treasured possessions did she leave behind when packing required efficient use of space? Did following the prophet really mean following him across the ocean, across the prairies, and all the way to Zion? Did she ever doubt her fitness for the rugged journey? Did she ever dream that her beloved family members would not survive the expedition?

In my own experience, I asked some of those same questions: Would my sons and I find friends to replace our regular associations with family and loved ones at home? How could I leave my imposing mountain boundaries for the flat plains of the Midwest? Would our limited savings and student loans support our family through the graduate program? Could I manage my cozy household with so many of my cherished possessions in storage? Would I be able to serve with brothers and sisters in the Âmission fieldÂ as the prophet directed? Was I truly fit for a major change in my environment? Did I ever imagine that my beloved family members would not survive the subsequent journeys?

Maria did not keep a journal. Her thoughts, feelings, and apprehensions went unvoiced to my generation. I cannot find answers to questions that push me to explore her experiences. I can only imagine her anguish and her joy as the facts of her existence rise from the notes and journals of others who traveled a similar path.

Maria was one member of the Martin handcart company. She was not the leader, the scribe, the heroine, nor a fatality. She was simply a 36-year-old mother following the command of a prophet to gather with the Saints to Zion.

The Lord instructed the Saints through Joseph Smith as early as 1830 that Âye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts; wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts and be prepared in all things against the [last] dayÂ (D&C 29:7-8).

In December 1847 the prophet Brigham Young advised the ÂSaints in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the adjacent islands and countries [to] emigrate as speedily as possible to this vicinity.Â [^2]

Maria and Thomas Normington were baptized in November 1840, shortly after their 1839 marriage. More than 15 years passed before they were finally prepared to heed the prophetÂs words and travel to Zion. Under the stipulations of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, Brigham Young directed President F. D. Richards of Liverpool that Âin your elections of the Saints who shall be aided by the Fund, those who have proven themselves by long continuance in the Church shall be helped first, whether they can raise any means of their own or not.Â [^3]Though no record exists to verify the distribution of funds, I assume that the Normingtons may have qualified for some assistance.

The prophet Brigham further suggested that a new means of transportation to Zion be attempted: the handcart. If immigrants traveled with the new method, he reasoned, Âthey will only need 90 daysÂ rations from the time of their leaving the Missouri river, and as the settlements extend up the Platte, not that much. The carts can be made without a particle of iron, with wheels hooped, madestrong and light, and one, or if the family be large, two of them will bring all that they will need upon the plains.Â [^4]

With years of tireless labor and careful saving behind them, the Normingtons set out on their journey to Zion. Following the instructions of the prophet, they[Âperceive[d] the necessity of dispensing with all wooden chests, extra freight, luggage, etc., they should only bring a change of clothing.Â [^5]

What valuable possessions remained in Iowa City as the handcart expedition commenced? Did Maria longingly leave treasures from her homeland on the edge of the prairie? In her determination to reach the mountains, Grandma undoubtedly deposited trunks filled with valued memories somewhere in the frontier town, then tucked a bundle of clothing for each family member into the wooden confines of the handcart.

The Martin company, under the leadership of former British missionary Edward Martin, Âconsisted of 576 souls, with 146 carts, 7 wagons, 30 oxen, and 50 cows and beef cattle.Â [^6]Though a few members of the group dropped out before reaching Florence, Nebraska, most continued the hike to the West.

A report in the Council Bluffs Bugle described the faithful as they continued their journey: ÂIt may seem to some that these people endure great hardships in traveling hundreds of miles on foot, drawing carts behind them. This is a mistake, for many informed me that after the first three days travel, it requires little effort for two or three men or women to draw the light handcart with its moderate load of cooking utensils and baggage.Â [^7]

While the weather held, the handcart pioneers paced themselves day by day. Cyrus H. Wheelock wrote in his journal on 2 September 1856 that Âall were in good spirits, and generally in good health, and full of confidence that they should reach the mountains in season to escape the severe storms. I have never seen more union among the Saints anywhere than is manifested in the handcart companies.Â [^8]

Faith and dedication pushed Maria on after she laid her son Ephraim to rest on the plains. The five-year-old was among the early casualties of the expedition, dying on 10 August. Little Daniel became the second of MariaÂs family to succumb during themigration. On that sad day Maria was permitted to ride in a wagon half a day with her dead child until the company stopped and he could be buried. [^9]

My own heart aches with Maria at the loss of her children: now five of her eight babies were gone. I, too, cradled a son for almost nine months before he was called home. Benjamin was born with undefined birth defects that ultimately shortened his turn on earth. In contrast to his pioneer cousins, Ben had the full benefits of medical research and pediatric specialists in a childrenÂs hospital to diagnose his needs. In the end, however, the loss was similar. The Lord called the youngsters home, young ones who had completed their earthly missions. Despite my testimony of that, my mind often fills with concern for BenÂs everyday activities. I long to hold him once again, but even more IÂm anxious to learn of his experiences on the other side of the veil. IÂm certain that Maria also found lonely and longing moments as she mourned the passing of her children. Nevertheless she trudged on, mile after mile, as the company moved toward the Rocky Mountains.

Supplies diminished as the party neared the crossing of the North Platte River. Josiah Rogerson of the group noted in his journal that Âmore than a score or two of the young female members waded the stream that in places was waist deep. Blocks of mushy snow and ice had to be dodged.Â [^10]Were my three surviving great-great-aunts, MariaÂs daughters, in that intrepid group?

Elizabeth Jackson, another Martin company chronicler, added, ÂSome of the men carried some of the women on their back or in their arms, but others of the women tied up their skirts and waded through, like the heroines that they were.Â [^11]

Shortly after the crossing the company was buried with a Âtremendous storm of snow, hail, sand, and fierce winds.Â [^12]The intensity of the storm disabled the party and they were forced to make camp for nine days while the blizzards continued. Sister Jackson recorded her experiences, which parallel MariaÂs own tragedy. She wrote, ÂThe weather was bitter. I listened to hear if my husband breathed, he lay so still. I could not hear him. I became alarmed. I put my hand on his body, when to my horror I discovered that my worst fears were confirmed. My husband was dead. I called for helpto the other inmates of the tent. They could render me no aid; and there was no alternative but to remain alone by the side of the corpse till morning. . . . They wrapped him in a blanket and placed him in a pile with thirteen others who had died, and then covered him up with snow. The ground was frozen so hard that they could not dig a grave.Â [^13]

Maria lost her husband, Thomas, to cholera on a night when 15 others also died. He was buried with the group, probably in a manner similar to Brother Jackson.

Sister Jackson continued her report: ÂI will not attempt to describe my feelings at finding myself thus left a widow with three children, under such excruciating circumstances. I cannot do it. But I believe the Recording Angel has inscribed in the archives above, and that my suffering for the GospelÂs sake will be sanctified unto me for my good.Â [^14]

In the absence of MariaÂs own words, I choose to assume her feelings were described by Sister Jackson. She, too, had lost her dear husband and was left with three surviving children as hope for a rescue of the stranded handcarters waned.

In another way I empathize with Maria. After 22 years of marriage I was left to raise my five children on my own. Though my loss was through the anguish of divorce, my feelings of loneliness and desperation must have paralleled MariaÂs. I wearied the Lord with questions over my circumstance, but just as he blessed Maria with strength to endure her challenges, he blessed me with little miracles that began to cement the pieces of my life back together.

In MariaÂs case, under the direction of Brigham Young a rescue party was dispatched to aid the struggling handcart companies. The Salt Lake wagon teams reached the Willie party on 21 October but found no sign of the Martin group. Half of the rescuers pushed on to DevilÂs Gate, where they expected to locate the missing pioneers. An express group of benefactors continued through the snow while the main body settled in the shelter of DevilÂs Gate. Finally the Martin party was located at Red Bluffs, more than 65 miles east of their predicted destination. Though the express men carried no provisions, they brought a message of hope to encourage the weary handcart group.

Maria later told her granddaughter that Âher shoes were worn out, they had very little clothing and practically no food. Grandmother tried to eat dirt to satisfy the pangs of hunger. She walked until her feet were so terribly frozen and sore she could walk no more. Then she crawled, using her hands and knees, and when her hands were so frozen she could use them no more, she went on her knees and elbows until, even after many years there were great scars on her knees and elbows.Â [^15]

Rescuer Daniel Jones observed the scene as he came upon the stranded Martin company. ÂA condition of distress here met my eyes that I never saw before or since. The train was strung out for three or four miles. There were old men pulling and tugging their carts, sometimes loaded with a sick wife or children-women pulling along sick husbands-little children six to eight years old struggling through the mud and snow. As night came on the mud would freeze on their clothes and feet.Â [^16]

Another rescuer, Ephraim Hanks, concurred. ÂThe sight that met my gaze as I entered their camp can never be erased from my memory. The starved forms and haggard countenances of the poor sufferers, as they moved about slowly, shivering with cold, to prepare their scanty evening meal was enough to touch the stoutest heart.Â [^17]

Surely the weary travelers fervently thanked their God for the miraculous rescue efforts. Their earnest prayers had been answered and they were once again bound for Zion.

Maria, however, was Âso overcome with the hardships, starvation and grief when the relief wagons came [that] she was unconscious, and almost out of her mind. She remembered nothing of the last part of her journey.Â [^18]

Family records indicate that Maria and her daughters were rescued by William Parker, son of British immigrant John Parker. Though listings of the rescuers of the Willie and Martin handcart companies fail to include Parker, [^19]other records note that the rescuers Âultimately amounted to 200 wagons and teams.Â [^20]That fact leaves room for Parker to be an unidentified member of the rescue party and may verify the stories told in family histories.

Parker returned the weary handcart sisters to his fatherÂs homearound the first of December. It was a full six weeks before Maria could finally walk, [^21]though her daughters recovered more quickly. After several weeks of convalescence Maria assumed a share of the responsibility for the livestock, some farming chores, and then the maintenance of her own little log home on the ParkerÂs Jordan River farm.

Could there have been a romance or was it simply a marriage of commandment when John Parker took Maria Normington as his third wife in November of 1857? Again, there is no record of MariaÂs feelings. I prefer to hope there was a love affair, but I do know that Maria never shirked her responsibilities to the Parkers nor questioned her commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I, too, was blessed with a second marriage, a union of love and laughter. It came about in a rather unlikely fashion as an elderly friend announced that she had the perfect man for me, and then proceeded to join us on the dinner date she arranged. She extolled the virtues of our union for almost two hours while we listened with embarrassment. Sister Durham was correct in her prediction; Russell and I married in the Salt Lake Temple 15 months later.

Maria bore John Parker two children, then traveled with his family as he was called to the Dixie Cotton Mission in 1863. Once again she struggled to eke out survival, first in a dugout and finally in a little log house. The barren landscape was blessed with rain 40 consecutive days after the ParkerÂs arrival in Dixie, allowing them to collect water for ditches and irrigation. Slowly the new settlement blossomed, evidence to MariaÂs industry and thrift. ÂShe washed and scoured the wool, then carded and spun it and dyed it with dock root or madder and wove it into cloth for their dresses and suits, which she also made. She was able to make the most of all she had, and soon was comfortable in her home.Â [^22]Maria spent her remaining years in Virgin City, a bishopÂs wife and companion until her passing in 1881.

Since my original departure from Utah in 1969, IÂve moved eight different times. IÂve packed my belongings and watched as the moving company loaded trucks to transport my possessions. IÂve had help from the Relief Society and assistance from priesthood quorums to complete the transitions. Each time I struggled to settleinto a new neighborhood, to relocate the children and the childrenÂs necessary services; yet I always felt sustained in those challenges.

Like Maria, my grandmother of the handcarts, IÂve been blessed with a testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ, a testimony thatÂs stretched without snapping into disbelief despite trials. Maria was well known for her Âgift of faith and was a most unusual prayer. No one could pray like she did; she seemed to actually see and talk with her Father as she expressed her gratitude and asked for the blessings she needed.Â [^23]Though my faith has wavered at times and IÂve questioned the Lord through challenges, IÂve learned, as I assume Maria did, that the Lord and his loving concern for his children always prevails.

102 103Though many of my lifeÂs experiences seem similar in content to those of my great-great-grandmother, the circumstances markedly differ. Her struggles were often physical in a battle with the elements for survival. My challenges were emotionally based personal conflicts in the midst of physical plenty. Yet as I consider her as a heroine in her time, I understand how she lived by her daily philosophy, ÂSweep the corners and the middle of the floor will sweep itself.Â [^24]IÂve learned that if I take care of the things within the reach of my immediate responsibility, the Lord will take care of the remainder of my concerns. I often reassured the children during my single years that I wasnÂt certain how the Lord would help us resolve the current and perplexing problems, I only knew that he would. He did and continues to do so with a continuing series of little miracles meant only for me and mine, just as he did for Maria and her precious family more than a hundred years ago.

102 103Notes

102 1031 Millennial Star 10 (15 March 1848): 84.

102 1032 Millennial Star 17 (22 December 1855): 814.

102 1033 Ibid., p. 813.

102 1034 Ibid., p. 814.

102 1035 LeRoy R. Hafen and Ann W. Hafen, Handcarts to Zion (Glendale, Calif.: The Arthur H. Clark Co., 1960), p. 93

102 1036 Council Bluffs Bugle, 26 August 1856, as cited in ibid., p. 95.

102 1037 L. Hafen and A. Hafen, Handcarts, p. 97.

102 1038 See Annie Hilton Bishop, ÂMaria,Â in Kate B. Carter, comp., Our Pioneer Heritage, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1959), p. 234.

102 1039 L. Hafen and A. Hafen, Handcarts, p. 109

102 10310 Ibid.

102 10311 Ibid.

102 10312 Elizabeth Jackson, Leaves from the Life of Elizabeth Horrocks Kingford Jackson (pamphlet), as cited in ibid., p. 111.

102 10313 Ibid., pp. 111Â12.

102 10314 Annie Hilton Bishop, personal history, in authorÂs possession.

102 10315 Rebecca Cornwall and Leonard J. Arrington, Rescue of the Handcart Companies (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), p. 20.

102 10316 Ephraim Hanks, interview by Andrew Jackson, as quoted in L. Hafen and A. Hafen, Handcarts, p. 135.

102 10317 Bishop, personal history.

102 10318 Cornwall and Arrington, Rescue, p. 20.

102 10319 Encyclopedia of Mormonism, s.v. Âhandcart companies.Â

102 10320 Bishop, ÂMaria,Â p. 235.

102 10321 Bishop, personal history.

102 10322 Ibid.

102 10323 Bishop, ÂMaria,Â p. 236.

102 103* Ann Whiting Orton earned both her bachelorÂs and her masterÂs degrees from Brigham Young University and is the former food editor of the Deseret News. She has written or compiled three booklets, Friend to Friend, Eternally Yours, and Experiment upon the Word. The mother of two daughters and four sons, one deceased, she is married to Russell B. Orton. Researching facts about her great-great-grandmother has expanded AnnÂs great admiration, respect, and gratitude for her.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
