Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

11 HEIDI SWINTON [^1] ÂI Gently Closed the DoorÂ Bathsheba W. Smith

1822Â1910

When I was a little girl, I used to take naps on the gold damask couch in the living room. Right above it hung an imposing portrait of a stately woman with refined demeanor, elegant clothes, and commanding stature. An ornate mantilla draped her white hair; an exquisite handmade lace collar ringed her dark silk, fitted dress. Her eyes followed me. Every time I walked into the room she looked at me. When I was dusting the furniture, when I was racing through in a chase with my brother, when I was practicing the piano, there was Bathsheba W. Smith.

She scared me.

In later years I became much better acquainted with my great-great-great-grandmother Bathsheba. My image of her matured and her picture took on new meaning. Framed as she was in an ornate leaf pattern of antique gold, Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith looked like a queen whose portrait should hang in the hall of a castle suggesting a life of privilege, polish, and ease. But not so. In her lifetime she faced the persecutions of the early Church, the sorrow of losing hosts of loved ones,the harshness of the pioneer trail, the settling of a desert Zion, and the complexities of helping Âgrow a Church.Â Put simply, her life was hard.

The wife of George A. Smith, the youngest Apostle called in this dispensation and cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, she was at the heart of early Church activity in Nauvoo. She was a charter member of the Relief Society, the youngest married woman. In the years that followed she was mother and grandmother not only to her own two children, George A. and Bathsheba, but to those of her sister-wives and close friends as well. She was on the board of directors of Deseret Hospital, was in the presidency of the Retrenchment Association, and served as treasurer, counselor, and then president of her wardÂs Relief Society. For 17 years she served in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. She was matron of the Salt Lake Temple and fourth president of the general Relief Society for the Church, serving from 1901 to 1910. When she died her obituary ran on the front page of the Deseret News, and her funeral was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Said Apostle Anthon H. Lund at the service, ÂShe was a woman of God.Â [^2]

I could discuss in detail all of these significant contributions, but I am leaving that to history. Her influence on me is more personal, for in many ways I grew up with Bathsheba Smith. Once I got past the portrait to the person, I found many parts of her life that have profoundly impacted mine.

What strikes me most is her repeated ability to ÂComeÂ when the Lord called, to put her life in his hands. Each time it meant leaving part of her life behind, yet it proved the making of a latter-day heroine. A line from poet Robert Frost speaks volumes when applied to the life of Bathsheba Smith: ÂI took the [road] less traveled by, and that has made all the difference.Â [^3]

Like Bathsheba, I, too, have had to turn and walk away from hopes and dreams. Most of us have been there. We have had to bury the children we wanted to raise, drive cars without hubcaps, and give up so many other desires. We have had to stand in the rain at soccer games, put an arm around a third baseman who missed too many balls, walk grocery aisles with a child in leg braces that bumped the bottom rows of cereal boxes. We have had to findcomfort in disaster, friendship in a new ward, strength when a friend is fighting cancer, and hope when there seems to be none at all.

Bathsheba may have lived in a different time, but the way she addressed lifeÂs trials speaks wisdom to my soul. She took to heart the LordÂs counsel in 1830 to Âlay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a betterÂ (D&C 25:10). She lived by it. For her, the gospel came first, and she closed the door on everything else, one door at a time. Her incredible faith and testimony gave her strength sufficient to face relentless hardships and find peace in the process.

I talk about closing doors because my favorite story from her life involves just that-walking out of her home in Nauvoo, closing the front door, getting in the wagon, and going west. Bathsheba left her home in the bitter cold of February 1846. She and her husband crossed the Mississippi in the first exodus that left Nauvoo. They, and hundreds like them, left behind their temple, their fields and orchards, their gardens and their homes. Every time I think of her experience I am impressed that I, too, can do what has been asked of me.

BathshebaÂs autobiography tells how she sacrificed her earthly treasures for what she knew to be true. She fervently believed in the LordÂs work and in his promised glory, and her exodus from Nauvoo bore witness to that testimony. She wrote:

We left a comfortable home, the accumulations of four years of labor and thrift and took away with us only a few much needed articles such as clothing, bedding and provisions. We left everything else behind us for our enemies.

My last act in that precious spot was to tidy the rooms, sweep up the floor, and set the broom in its accustomed place behind the door. Then with emotions in my heart which I could not now pen and which I then strove with success to conceal, I gently closed the door and faced an unknown future, faced a new life, a greater destiny as I well knew, but I faced it with faith in God. [^4]

That resolve-to face it Âwith faith in GodÂ-reaches right intomy heart. Bathsheba recognized what was being asked. I have pondered how she must have felt sweeping the floor for the last time, straightening the cushions that she had so carefully made, setting out of the draft the plants that she had nurtured from cuttings, then closing the door on that life she had worked so hard to sustain, on that house which had given her dignity and security when persecution had stripped so much away.

She completed her entry with this powerful summation: ÂNow I was going into the wilderness, but I was going with the man I loved dearer than my life. I had my little children. I had heard a voice, so I stepped into the wagon with a certain degree of serenity.Â [^5]

I believe that the voice she heard was the voice of the Lord and that he had said, ÂCome, Bathsheba.Â She did. She knew that voice. The words of Paul to the Corinthians were being repeated to her and all the beleaguered Saints: ÂCome out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord . . . and I will receive youÂ (2 Cor. 6:17).

All of us at some point are asked to close the door and then walk into the wilderness. That Bathsheba did this with a Âcertain degree of serenity,Â in a fulness of faith, took the edge off the fierce forces all around her. What a lesson!

I have closed a door like that, though my house was never even built. My husband and I had lived for five years in an apartment in the center of Salt Lake City. I longed to share a street with neighbors, not fire trucks, buses, and commuters. We purchased a lot on a hill with a view of the city and hired an architect to design our house, complete with gabled windows and doors with beveled glass. Then we moved, renting a home in our new area while we built our dream. Except we never broke ground.

Although we had already moved out of our ward, our stake president called and invited us in for a visit. While it appeared the appointment was only a formality in releasing my husband as a counselor in our bishopric, I had a feeling it was something else. The stake presidentÂs request was bold. ÂCome back,Â he said. ÂThe Lord needs you here. He wants you in this area; we need you on the high council.Â

Come.

I was shocked by his request, but when my husband accepted, I was stunned. We moved back but not until I did some serious soul-searching. The scripture ÂAs for me and my house, we will serve the LordÂ (Josh. 24:15) suddenly took on new meaning. Four days after the call from the stake president, I walked into the backyard of our rented home, lit a match, and burned our house plans. Now I was in the wagon with Bathsheba. I didnÂt know then that my husband would be called to serve in a succession of leadership positions there. I only knew the Lord had said, ÂCome.Â

BathshebaÂs example of closing her front door takes on additional significance when we follow her from home to home leading up to that time in Nauvoo. Bathsheba was born in 1822 and had been raised on her fatherÂs Virginia estate in a spacious and beautifully appointed home. She was educated, skilled as an equestrian, and interested in religion. Her family moved to Missouri shortly after joining the Church in 1837, and her surroundings changed dramatically. Persecution forced them to abandon their newly purchased farm, and for many months the struggle was simply to survive. The stress and exposure took the lives of many Saints. Her father, Mark Bigler, died in Quincy, Illinois, in 1839.

Bathsheba married George A. Smith 25 July 1841. He was one of the elders who had been a frequent visitor to her home in Virginia, and she had agreed Âto keep his cabinÂ in three years when he completed his missionary service. The two first moved in with his parents. Within a month they started housekeeping in a small log cabin that was highly unsuitable. According to Bathsheba, ÂThe house leaked and the chimney smoked.Â [^6]When George A. was asked to move to Nauvoo, they did, renting a log house Âthat was open and that chimney, too, smoked.Â [^7]

They tried renting a room, which was much more comfortable, but then Brother Joseph gave them a lot with a small log house. ÂMy husband fixed up the place as best he could,Â wrote Bathsheba, Âbut, after all, it was the worst looking house we had yet lived in. I was ashamed to have my acquaintances see me in such a looking place. It, however, had the desirable qualities of neither leaking nor smoking.Â [^8]

They decided to build a home there in Nauvoo. George A. wentto work and soon had constructed a story-and-a-half frame house with four rooms, two up and two down. He fenced and drained the lot, and the young couple planted a garden, with Âfruit trees, flowers, vegetables and corn.Â Called on another mission, George left it to Bathsheba to get the house finished. Bathsheba Âspared no pains or effort to make this home a place good to look upon.Â [^9]She struggled to afford workers to plaster the rooms, finish the roof, and hang the glass windows. Trained by her mother in many forms of needlework, she made curtains, lace cloths, pillows, and special pillow covers to give the home her touch. She repeatedly got up in the middle of the night to take her turn watering the orchard.

In the short years before the exodus, Bathsheba opened her doors to refugee Saints who had been burned out of their homes and then fled to Nauvoo for safety. Right before she abandoned Nauvoo, her parlor was used as a workshop for painting wagons in preparation for the exodus. It was the door of this house, which had so much of her labor and heart, that Bathsheba gently closed, leaving the house to her enemies.

Though BathshebaÂs experience in leaving her home was only a footnote in the unfolding drama of the flight from Nauvoo, it was a defining moment for her. Her significant Church responsibilities later in life were perhaps the showpiece experiences of Bathsheba Smith, the headlines, but it was there in Nauvoo that she fully committed her course to Christ.

That was not the first, or last, of her trials of faith. In Nauvoo the Lord asked only for her home; before, due to the persecutions in Missouri, Bathsheba had determined that she might have to give up her life for the Church. She had felt that way with good reason.

When BathshebaÂs family, the Biglers, had been traveling to Far West, they had joined with a company of Saints from the eastern states, held a service, and worshipped together. In the morning, to make better time, the two groups separated, crossing the river on different ferries. While BathshebaÂs family arrived safely, the other company was overtaken by an armed mob at HaunÂs Mill and 17 were killed, with many others wounded and maimed for life.

The Biglers had purchased a farm in the area of Far West, and they Âwere well received by the Saints among whom [they] had[cast[their] lot.Â [^10]But things were already out of control. Within days mob activity escalated; Bathsheba was in the room when David W. Patten, the first martyr among the Twelve Apostles, died following a vicious attack.

ÂI witnessed much,Â she wrote in her journal, Âvery much suffering which was brought upon our people by these lawless men. In these distressing times the Spirit of the Lord comforted and sustained me. I had an abiding testimony that we were being persecuted for the GospelÂs sake and . . . that though many of us might be called to lay down our lives, the Gospel must survive.Â [^11]

Years later, having left Nauvoo, Bathsheba found the trail west through Iowa in the middle of winter to be grueling. She wrote, ÂWe traveled through snow, wind and rain . . . how we suffered in poverty and sickness, and many died of the hardships and privation, and were buried by the wayside, as we journeyed along.Â [^12]

At this point many of us may have been inclined to shake our heads, already bent down from the strain and the miseries, and say, ÂNo more.Â What Bathsheba said was, ÂBut the Lord was with us and His power was daily made manifest.Â [^13]

Bathsheba had heard the Lord say ÂCome,Â and she went to Missouri. He had said ÂCome,Â and she left her home in Nauvoo. In Winter Quarters he said ÂComeÂ again, but this sacrificial call perhaps tested her strength and resolve to the limit.

People died crossing Iowa; they died at Winter Quarters, too. In March of 1847 Bathsheba lost her mother, Susannah Ogden Bigler, herself a woman of faith and refinement. In April, a month later, BathshebaÂs second son, John, was born. Her record of that time is brief and telling: ÂHe was my last child, and lived only four hours.Â [^14]

Anyone who has lost a child at birth or in their youth knows that this brings extraordinary pain. I think the closing of this door was when Bathsheba turned to the Lord and pleaded for peace. Her testimony of Joseph Smith and the Savior had sustained her through many trials. This one required that she feel the Spirit with her in great abundance.

In the same cemetery where Bathsheba rests, I stood by the grave as we buried my oldest son, Christian, one of my twins, whodied 22 hours after he was born. The grief was enormous, the peace greater still. Into my mind came the scripture in John, ÂPeace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.Â (John 14:27.)

I was closing the door on my earthly hopes and dreams for this child. Bathsheba had already been there. I learned, as she must have, that when the Lord says to one of our most precious, ÂCome home,Â he also fulfills his promise to us, ÂI will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and my angels round about you, to bear you upÂ (D&C 84:88).

Bathsheba faced this anguish again in 1860 when her other son, George Albert, was murdered by Navajo Indians. He was only 18. On a special mission with pioneer leader Jacob Hamblin to the Moqui (Hopi) Indians in what is now Arizona, he was shot by a band of young warriors retaliating for an attack by white soldiers on their settlement. They were evening the score by killing this young elder who had left the safety of his party to retrieve his horse, which had bolted. His father, George A. Smith, who was very involved in the settlement of southern Utah and for whom St. George is named, had to tell Bathsheba of their loss. It was agonizing for them both.

Bathsheba had learned to find peace. Over the years she became known for saying as she walked out of the door of a home she had visited, ÂPeace be with you.Â That message was grounded in her testimony that the gospel of Jesus Christ was true, the Book of Mormon was the word of God, and Joseph Smith was a prophet. That understanding was fully framed in Nauvoo, where, because of George A.Âs assignment as an Apostle, the two had numerous opportunities to hear Joseph Smith preach the doctrines of the kingdom of God.

BathshebaÂs testimony of priesthood authority was grounded in personal experience as well. In an official statement to the United States Congress, she stated: ÂIt was my privilege to attend a regular prayer meeting in the lodge room over the ProphetÂs store. There were present at this meeting most of the Twelve Apostles, their wives and a number of prominent brethren and their wives. On that occasion the Prophet arose and spoke at great length and during hisremarks I heard him say that he had conferred on the heads of the Twelve Apostles all the keys and powers pertaining to the Priesthood, and that upon the heads of the Twelve Apostles the burden of the kingdom rested, and that they would have to carry it.Â [^15]

Bathsheba was sealed to George A. on 12 July 1843 in what she described as Âthe holy order of the Celestial Marriage which order is for time and eternity.Â [^16]In December of that same year she wrote: ÂI received my endowment in the upper room over the Prophet Joseph SmithÂs store. The endowments were given under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith who afterwards gave us a lecture or instructions in regard to the endowment ceremonies.Â [^17]

When the Prophet Joseph taught the principles of celestial marriage, Bathsheba heard again the call to ÂCome,Â this time opening the doors of her heart to sister-wives. She wrote: ÂBeing thoroughly convinced as well as my husband that the doctrine of plurality of wives was from God, and having a fixed determination to attain to Celestial glory, I felt to embrace the whole gospel. Accordingly like Sarah of Old, I have given to my husband five wives, good, virtuous, honorable young women, this gave them all homes, with us.Â [^18]These sister-wives were Lucy Meserve, Nancy Clement, Zilpha Stark, Sarah Ann Libby, and SarahÂs sister, Hannah Maria Libby. Later George A. also married Susan Elizabeth West.

In my own marriage I have Bathsheba to thank for my husband. We both descend from George A. Smith. JeffreyÂs great-great-grandmother is Hannah Maria Libby, George A.Âs sixth wife.

Bathsheba fully embraced her husbandÂs large family. In 1849, when the Lord said ÂComeÂ to the Valley, George A. was in charge of the company in which they would travel, but he lacked the resources to obtain the necessary outfits. Said Bathsheba, ÂIt would have been impossible for any of us to go had it not been for the money and property left by my mother when she succumbed to the hardships of Winter Quarters. This I readily gave to my husband to satisfy the needs of his large family so that he was able to purchase equipment for this journey.Â [^19]

In 1875 another door closed in BathshebaÂs life. George A. Smith, then a counselor to President Brigham Young, died of a lung ailment, and Bathsheba was left a widow for 35 years. ÂI believe butfew in this wide world have been as happy as we have been,Â Bathsheba wrote of their union. Her description of his death says it all: ÂI could not think of myself. I loved him more. He was now through. All was quiet and his head lay against my bosom, good angels had come to receive his precious spirit, perhaps our sons, prophets, patriarchs, saints beloved were there, but he was gone. My light, my sun, my life, my joy, my Lord. Yea almost my God. But I must not mourn but prepare myself to meet him but my heart sinks with in my bosom nearly.Â [^20]

Bathsheba was so much a part of the early era of the restored Church-when the cornerstone was laid for the foundation of the Nauvoo Temple, when the Relief Society was organized, when the Prophet and his brother Hyrum were killed. According to Bathsheba, those days following the Martyrdom were ones Âof anguish and horror and mourning.Â But then she witnessed the resiliency of testimony and faith. ÂThe people emerged more hopeful and more determined that Truth would triumph.Â [^21]

The Church did not collapse, as its opponents had hoped. The members carried on the work. Bathsheba assisted day and night in the Nauvoo Temple as every effort was made to endow the Saints while they raced against the clock of persecution. Years later she was called to Âofficiate as a priestessÂ [^22]in the Endowment House in the Logan, St. George, and Manti Temples. When the Salt Lake Temple opened, she was called as the assistant matron and later as the matron.

Bathsheba Wilson Bigler SmithÂs portrait hangs in the hall of the womenÂs area of the Salt Lake Temple; it draws me to it each time I am there. It has added another dimension to my temple experience because I know she loved the work more than anything else the Lord had called her to do. When he said ÂComeÂ to the temple, he knew Bathsheba would embrace the experience with all her heart. This is where Bathsheba made her signature contribution. She knew the power of the temple and the significance of the temple ordinances, and felt the power of the LordÂs promises when she was there. Bathsheba found peace all around her in the temple; I do too. Perhaps itÂs because in the temple the doors are open to eternity. We reach beyond temporal time to the promises of eternal life.

Bathsheba faced challenges that would daunt even the most resilient. Yet she carried on with dignity and determination, always resounding one particular theme: ÂI know Joseph Smith for what he professed to be, a true prophet of God, and the Lord through him restored the everlasting gospel and every ordinance and endowment that will lead us into the celestial kingdom.Â [^23]Her second counselor in the general Relief Society presidency, Ida Smoot Dusenberry, said at her funeral, ÂIf the book of Life were written there would be something beautiful on each page.Â [^24]

President Joseph F. Smith, in tribute to Bathsheba, said in a written note to her, ÂYour life has been one of constant energy, fraught with toil and sacrifice of personal comfort and mixed with plentiful sorrow. And yet, your life has been full of good works, and true womanly deeds with real Christian patience, and with love divine, the crowning virtues of a well spent, virtuous, generous life. You have the surest promise of most glorious rewards.Â [^25]

ThatÂs the woman that now looks out of that painting at me. Her eyes still follow me, but the message is now more clear. She speaks to my heart of healing with the peace of the Lord. She speaks of listening for his voice. She exemplifies the blessings that come to those who hear his call. When I think of AlmaÂs call to works of righteousness-ÂHave ye been spiritually born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances?Â (Alma 5:14)-I think of Bathsheba in her portrait framed in all her nobility and holiness.

From Bathsheba I have learned that life is all about opening and closing doors. BathshebaÂs door closed on this life when she died on 20 September 1910 at age 88. My door to this life opened when I was born on that same day 38 years later.

Notes

1 Deseret Evening News, 26 September 1910, p. 5.

2 Robert Frost, ÂThe Road Not Taken,Â The Poetry of Robert Frost, ed. Edward Connery Lathem (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969), p. 105.

3 Bathsheba W. Smith, autobiography, ed. Alice Merrill Horne, typescript, pp. 14Â15, in authorÂs possession.

4 Ibid., p. 15.

5 Ibid., p. 9.

6 Ibid.

7 Ibid., p. 10.

8 Ibid.

9 Ibid., p. 7.

10 Smith, pp. 6Â7.

11 Ibid., pp. 15Â16.

12 Ibid., p. 16.

13 Ibid., p. 18.

14 Affidavit notarized by Martin S. Lindsay, 19 November 1903, Bathsheba W. Smith Collection, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

15 Smith, p. 7.

16 Ibid.

17 Ibid., p. 13.

18 Ibid., p. 22

19 Ibid., p. 42.

20 Ibid., p. 12.

21 Ibid., p. 42.

22 Smith, p. 19.

23 Deseret Evening News, 26 September 1910, p. 5.

24 Joseph F. Smith, as quoted in ÂSister Bathsheba Smith Sees Her Seventy-Fifth Birthday,Â Deseret News, 3 May 1897.

* Heidi Swinton graduated from the University of Utah, where she majored in English and journalism and was the editor of the Daily Utah Chronicle. She also attended Northwestern Medill School of Journalism. A professional writer, compiler, and editor, Heidi has written seven books, her latest being The Pioneer Spirit. She is a Gospel Doctrine teacher and has served on general Church writing committees. She is married to Jeffrey C. Swinton and they are the parents of four sons. Of this essay on Bathsheba W. Smith, Heidi says, ÂMy heart is on each page.Â

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
[^25] 25 Ibid., p. 49.
