Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

12 JENI BROBERG HOLZAPFEL [^1] A Life Story Patchwork Quilt Elizabeth Stowe Higgs

1824Â1913

The summer of 1978 was never to be forgotten. My husband, Richard, and I were thrilled to find out we were having our first child. Before I had a chance to share our news with my only living grandparent, he died. He was my only link to the past-at least, that is what I believed at the time. Passing beyond the veil, he left me with a heavy heart and something else I had not known before-I felt a great desire to seek out the personal history of my kindred dead and to discover the stories of their lives.

My husband is intensely interested in the past, especially the history of the Latter-day Saints. While in California for my grandfatherÂs funeral, he began asking questions about my progenitors. I soon became consumed with the desire to find answers to his and my own questions about my family history, and so began my adventure.

In October 1979, with an eight-month-old baby in arms, Richard and I drove to Manti, Sanpete County, Utah, to visit a 91-year-old Saint, Alice Johnson Nielsen. The timing was providential because she died on 20 November, just a few weeks after our afternoon meeting. For me, the visitwas important since Sister Nielsen knew my great-great-grandmother, Elizabeth Stowe Higgs.

ÂLittle Sister Higgs,Â as Sister Nielsen called her, was born in England in 1824 and died in Utah in 1913, long before I was born. My desire to find living bridges to Elizabeth brought me into contact with several aged Saints, including her last living grandchild, George Henry Higgs, my motherÂs uncle. Within a short time these people were gone, and I was grateful for the opportunities to record their thoughts and remembrances of my great-great-grandmother before their voices became silent.

Elizabeth Stowe Higgs lived during an exciting time of world history and was an active participant in the Restoration drama that unfolded during the 19th and early 20th centuries. Just a year before my visit with Sister Nielsen in 1979, I had begun to piece together her life story as if making a quilt. The first patch of this quilt was a photograph of Elizabeth that I saw in the home of a distant relative during a visit in Salt Lake City. Since my husband and I had been attending school in Utah, we had begun looking up information about my family in libraries and historical repositories in the state, particularly in Salt Lake City. One discovery led to another, and soon I was on the phone with Roberta Slater Barker, ElizabethÂs great-granddaughter, whom I had never had the pleasure of meeting before.

I had found RobertaÂs name on a genealogical sheet she submitted on our common family line. Although she had never met Elizabeth in person, Roberta had shown enough interest in family history that she had managed to collect a wealth of photographs and other information from ElizabethÂs children and grandchildren. Later, she and her husband served a mission at the London Temple, which allowed them to continue their search for names in ElizabethÂs line and to visit her birthplace. I made an appointment to visit Roberta and soon thereafter drove to her home in Salt Lake City. As Richard and I stood on her porch, I knew that a whole new world awaited me inside. We were greeted by the friendly retired couple-Roberta and her husband, Elwood-as though we had known each other for years.

Soon, envelopes, folders and small boxes of material werebrought into their living room to be opened. My anticipation at Christmas or birthdays as a child could not have been greater than at that moment. Each envelope, folder, or box contained a family heirloom or document revealing something about Elizabeth and her family.

Just after we began, Roberta opened a folder and said, ÂHere is a picture of your great-great-grandmother Elizabeth.Â Before that day Elizabeth had been just a faceless name in my genealogy pedigree line.

I examined the photograph carefully, searching every part for clues of this person and her world. The image had been taken by the famous Utah photographer George Edward Anderson when Elizabeth lived in Manti sometime in the 1880s. She was shown standing near a table on which a photograph of the Manti Temple was carefully displayed. This image of Elizabeth and the temple was symbolic of her service in the Church, as I would eventually discover.

My efforts to piece together the patchwork quilt of her life story brought into my life wonderful blessings, such as meeting people like Roberta and Elwood Baker, George Henry Higgs, and Alice Johnson Nielsen. However, the most important blessing for me personally was the recovery of an intensely interesting story of an individual Saint who loved the gospel she had embraced with her whole heart. The same fire that burned in her bosom-dedication to family history research and temple worship-had sparked in mine and drew me into her world. I sought photographs and word pictures of Elizabeth Stowe Higgs, along with other information about her life, and I began a personal mission to find out everything I could about her. Pieces of the quilt I was making were found in cemeteries, in attics and basements of old homes, in the vaults and storage areas of modern archives, and in the closets and libraries of churches and courthouses in England and the United States.

Some of the best preserved patches of Elizabeth HiggsÂs life were found in the LDS Church Archives in Salt Lake City. I spent long hours at a stretch in the quiet search room on the second floor of the Church Office Building where the archives are located. With only a scratch pad and the obligatory pencil to transcribe by handher voice as found in ward, Relief Society, and temple meeting minutes, I began to grow closer to her with each word and sentence. Whether I was able to see the original records or a microfilm copy of them, I began to feel a connection with Elizabeth as I read her words, often recorded by a secretary, during a meeting where she took the time to not only bear testimony but also reveal the threads of her life. Though she originally spoke to those present, she also spoke to me through these records. Sometimes I marveled that they had been preserved-precious books containing the sweet words of my great-great-grandmother. What I discovered about her in this manner changed my life forever.

ElizabethÂs father and mother were landless laborers in Warwickshire, England. They lived in several homes, mostly on the property of the West family-the landed aristocratic family in the area. Elizabeth was born on 22 June 1824 in the small community of Aldeminster. Apparently her father died as the result of an accident sometime thereafter, leaving her mother to raise the young family by herself. They eventually immigrated to America and made their home in Utica, New York.

Elizabeth married Thomas Higgs in Utica on 21 May 1844, just over one month before the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. ElizabethÂs older brother William had married ThomasÂs sister Mary Susannah a few years before. During Elizabeth and ThomasÂs first years of marriage they found themselves in a secure circle of family and friends. They needed that support, as their first two children, William Wallace and Sara Ann, died on the same day in May 1848. During the next year Elizabeth bore a baby girl, Mary Susannah, who lived a long life. The next child, Sophia, died in 1853, however, at three years of age. A fifth child born in New York, Annie, lived a long life.

ElizabethÂs brother Daniel joined the Restoration movement in 1834, just a few years after the organization of the Church in Fayette, New York, in 1830. Later, ElizabethÂs mother, Anne Kite Stowe, was baptized a member of the Church in Utica in 1841. What conversations took place between Elizabeth and these family members are unknown. Daniel, for some unknown reason, discontinued his association with the Church within a short time, however.

Sometime in 1854 Elizabeth and her husband left their family, friends, and three buried children in Utica and moved west to eastern Iowa to begin a new life. Some of ElizabethÂs family, including her brother Daniel, had settled in Davenport earlier and welcomed Elizabeth, Thomas and the two daughters.

Within two years John Van Cott, on his way home to Utah after serving as president of the Scandinavian Mission, visited their home. Elder Van Cott notes in his journal: ÂIn the evening I baptised Elisabeth Higgs wife of Brother Higgs. Returned to the house and confirmed her. During my stay I was treated very kindly they rejoiced in the privilege of having an Elder with them.Â [^2]

Swept up in the spirit of the gathering, Elizabeth and Thomas left loved ones in Davenport along with another buried child, Thomas Young Higgs, who died in 1856 shortly after ElizabethÂs baptism, to join the Saints in Utah. The small family took ElizabethÂs mother with them as they made their way to the Mormon staging ground near Iowa City. Assigned to the Hodgett wagon train, they accompanied the Martin handcart company to Zion.

The story of the struggle of these companies of emigrating Saints is well known. The family finally arrived in their new home on 15 December 1856 after experiencing bitter cold, heavy snowstorms, and meager food rations.

With a letter of introduction, the Higgs family finally found refuge from the cold in the home of Hiram B. Clawson. The Higgses spent their first winter in Zion in a room furnished with a stove that gave them an opportunity to forget to some extent their suffering on the plains. Such hospitality was not forgotten. In 1860, with a full house, Elizabeth and Thomas enabled German convert Karl G. Maeser and his family to live with them for one year until the Maesers could establish their own home. Elizabeth and ThomasÂs actions helped reveal how the Church titles ÂBrotherÂ and ÂSisterÂ were more than forms of address-they represented community unity.

In 1858 Elizabeth delivered her seventh child, Brigham Thomas Higgs, named in honor of Brigham Young and Thomas Higgs. Shortly after his birth the family was on the move again as they followed the Saints to Utah County during the Âmove south.Â Their stay there wasbrief, and they returned with many of the northern Utah Saints to their homes following the peaceful conclusion of the Utah War.

A year later Elizabeth began another important step that ultimately bound her to the temple. She entered the Endowment House on the Temple Block in Salt Lake City on 20 August 1859. There she received special promises through the ordinances revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, including the privilege of being sealed to her beloved husband for time and all eternity.

Three years later Elizabeth received her patriarchal blessing. Patriarch C. W. Hyde told her: ÂThou art of Jacob, a lawful heir to the fullness of the priesthood with your companion and numerous posterity. You shall be a Queen and your companion, a King and Priest. . . . You shall go into the temple of the Lord . . . and redeem the living and the dead.Â [^3]If she remained faithful, the patriarch promised, her life would be bound up in temple worship and family history research, and through this she would be a blessing to her progenitors and posterity. The blessing also implied that she would help the living by serving as a temple ordinance worker. Of course, no temple stood in Utah in 1862-the Endowment House was a preparatory structure limited to work for the living only, except baptisms for the dead, which were performed there briefly. Work on the Salt Lake Temple began in 1853, but it had not risen above the ground and was not completed until 1893-40 years later. The St. George Temple (1877), Logan Temple (1884), and Manti Temple (1888) were yet to be completed. Nevertheless, Elizabeth was being prepared for temple service. Endowment House records indicate that she later was busily engaged in identifying her kindred dead and performing baptisms in their behalf. [^4]

As Elizabeth grew older she confronted the inevitable tide of mortality-cherished friends and family continued to die. She lost a daughter, Harriet Eliza, on 7 April 1865. Her mother died on 7 February 1868.

In 1870, after the arrival of the first trains to Utah, ElizabethÂs husband was called on a mission to the East. The principal purpose was to contact family and friends and invite them to be baptized and come to Zion. Family ties were important to Elizabeth and her husband so that they could be strengthened and family history information could be collected for temple work.

Later, when the St. George Temple was completed in southern Utah, Elizabeth made the journey south to participate in the same ordinances now confined to this structure-the only fully functioning temple on the earth where the blessings of the holy house were extended to the dead. From 19 April through 22 April, Elizabeth stood proxy in baptisms, confirmations, and endowments for many of her loved ones who had died without the blessings of the everlasting gospel. [^5]

In 1879 ElizabethÂs husband was called to serve as the engineer for the temple being built by the Saints in Manti, Utah. On 1 May 1884, four years before this beautiful building was completed, Elizabeth expressed her desire to Âlive near to God that we might be worthy to go into the temple of the Most high and be worthy to do work for our dead.Â She helped in her own way to see the temple completed. The Manti Historical Record and the Manti North Ward records mention her donations to the temple fund. At different times her donations included five pounds of dried apples, a pair of knitted socks, five pounds of flour, a chicken, and a few eggs.

In 1888 the promises given to her through the inspired patriarch in Salt Lake City in 1862 were fulfilled. President Wilford Woodruff called Elizabeth to be among the first ordinance workers of the newly completed temple on 18 May 1888. She served faithfully for 24 years and was finally released in 1912, just one year before her death.

The Higgs family ÂTemple Book,Â the Manti Temple Historical Record, diaries of other temple workers, and letters addressed to Elizabeth demonstrate her personal concern to do the work. Much hard work and expense allowed her to provide hundreds of names so that temple ordinances could be performed. The Lord must have been pleased with her efforts, because on occasion he sent an extra witness of his concern about this important responsibility. J. Hatten Carpenter described one of ElizabethÂs experiences: ÂSister Smoot was here [in Manti] doing Temple work. One night a personage of spirit came into her bedroom and told her that her name was Collins and they had passed over her name in the Temple. The next day she told Sis. Smoot of the vision and they examined the books and found it was so and the work was done for Mrs. Collins.Â [^6]

Elizabeth led a quiet life committed to Jesus Christ and the restored gospel. If she had been alive now, or if I had been alive then, I rather think I would have liked and admired her. My life has been blessed because she took the bold step to begin a new life with a new religion in Utah, far away from so many people whom she dearly loved. Her dedication to temple worship and family history work has welded me to her, not only by the sealing promises of the temple but also by a special spirit that accompanies temple worship and family history work.

While many view family history work as simply identifying individuals and their vital statistics so that their names can be submitted for temple ordinances, I have come to believe that it also includes filling in the contours of ancestorsÂ lives with photographs (when possible) and word pictures gathered from written records and from the landscapes and buildings they knew. The Lord has said, ÂBehold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curseÂ (Mal. 4:5Â6). The Spirit Âturns our heartsÂ to our progenitors. Just as we come to love those we associate with because we know more than simply their birth, marriage, and death dates, so comes a special relationship with our own progenitors when we move beyond vital statistics.

Certainly Elizabeth is interested in what I do as I continue her efforts in collecting the names of her and my progenitors for temple work. She collected and recorded the names in a ÂTemple Book,Â and I have utilized the modern conveniences of a Pentium processor and the ChurchÂs Personal Ancestral File program. We both have helped fulfill the Prophet Joseph SmithÂs dream he expressed when he said, ÂLet us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple . . . a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptationÂ (D&C 128:24). In this effort we join together in bringing souls unto Christ and binding together our family through the ordinances of the holy priesthood. Through her family history work Elizabeth has left me alegacy of faith and commitment that I can leave to my children, grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren.

The intimate and personal side of my efforts has given me the greatest blessings as I have striven to build bridges to the past, turning my heart to my great-great-grandmother. One of the special moments in my life was 11 January 1980, when Richard and I went to the Provo Temple with Roberta and Elwood Barker. I had discovered while making my patchwork quilt that one of ElizabethÂs sons, Wallace James Higgs, had not had the opportunity to receive the ordinances of the temple or to be sealed to his wife, though he had been baptized a member of the Church. Wallace and his wife, Matilda, had died childless and apparently had been forgotten. I prepared the necessary documents and eventually received permission to have the temple ordinances performed for ElizabethÂs son and to have him and his wife sealed together. As we entered the temple that day in January, I could not help but think of my great-great-grandmother, who had spent so many years serving in the Manti Temple to help Âbring to pass the immortality and eternal lifeÂ of so many others (see Moses 1:39). Now, decades after her death, we were about to complete her immediate family circle by performing the sacred ordinances of the house of the Lord for her son and his wife.

Richard stood proxy for Wallace for the washing and anointing, the priesthood ordination, and the endowment ordinances. Following the endowment ceremony we gathered in one of the sealing rooms of that beautiful edifice. Again, my husband stood in WallaceÂs place and Roberta stood proxy for Matilda, WallaceÂs wife. By the authority of the holy priesthood, the welding link was completed for ElizabethÂs family. We left the temple rejoicing in the privilege to perform such an important work-especially for people I was coming to know beyond their simple vital statistics. Following the special temple experience, we gathered at our small apartment in Provo for lunch. It was a time of refreshing as we joined together in the bonds of the gospel covenant.

As we traced the life of Elizabeth, my husband and I ventured to the places where she had lived. In England I stood in the cool, damp Anglican Church in Aldeminster just a few kilometers southof Stratford-upon-Avon, looking at the baptismal font and trying to imagine the poor family coming to have their little daughter christened. I thought about her family making the decision to leave their native land for a new life in America, where Elizabeth would meet and marry another English immigrant and then settle in eastern Iowa.

At another time I gazed along the Mississippi River shoreline in Davenport, Iowa, with a copy of pages from the missionary diary of the elder who had baptized the 32-year-old Elizabeth into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I visualized her struggling out of her sickbed and going into the river to begin a new life with the Saints. A few miles from Iowa City I strolled around the site where the wagons and handcarts had begun the fateful journey that brought Elizabeth and her family to Utah in 1856. I thought about the trials of the Martin handcart and Hodgett wagon trains as they traveled together in the snow through Wyoming and into Utah late in the year.

Later, upon my return to Utah, I went to the Salt Lake City Cemetery, very near the spot where Elizabeth had buried her mother and several children. I remembered reading in a Relief Society minute book something Elizabeth had said about her faith in the face of the deaths of her little ones. A secretary notes in 1878: ÂSister Elizabeth Higgs said she could bear testimony . . . she heard Pres. Young say a good faithful Brother and Sister should have their children again. She had a trial with her own childrenÂs [deaths] but lived to over come.Â [^7]On a visit to the Manti Temple, I contemplated ElizabethÂs call to be among the first temple workers in 1888. I wondered how many times she had walked those halls or stood at the altar in the terrestrial room in prayer. I stood under a canopy of tree branches in the cemetery across the road from that sacred building and examined the headstone with her name on it. At that moment I said silently, ÂGod bless you, Elizabeth,Â and thanked the Lord for such a disciple as this little Christian Saint.

Now, years later, I have nearly completed this quilt-patch by patch-of her life story. Though not complete, each part of the quilt helps warm me with the history of a courageous woman whose activities, sacrifices, and testimony have proven to be particularlymeaningful to me. A secretary reported remarks Elizabeth had made while attending a Relief Society meeting in Payson, and I try always to remember and live by their message: ÂSister Higgs felt glad that the Lord had opened the way that the children might be taught the things of God. She was thankful that she was here in these valleys. Said the Lord had answered her prayers and she would not complain if her lot was ever hard. [She said] May God bless us in all we do in righteousness.Â [^8]

I am thankful the Lord has allowed for the preservation of the priceless records that note the words and deeds of my great-great-grandmother Elizabeth Stowe Higgs, a heroine of the Restoration.

Notes

1 John Van Cott, journal, 21 May 1856, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

2 Patriarchal Blessing of Elizabeth Stowe Higgs, 12 January 1862, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah (hereafter cited as LDSCA).

3 See Endowment House Baptism Book A., LDSCA.

4 See St. George Temple Records, LDSCA.

5 J. Hatten Carpenter, journal, 1909, Special Collections, BYU.

6 Payson Ward, Utah Stake Relief Society Minute Book (1877Â85), 6 June 1878, LDSCA.

7 Ibid., 1 October 1878.

* Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, a native of Glendale, California, now lives in Woodland, Utah, with her husband, Richard, and their five children. She is the coauthor of several articles and books, including Women of Nauvoo and Sisters at the Well: Women and the Life and Teachings of Jesus, and is the author of a forthcoming book, A WomanÂs View: Helen Mar WhitneyÂs Reminiscences of Early Church History. Jeni wrote this essay to honor one of the Âunsung SaintsÂ and to encourage others to recover the life stories of their ancestors.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
