Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

13 BARBARA B. SMITH [^1] ÂShe Did What She CouldÂ Caroline R. Smoot

1827Â1915

Each Memorial Day our extended family is invited to go as a group to the historic Salt Lake City Cemetery and to the countyÂs Elysian Burial Gardens to place flowers on our ancestral graves. Tombstone inscriptions and dates are read, and we share remembered experiences in tribute to those who have gone before us. The present generation is annually ensuring that this tradition is carried on to our growing posterity, who must also know the forebears who left them the great legacy they enjoy today.

A part of this routine has provided annual amusement for our family members. Found on our largest family tombstone in the Salt Lake City Cemetery, etched in black marble, is my great-grandmotherÂs epitaph:

CAROLINE R. SMOOOT

Daughter of

David W. & Martha Collins Rogers

BORN: MARCH 20, 1827

DIED: MARCH 14, 1915

ÂShe Did What She CouldÂ

ÂShe did what she could.Â Throughthe years we have never really known why such an epitaph was appropriate for Great-Grandmother Smoot, but her epitaph has become part of the lives of the female members of the family, bringing humor and solace to moments when one thinks she didnÂt quite measure up, but tried. At such times out comes the personalized version, voiced with a certain amount of ancestral pride and dignity-ÂI did what I couldÂ-and thus the merriment persists.

I never realized until recently that this serviceable epitaph has a scriptural foundation. In the New Testament I came across these words: ÂShe hath done what she could: and the which she has done unto me, shall be had in remembrance in generations to comeÂ (JST, Mark 14:8, emphasis added). The tone and content of that scripture now have particular meaning for me as I contemplate my great-grandmotherÂs legacy to me personally and to my family generationally. Great-Grandmother SmootÂs life is certainly Âhad in remembranceÂ in the generations that have come, but I think few of us until now have given consideration to more than the humor we discovered in her scripture-based epitaph. My research into her life and times has unalterably changed that for me.

I had heard stories about my maternal great-grandmother throughout my childhood. Now, late into adulthood, I have finally learned for myself what a feisty, faithful little woman of endurance I had laid claim to by birthright. Knowing of the hardships and tragedies in the life of Hannah Caroline Rogers Daniels Smoot, I have come to realize that a lesser woman would never have remained true to her faith under such circumstances. The fact that Great-Grandmother Smoot did bears no small mark upon her posterity, down to the present generation.

This is not to say that all her life was one of grim endurance; in fact, much of her childhood reads almost idyllic. For example, when Caroline was a young child her family lived on the Hudson River shores of CaldwellÂs Landing, New York City. Of that home Caroline recorded in her journal: ÂWe could see West Point from our house. The home itself was an old revolutionary wartime building with three verandas running around the house, one above the other. It was a large roomy edifice standing on the brow of the river near the shore, a lovely place indeed.Â [^2]

Living on the banks of the Hudson River made life interesting for young Caroline; something was constantly going on. She could watch the steamers dock, look over the bridge railing and see the running river, and notice the changing color of the water with its quiet ripples or the restless, rushing waves breaking into white caps.

When her youngest brother was born in 1833, Caroline wrote that she could hardly wait until he was old enough to be taken outdoors. Later she and her older sister, Hester, often took him to the park so that the baby could be in the open air and feel the sea breezes. Caroline summarized, ÂThat was a happy time of my life.Â [^3]

Another of CarolineÂs childhood recollections finds her in New York City, where she was to know splendid as well as anxious times. Even though she was only five years old in 1832, she vividly recalled that as Âthe great cholera year in New York City.Â [^4]The Âdead wagons,Â as they were called, could be heard night and day carrying away those who had not survived the epidemic. At that time her mother became very sick with typhus fever. Caroline remembered her mother mustering all the strength she had to daily call her children together to ask, ÂHow do you feel?Â ÂDoes your head ache?Â ÂDo you feel sick anywhere?Â [^5]She was so afraid the children would contract the dreaded cholera.

That year of early childhood was stamped clearly on CarolineÂs mind, not, however, because of her motherÂs illness or the cholera epidemic specifically, but because of the freedom she enjoyed from her motherÂs omnipresent supervision. Susanna, CarolineÂs not much older sister, was given the responsibility of caring for Caroline during their motherÂs illness. Time and time again impish Caroline would run off to play with her neighbor friend, in spite of instructions to stay home. Susanna would dutifully retrieve her little sister, only to have her run off again. Finally, in desperation Susanna took CarolineÂs dress off so she would stay home. That worked! Those happy, teasing days were part of a clear remembrance that never dimmed for Caroline. [^6]

One Sunday in 1837, 10-year-old CarolineÂs father, David White Rogers, was on his way home from church. He stopped at a place where he and some friends frequently gathered to have discussionsor hold meetings. When he got there, someone was speaking. The first words he heard were, ÂIs it possible that I shall have to go back to those that sent me and say that in all the great city of New York, there was not one person willing to open their house for me to preach in?Â At the close of the meeting CarolineÂs father arose and offered the use of his house to Elders Parley P. Pratt and Elijah Fordham. [^7]

This was no small decision for David Rogers. He was an ardent teacher in the Methodist faith. When he offered his home for their preaching, he didnÂt realize that the missionaries were Mormons. Had he known, one wonders if he would have spoken up. But his heart had been touched, which did not go unnoticed by Elder Pratt. What David also did not know was that the two missionaries had previously received a special witness that many in New York, including himself, were ready to hear the gospel message. According to Parley P. PrattÂs autobiography:

We had retired to our private room up stairs with the few members we had, to hold a last prayer meeting, as I was about taking leave for New Orleans. We had prayed all round in turn, when, on a sudden, the room was filled with the Holy Spirit, and so was each one present. . . . Many marvelous things were manifested which I cannot write. . . .

The Lord said . . . our prayers were heard, and our labors and sacrifices were accepted. We should tarry in the city, and go not thence as yet; for the Lord had many people in that city. . . . And from that very day forward . . . there should be more doors open for preaching than we could fill; crowds, who could not get in, should stand in the streets and about the entrance to try to hear us; and we should know that the Almighty could open a door and no man could shut it. . . .

. . . Now there was in this little meeting a man named David Rogers, whose heart was touched. He, being a chairmaker, fitted up a large room, and seated it with the chairs of his ware house, and invited us to preach in the same. This room was crowded. He then joined with one of our members, who was a joiner, and rented a small place, and seated it for a regular place of meeting; this was generally crowded. [^8]

Caroline was another who was ready for the truths of the restored gospel. Even though she was quite young, she was already a student of the scriptures: ÂI always attended Sabbath school at the Methodist church and loved to learn whole chapters from the testament to repeat each week. I often wished I could have lived in the days of Christ and his apostles. And, when the new and everlasting covenant was preached again to us, my heart rejoiced and I looked on those men that brought the glad tidings of salvation to us, with reverence and awe.Â [^9]

As Elder Pratt taught the gospel to the Rogers family, Caroline Âtook an uncommon interest in everythingÂ she saw and heard. [^10]She later wrote of that time: ÂI never thought of doubting anything he said. When he spoke of the apostles and prophets, I said to my sister that it was just like it was when Christ and his apostles were on the earth.Â [^11]Everything he said rang true to her. Her faith-filled response of childhood would be further refined in the critical hardships she would be called upon to endure as an adult.

Of that time of conversion Caroline particularly remembered the morning when her father did not come to breakfast and she went to his bedroom to find him. There she saw her father kneeling in prayer by the side of his bed, so she shut the door carefully and went away. Every little while she returned to look through the door to see if her father was still there. He was. He stayed there four days and nights, seeking a testimony of the truth of the restored gospel which he had been taught by the missionaries and by the scriptures brought forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^12]

I can imagine CarolineÂs intent interest when her father shared with the family the vision he had received during those four days of fervent prayer, which was given in witness of the divinity of the restored gospel and of the calling of Joseph Smith Jr. as the Prophet of the Restoration. Her father recounted, ÂDuring that time, the room was a blaze of light as bright as the noon day sun. I saw Joseph Smith sitting . . . in the corner of the room with a Book of Mormon in his hand.Â Later, after describing the man he saw in his vision to Parley P. Pratt, the Apostle said he could not have described the Prophet better himself-and he knew the Prophet, whereas her father had never seen him. [^13]

CarolineÂs mother also bore convincing testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel, detailing a dream she had had two years before Pratt and Fordham came to New York City as missionaries. She indicated that in her dream two men had come to the RogersesÂ home bringing a book with them, which they told her was of great importance. She later recognized Parley P. Pratt and Elijah Fordham when they came to the Rogers house together, Book of Mormon in hand. [^14]

These were the witnesses borne to young Caroline by her parents. Because of their testimonies and because she felt the truthfulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ as she heard it taught, she remained a strong advocate of the gospel throughout her life. To further bolster her early faith, her father had amazing, faith-promoting experiences as he fulfilled responsibilities given to him by Church leaders.

One such experience occurred when David Rogers was asked to return to Jackson County, Missouri, after the family had journeyed there and then left with the persecuted Saints to go to Illinois. Actually, Church authorities were looking for someone familiar with the area who could sell the Church lands that the Saints had left without recompense. Not a soul volunteered, so CarolineÂs father was personally approached and he accepted the assignment, in spite of the Missouri mob threats made against any Mormons who might came back to try to sell or repossess their lands. In accepting the responsibility, her father replied, ÂIf it is the will of the Lord . . . I will go and do the business or be found dead trying.Â [^15]

Her father could not have known how close he would actually come to being Âfound dead trying.Â The next month, March 1839, he did go to Independence, Missouri, and, assisted by a man familiar with the area, sold the Whitmer farm. The following day, as they crossed the public square, the two men were surrounded Âby a posse of about forty men. Soon the square was congested with three hundred people.Â [^16]The spokesman for the posse told the two men that they had to give up the money and any other bills of sale they had for property in that area and leave the county before sunset-or be killed.

CarolineÂs father asked if he could first speak in their owndefense and was allowed to do so. He told the mob he had been sent in the name and power of God to accomplish his business. ÂAnd in no way can I be prevented only by commiting wilful, cold-blooded murder.Â At this point, unbuttoning his coat and vest, he bared his chest to them and challenged the mob: ÂAnd if any one present is prepared for that, now is the best time you can ever have, in the blaze of this beautiful, morning sun and in the presence of this large concourse of witnesses, that the honor and glory of the deed may descend to the latest posterity. That is all I wish to say.Â [^17]

The crowd suddenly grew silent. David RogersÂs partner had disappeared. Others began to walk away. Soon David White Rogers was totally alone. He returned to his task of selling the lands, staying in the county for over a month and amassing nearly $3,000. [^18]

I recognize that Hannah Caroline Rogers Daniels SmootÂs own life is a clear reflection of the continuity of that noble legacy from her early youth to her last days. I know now that only her early life was pleasant; throughout adulthood she would have to draw upon that legacy of faith as she was forced to endure nearly unbearable anguish and heartache, portions of which even she thought she Âcould not live through.Â [^19]

When the call came to go to Zion, CarolineÂs parents did not hesitate. In 1839 preparations were made for the Rogers family to move to Far West, where the Saints were gathered in Missouri. Their route would take them through Quincy, Illinois. Before they had completed their journey, however, they met several wagon trains crossing from Missouri. They were told the Saints had been driven from the state. Caroline saw the terrible suffering of the newly converted Saints who had fled to Quincy, but she was not persuaded to do other than join with them.

It was there in Quincy that Caroline met and shortly after married Aaron Daniels, on 14 December 1845. The Daniels family had joined the Church in its earliest days, AaronÂs father being one of its first 30 members. By the time they headed in earnest for the Salt Lake Valley, Aaron and Caroline had two children. For the trek west they joined with Captain Milo Andrera, who commanded 52 wagons divided into groups of 10. Six weeks after their arrival in the Valley in 1850, Caroline gave birth to their third child.

Caroline and Aaron were among those called to settle Utah Valley in the area now known as Provo. Aaron now had gold fever, however, and wanted to try his luck in California. Refusing to leave the body of the Saints, Caroline went to live with her brother in Provo. Aaron told Caroline that if she would not go with him, he would marry a second wife. She told him she would rather he married a dozen than have him go. Aaron did enter plural marriage and moved to California.

Polygamy deeply troubled Caroline and she sought divine intervention to keep herself from grieving over the polygamous union. ÂI need not say I did not have trouble. I used sometimes to wish I would not wake up in the morning but sleep the last long sleep.Â [^20]It took some time until she realized that she should not worry over a principle that was calculated to elevate and exalt mankind if rightly lived.

In spite of AaronÂs continual pursuit of gold, Caroline had 11 children by him, although she lost four of them. One of these was two-year-old Henry, who died the year Aaron married the second wife. ÂLosing my child was worse than losing my husband had been,Â she said. [^21]Little Henry died about two hours before her next son was born. Aaron was still gone in search of gold.

Caroline moved into a log room adjoining her brotherÂs home in Provo. It was very uncomfortable, with no door and no chinking between the logs. She put in the chinking herself, filling up the cracks to make the place warmer for herself and her three children. She also made hinges of leather from old boots for the door, put boards down for a floor in front of the fireplace, and lived there for some time. Then there was an accident that compelled her to move again.

The mishap occurred on 11 February 1852, her brotherÂs birthday. He had bought a wild goose from the Indians, which she was cooking. Her brother had a sawmill on the Provo River a short distance from the house, where he and a number of men were working that day. Dinner was about ready to be served, and the older children were collecting wood for the night. Caroline had just left her room and gone around to the door of her brotherÂs home, when she heard an awful noise. She ran back to her room to find that half ofthe sod roof had broken down and that none of her children-buried under a foot or more of dirt-was to be seen or heard. She never expected to find one of them alive.

Her cries attracted the men at the mill, who came running. They began to dig, although they could only guess where to begin. Soon they found three-year-old Maria. They didnÂt think she was hurt much. Next they dug out David. They thought he was dead, for he was limp and his face was black. His rescuer said that David could not have lived another minute. It was a miracle that he found him just when he did. CarolineÂs 16-month-old baby was still missing. All were certain that she was dead until CarolineÂs nephew called out, ÂHere she is sitting behind a large pile of wood away from the house.Â During all the commotion little Maria sat on the knee of the man who had found her. She never moaned or cried, but they later found that her leg was broken in two places. Caroline knew that the Lord had been merciful to her children and to her. [^22]

After living 17 years in polygamy, CarolineÂs husband apostatized from the faith. But when AaronÂs second wife left him, Caroline had not only her own children to care for but a young foster Indian girl named Rose from the second marriage, whom Aaron left in her charge. Compassionate and cultured Caroline accepted Rose as her own. She taught her the rudiments of homemaking, cooking, cleaning, weaving, spinning, sewing, and all the tasks necessary to make a comfortable pioneer home. Caroline also gave Rose the opportunity to have an education in the Provo public schools along with her own children.

Caroline counseled with President Young about what to do Âas I had a large family of children and no means of support for them.Â [^23]President Young encouraged her to stay with Aaron if he would support her. He told her she might be able to encourage him to come back into the Church. Instead, Aaron said he would turn all their children away from the Church. He succeeded in turning seven of her eight boys away, and one girl. Her youngest son was nine years old. Aaron said that just as soon as the boy was old enough, he would take him away from her, too. ÂBut the Lord showed him he could not have everything his own way and he took my son to himself. My son was a sweet spirit and a saint,Â saidCaroline. ÂHe had been baptized when he was eight years old. It was hard to part with him, but how much better the Lord should take him than to have had him turn away from the truth.Â [^24]Caroline got a divorce.

In 1886 Caroline married Abraham Owen Smoot in the Logan Temple, later stating, ÂIt was necessary to my salvation and exaltation.Â [^25]His first wife had died the preceding year. In 1895 Abraham Smoot died, and Caroline was alone again.

Regardless of the havoc and heartache that was too often present in CarolineÂs personal life, her faith and commitment to the gospel remained firm and found continuity in her posterity, even to the latest generation. CarolineÂs legacy of Relief Society service as well has extended down the generations to and beyond me. Following her own motherÂs early example of membership in the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, Caroline gave years of dedicated service and leadership in the Provo Relief Society. Her daughter Caroline Amelia and all succeeding generations have been stalwarts in Relief Society. I have no doubt that this heritage of leadership service in the womenÂs organization of the Church had direct bearing on my eventual call as Relief Society general president. My nearly 10 years of consecrated service I proffered in gratitude and love to the women worldwide I served and as my part of the continuing legacy of faith that was entrusted to me.

In her later years Caroline lived with her daughter Caroline Amelia Daniels Mills, my grandmother. Because of the sound education sheÂd received, and in response to the BrethrenÂs encouragement that women become doctors, Caroline Amelia pursued that goal. Mother Caroline assisted her daughter through medical school by going to Iowa with her to tend the children. It was this Dr. C. A. Mills who later delivered me, her baby granddaughter.

After 88 years of valiant living, Caroline herself was finally delivered from this life to the eternities on 14 March 1915.

CarolineÂs courageous life and marvelous heritage can be appreciated by todayÂs generation because she recorded much of her life in her autobiography. In that record she bore vivid testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In part, she recounted:

I well remember the day spoken of in history when Joseph accompanied by other brethren came to Montrose healing the sick and raising them from their beds of affliction. I was personally acquainted with Elijah Fordham, spoken of in [the] history of that day, who came from New York City and was a personal friend of my father. I can testify to the truth of that event of the healing of the sick, at that time.

I well remember too when Joseph was hiding at Brother HancockÂs. He lived just back of Montrose on the bluff, as it was called. Of course it was whispered around where he was, but everyone did not know it.

How sorrowful the saints felt, many of them, when he gave himself up to his foes. Of course there were some who advised and almost insisted that he should give himself up to be tried yet another time, which he did to satisfy those doubtful friends. But oh, I well remember the sorrow, grief and lamentations when a few days after came the heartrending news that our Prophet and Patriarch were slain, martyred by a furious mob. All Israel mourned as they never mourned before and as they have never mourned since. Very few eyes closed that night in sleep.

I saw the Prophet and Patriarch in their coffins. I saw the wives and aged mother gazing on the lifeless clay of their loved ones. I saw the bullet hole in HyrumÂs face and I saw the clothes that had been taken from their bodies, saturated with their lifeÂs blood. I have also seen and handled many a time the six-shooter that Joseph put through the door of the jail and fired at the mob before he attempted to get out of the window. I have also had the watch in my hand that John Taylor had on at that time and which was stopped by the bullet striking it and showing the time of the day the deed was done. I saw and handled those relics in Nauvoo and those events are very clear and vivid in my mind. Many other things transpired which time will not permit being mentioned here.

Soon the old timers will have passed away and as Job says, ÂThe places that have known us will know us no more,Â and the coming generations will speak of these events long passed by in the history of the Saints of God. [^26]

Caroline dealt with Âthe stern realities of life,Â as she expressed it, with a resolute faith, if not always a happy heart. In summarizing her life, she asserted: ÂMy faith in Mormonism has never wavered and I hope it never will. I want to bear my testimony to whoever may read this that the gospel is true. Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and I do pray that all my children may be brought to a knowledge of the truth and be saved in His kingdom, which will be the case [if] a MotherÂs prayers are of any avail before the throne of God, which may God grant for ChristÂs sake, Amen.Â [^27]

Amen to CarolineÂs final words, and blessed amen to the life of one who, in dignity, grace, and full faith, Âdid what she could.Â I will never view that marble gravestone in the Salt Lake City Cemetery the same again. What was once a seemingly humorous epitaph now draws from the very wellspring of my heart the utmost of respect, awe, reverence, and love.

How honored I am that this is part of my heritage, my noble lineage, this life of Great-Grandmother Caroline Rogers Smoot. How infused I am with a sense of noblesse oblige-to live my life with the same generosity of spirit, the same maternal love, the same conviction of soul, the same integrity of heart, the same faith-filled response to priesthood authority, the same steadfast service and testimony as that of my revered progenitor. How I fervently desire that my life reflect as clearly the continuity of that noble legacy, even from my earliest youth to my last day. The fulfillment of that soul-deep desire in CarolineÂs life is evidenced in those simple words: ÂShe did what she could.Â Now knowing their meaning, I would be immeasurably honored if the same were one day said of me.

Notes

1 Caroline R. Smoot, journal, as quoted in Caroline Strong, ÂA Proud Heritage,Â vol. 2 (Mills family history, n.d.), p. 474.

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid.

4 Ibid.

5 See ibid.

6 See ibid.

7 Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), pp. 145, 146.

8 Smoot, journal, in Strong, A Proud Heritage, p. 467.

9 Ibid., p. 476.

10 Ibid.

11 See ibid.

12 David White Rogers, as quoted in Strong, A Proud Heritage, p. 476.

13 See ibid.

14 David White Rogers, Report, typescript, p. 1, as quoted in Naida R. Williamson, ÂDavid White Rogers of New York,Â BYU Studies 35, no. 2 (1995), p. 73. See also History of the Church 3:260.

15 Williamson, ÂDavid White Rogers,Â p. 78.

16 Rogers, Report, pp. 2Â3, as quoted in ibid., p. 79.

17 See Williamson, ÂDavid White Rogers,Â p. 79

18 Smoot, journal, in Strong, A Proud Heritage, p. 470.

19 Ibid.

20 Ibid.

21 See Strong, A Proud Heritage, p. 483.

22 Smoot, journal, in ibid., p. 470.

23 Ibid., pp. 470Â71.

24 Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Autobiographies (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1977), p. 328.

25 Smoot, ÂTestimony of Knowing Joseph Smith,Â as quoted in Strong, A Proud Heritage, pp. 486Â87.

26 Ibid., p. 468.

* Barbara B. Smith was general Relief Society president from 1974 to 1984. She serves on UtahÂs sesquicentennial committee, the national board of American Mothers, Inc., Governor Mike LeavittÂs GIFT committee for the advancement of families, and many other associations. She is married to Douglas H. Smith and has seven children, 39 grandchildren, and eight great-grandchildren. Barbara chose to write about Caroline Rogers Daniels Smoot because of CarolineÂs profound influence on and example to the generations that followed her.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
[^25] 25 Ibid., p. 49.
[^26] 26 Susan Sessions Rugh, ÂPatty B. Sessions,Â in Vicky Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 316.
[^27] 27 Sessions, as quoted in Willis, ÂVoice in the Wilderness,Â p. 44.
