Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

14 ELAINE L. JACK [^1] ÂBelieving in the Light After DarknessÂ Emmeline B. Wells

1828Â1921

On 28 February 1921 the Relief Society general board hosted a grand birthday celebration at the Hotel Utah for President Emmeline B. Wells. She was 93. Dressed in a blue and pink brocade dress with a blue tulle scarf-what the Deseret News called Âher official costume for which she had become famousÂ-Emmeline greeted her hundreds of friends Âof all creeds and circles who called to pay their respects.Â When asked to make a wish, Emmeline responded that she hoped her birthdays would continue for years to come, Âbrim full of happiness and comfort.Â [^2]

Only three months later, 25 April 1921, ÂAunt Em,Â as she was affectionately known, died at the home of her daughter. For the first time in the history of Salt Lake City, the flags in front of the BishopsÂ Building, Des-eret News building, and other prominent structures flew at half-mast. They were lowered in tribute to the diminutive pioneer Emmeline Blanche Woodward Harris Whitney Wells, who for 70 years had carried high her banner for Mormonism and its women.

She was the last of those pioneer women whose testimonies had been solidified by knowing the Prophet Joseph Smith. Sheremembered first meeting him: ÂHis majestic bearing [was] so entirely different from any one I had ever seen. . . . It was as if I beheld a vision. . . . Before I was aware of it he came to me, and when he took my hand, I was simply electrified,-thrilled through and through to the tips of my fingers, and every part of my body, as if some magic elixir had given me new life and vitality. . . . The one thought that stilled my soul was, I have seen the Prophet of God, he has taken me by the hand.Â [^3]

Many aspects of her life fulfilled the blessing given her by her husband, Bishop Newel K. Whitney, that she would have a Âtremendous influence in the building of the kingdom in the west.Â [^4]She made extraordinary contributions: she served as president of the general Relief Society, edited the WomanÂs Exponent, established the wheat-saving program, directed the Silver Jubilee anniversary of the Relief Society, received an honorary degree from Brigham Young University, and was memorialized in the Utah State Capitol with a statue recognizing her lifelong offerings.

EmmelineÂs legacy was far-reaching. In an editorial tribute to this physically frail yet unyielding pioneer the Deseret News said, ÂHaving lived a unique and glorious life, she has gone to claim a faithful SaintÂs reward, leaving a name and memory that will live forever in the hearts of all who knew her.Â [^5]

I feel like I know her. As I have served in Relief Society, I have felt a tie to Emmeline. In tracing her life for this essay I have gained an even broader picture of her influence, her stature, her personal strength. Three things strike me about Emmeline B. Wells: her hope, her belief in women, and her commitment to Relief Society.

First, her sense of hope. I am drawn to her because of her ability to maintain a positive and progressive outlook when things were not easy or smooth or fair. Her positive outlook, her hope, is one of the resounding themes of her life.

While we often pay homage to accomplishments-EmmelineÂs list is impressive-it is the fact that hers were achieved in the face of great odds that makes them worthy of emulation. In 1874 she wrote in her journal, ÂWhen I look back it seems incredible that I should have passed through such hard and thorny places. I have always been . . . hopeful believing in the light after darkness.Â [^6]

Second, EmmelineÂs belief in women of the Church. Her statement ÂI believe in women, especially thinking womenÂ resonates within me. [^7]In her closing editorial of the Exponent she wrote, ÂWe love women, and shall ever strive to uplift and help them attain their ideals.Â [^8]Her journal entry of 31 March 1875 stated that she Âwas alone nearly all the evening reading and thinking.Â [^9]She believed in womenÂs minds and in their abilities, valued their individual efforts, and praised their work.

Third, her commitment to Relief Society. On 1 April 1875 Emmeline wrote of her feelings when she returned from a Relief Society meeting, feelings that mirror those I have had in my Relief Society calling: ÂI feel deeply the great responsibility resting upon me in being called to fill this public office; but hope to be guided and sustained by the Holy Spirit in this calling and duty that I may keep humble and be qualified to do all things that are required of me.Â [^10]

As I have looked closely at her Relief Society administration I have seen similarities in the challenges facing women at the first of this century and at the end. EmmelineÂs fervent desire to maintain the essence of Relief Society in a changing world provided a pattern for future members to follow. We, too, are faced with holding firm the unchanging purposes of Relief Society-to relieve the poor and to save souls-while looking to the education and general development of women. This was a challenge for Emmeline; it has been for me as well.

Many women who are new to membership in the Church attend Relief Society meetings regularly, yet, not knowing the historical background of this divine organization, regard it as Âjust another class we attend on Sunday.Â It is so much more. It is the LordÂs organization for women!

While I have isolated three elements of EmmelineÂs life here, I recognize that during most of her years they were interwoven. For example, her love for women and her confidence in their abilities gave her hope. Hope hinged her life together. EmmelineÂs experiences reveal a constant battle to balance the difficult with the exulting, the needs of the Lord with the abilities of his people, the desires of the heart with the practicalities of what must be done. One of my favorite scriptures applies to her so well: ÂWherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightnessof hopeÂ (2 Ne. 31:20). ÂA perfect brightness of hopeÂ-what a light, ebullient phrase that is! How well it represents Emmeline! How well it reminds us that Âall these things shall give thee experience and shall be for thy goodÂ (D&C 122:7).

EmmelineÂs last wish for a life Âbrim full of happiness and comfortÂ was to ask for a life she had never known. Her life had not been easy. She was persecuted by her friends when she joined the Church; her first child and only son died as a baby; her young husband abandoned her in Nauvoo; his letters to her were never forwarded by his mother; her own mother died at Winter Quarters. Emmeline married again and was widowed in only a few short years, this time with two small girls to raise. Her third marriage, though to a pillar of the Mormon community, never fulfilled her hopes for companionship.

The Deseret News noted in its eulogy at her death that Emmeline Âhad her full share of bitter sorrows, but these only served to test and refine the pure gold in her nature.Â [^11]Indeed, this one-time schoolteacher had been schooled by the Lord, and her grasp of the eternal plan sustained her.

In an autobiographical poem, ÂFaith and Fidelity,Â she wrote:

And so some lives go on in tragedies, each part To be sustained by human effort grand; Though Âneath the outward seeming lies the broken heart, That only One above can understand. [^12]

When I was called as general president of the Relief Society I brought with me the fervent desire that women feel and acknowledge hope. I cannot imagine life without hope. I learned early that the personal quality of hope is essential for righteous living. Hope comes from a knowledge that the LordÂs promises are true, that he will fill our souls with his Spirit, and that we will have the strength to carry on. As Emmeline rebounded from personal rejection and disappointment, she put her faith in the future, reflecting MoroniÂs teaching that we cannot be saved in the kingdom of God Âif [we] have no hopeÂ (Moro. 10:21).

The Apostle Paul helps us understand hope when he counselsus to be Âfervent in spirit; serving the Lord; rejoicing in hopeÂ (Rom. 12:11-12). To me, Ârejoicing in hopeÂ is a godlike characteristic. Great comfort comes from hope. I find that I measure hope by those things that have spiritual roots: my relationship with the Lord; the precious time I spend in prayer, in study, in service; my relationship with my husband, my friends, my children, and my sisters and brothers with whom I share this glorious gospel. All these sustain my hope.

Emmeline did not view hope as an abstract thought or a nebulous quality. She bolstered it with hard work and commitment, indicating her belief that Âthere is no excellence without labor.Â [^13]

Born in the small community of Petersham, Massachusetts, Emmeline had the distinction of having been born in a leap year, 29 February 1828. She was the seventh child and fifth daughter of David and Diadama Woodward. Her father died when she was young. Descended from a long line of New England landowners of comfortable means, Emmeline exhibited literary talent as a girl and was admitted to the private New Salem Academy to further her studies. All her life she found joy and expression in writing. Her mother and younger siblings had already joined the Church when Emmeline was baptized 1 March 1842.

EmmelineÂs personal life reads almost like a tragedy. Her journals give us a glimpse of a life replete with the pain of being alone, the loss of three husbands, the early deaths of three of her children, the struggle with disappointment and discouragement. Through her many trials she grew self-reliant, determined, and diligent. She never gave up hope.

EmmelineÂs written words flowed with idealism, faith, and high expectations. Her belief in the promises of the Lord is indicated by this notation in her journal: ÂI have been afflicted and troubled. . . . Thou has promised me days of joy and gladness and O Lord send not more affliction than I can bear.Â [^14]

She was introspective and thoughtful in her personal writings, musing over the events of the day, analyzing their significance and her feelings about them, turning finally to the Lord for guidance and comfort. In her diary entry for 1 September 1874 she wrote of her first and only son Eugene: ÂHe would have been thirty today. Ifhe were living how much happiness he might bring to me.Â [^15]Of her third husband, Daniel H. Wells, father of Emma, Elizabeth Ann, and Louisa, Emmeline said,[Â[He] is not in want of me for a companion or in any sense, he does not need me at all.Â [^16]

Her struggles with the harsh nature of pioneer life may have prompted her delicate, flowery verse so popular at the time. It may have been her way of making the desert Âblossom as a rose,Â just as her penchant for soft scarves and delicate brocades created a delicacy in her countenance. She published many of her expressions in a volume, Musings and Memories, in 1896, with a second edition in 1915. In her poem ÂOctoberÂ comes her recurrent theme of hope: ÂThereÂs beauty and grace in brown October.Â [^17]Other poems describe dreams shattered, happy days of the past, her delight in wild flowers, her Âmountain home so dear,Â and her hope in immortality.

I remember looking out of my schoolroom window to the brown, windswept prairies of Canada while listening to my English teacher explain the poetry that still brings me hope, recurrent pleasure, and motivating thoughts-verses like BrowningÂs ÂAh, but a manÂs reach should exceed his grasp, or whatÂs a heaven for,Â [^18]Gerard Manley HopkinsÂs ÂGlory be to God for dappled things,Â [^19]and Oliver Wendell HolmesÂs ÂBuild thee more stately mansions, O my soul.Â [^20]

EmmelineÂs ability to transfer her thoughts to paper became one of her greatest contributions. In the WomanÂs Exponent, established in 1872 to discuss Âevery subject interesting and valuable to women,Â [^21]she wrote of the vitality of women, their ability to do great good, and their responsibility in the community and to their families.

Progression in the eternal plan was a central theme of EmmelineÂs messages to women, which she expounded upon often in the pages of the paper. The Exponent sought to broaden womenÂs understanding of the world and to clarify the doctrines of the kingdom of God.

I, too, have a passion for the power of the word. At the close of this century that Emmeline so capably helped open, we see women again turning to words for expression and understanding through the literacy effort of the Church. The literacy program helps womenuse this skill to lift others, to teach their children, and, most of all, to help them draw closer to their Father in Heaven. Literacy is a step-by-step process which, when embraced, means not only reading but comprehending and taking action.

When Brigham Young reestablished the Relief Society in 1867, Emmeline was involved quickly. She loved Relief Society. She revered the many great women in the Church whose contributions were so important-women like her beloved sister-wife Elizabeth Ann Whitney, charter member in Nauvoo and counselor to Emma Smith and Zina Young. Emmeline believed Relief Society lifted womenÂs spirituality and gave them hope.

I, too, love Relief Society. My mother, my grandmother, my aunts, and my neighbors were all involved in Relief Society in our town of Cardston, Canada. When I was 12 I read the Relief Society magazine every month, sometimes at night by the light from the hall that streaked under the door to my room. Relief Society was my anchor as a young bride in Boston, in New York City, and again when we moved to the frontiers of Alaska several years later.

In 1876 President Brigham Young called Emmeline to organize the women in a grain-saving program that was a signature activity of Relief Society for almost 40 years. For four years Emmeline chaired the central grain committee until 1880, when the Relief Society assumed full management of the project.

From those years of sisters gathering and storing wheat came a work ethic synonymous with Relief Society. It became such a significant symbol that wheat sheaves were added to the Relief Society emblem which we still use today.

Emmeline was in charge of the Silver Jubilee celebration of Relief Society in 1892. At that great event in the Tabernacle, Apostle Abraham Cannon read a talk, ÂWork of the Relief Society Since Nauvoo,Â prepared by Emmeline. President Joseph F. Smith, then a counselor in the First Presidency, led the women of the Church in an official prayer. More than 50,000 Relief Society sisters in countries around the world gathered together for that singular event and held prayers in their local units.

One hundred years later, in 1992, the Relief Society again celebrated in the Tabernacle. What a thrill it was to be a part of thisevent! ReliefSociety membership numbered more than 3.5 million, and again, sisters in 137 countries around the world gathered, this time for a satellite broadcast received practically simultaneously around the world. The sesquicentennial featured tributes to Relief Society from women representing countries on five different continents-Zimbabwe, Mexico, South Korea, Australia, and Germany. Emmeline and her sisters would have surely joined with us as I invited the sisters to follow IsaiahÂs supplication: ÂLet us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his pathsÂ (Isa. 2:3).

When President Joseph F. Smith called Emmeline as the fifth president of the Relief Society on 3 October 1910, she was 82 years old. She had been corresponding secretary from 1888 to 1892 and then general secretary since 1892. She described herself as Âthe last leaf upon the tree,Â [^22]for she had spent her adolescent years in Nauvoo, had helped to settle Zion with many sisters familiar to us from Church history, and was now the only one left. With EmmelineÂs calling came the challenge to lead in a new century, relying upon the strength of the Relief Society and its promise of Âfuture greatnessÂ that had been extolled from the beginnings in Nauvoo.

Much of what we know as Relief Society was introduced during Emmeline B. WellsÂs administration. ÂCharity Never FailethÂ became the motto; visiting teaching was formally initiated; standardized lessons for four meetings a month were circulated, some even corresponding directly with priesthood lessons. In addition, an emphasis was given to genealogy, public health, home economics, and charity work.

A study of EmmelineÂs presidency shows a series of breaks with long-standing traditions she had helped institute or maintain. The challenge of her 11-year presidency was to preserve the essence of Relief Society while shaping new directions. Each step seemed to distance the organization from some established practices and to require the adoption of new ones. In many ways it was a difficult era.

Through a decade of change, Relief Society tried to respond to a growing sense of social consciousness among younger sisters and yet still hold fast to its spiritual charge. Emmeline openly expressed her concern that Âwe are getting too far away from the spiritual sideof our great work, and from the thought that inspired the first organization of the Relief Society.Â She emphasized, ÂThe Society stands first for spirituality, and then for charity and mercy.Â [^23]

I have wrestled with how to keep Relief Society balanced and focused. The challenge of the 1990s has been to meet the needs of a world in turmoil in a rapidly growing church, and to bring women representing many cultures and traditions into the circle of our presidency and board. I have worked to maintain the essence of Relief Society-its identity and contribution-when the women in high-growth areas have no connections to its past role. This organization for women, established by a prophet, is an essential part of their gospel experience.

Building the personal testimony of every woman is foundational to developing and exercising the charity for which Relief Society is known. Membership has the responsibility to care for each other, the opportunity to learn together, and the joys of a unified sisterhood. Because it was organized under the direction of and after the pattern of the priesthood, it has a divine identity. It continues to function with this guiding power.

What we learn from EmmelineÂs era is that the Relief Society is not based on a collection of programs or good ideas put in motion. Methods and policies have changed with time and emphasis. The strength of Relief Society comes from being grounded in spirituality and service, as identified by the Prophet Joseph Smith when he charged the women Ânot only to relieve the poor, but to save souls.Â [^24]

In the past seven years as I have worked with our priesthood leaders in directing Relief Society, I often have reflected on EmmelineÂs pioneer role. During her 11-year tenure as Relief Society president, Emmeline faced tough issues. Stepping forward to disband the grain storage program when many women were so vested in the assignment-having built granaries, organized accounting procedures, and encouraged this as a hallmark activity-was a bold yet humble act. Bold as a leader, humble as a follower, Emmeline moved Relief Society into the order of the Church.

I have also tried to lead the Relief Society according to that pattern described in the Doctrine and Covenants: ÂHearken unto myvoice, and unto the voice of my servants whom I have appointed to lead my peopleÂ (D&C 124:45).

On 29 February 1928, on the 100th birthday anniversary of Emmeline B. Wells, the women of Utah placed a marble bust of this great woman in the rotunda of the Utah State Capitol. The inscription is simple: ÂA Fine Soul Who Served Us.Â What a tribute this is to her life, her dignity, her contributions, her love of women and Relief Society, and, most of all, her remarkable hope, Âbelieving in the light after darkness.Â

Notes

1 ÂEmmeline B. Wells,Â Deseret News, 25 April 1921.

2 Young WomanÂs Journal, December 1905, pp. 554Â55.

3 Augusta Joyce Crocheron, ed., Representative Women of Deseret: A Book of Biographical Sketches (Salt Lake City: J. C. Graham and Co., 1884), p. 65.

4 ÂEmmeline B. Wells,Â Deseret News.

5 Emmeline B. Wells, diary, 1 September 1874, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

6 Emmeline B. Wells, WomanÂs Exponent, 1 October 1874, p. 67.

7 Wells, WomanÂs Exponent, February 1914, p. 100.

8 Wells, diary, 31 March 1875.

9 Ibid., 1 April 1875.

10 ÂEmmeline B. Wells,Â Deseret News.

11 Wells, ÂFaith and Fidelity,Â Musings and Memories, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Deseret News, 1915), p. 221.

12 Wells, WomanÂs Exponent, 15 April 1880, pp. 75Â76.

13 Wells, diary, 20 February 1845.

14 Ibid., 1 September 1874.

15 Ibid., 13 September 1874.

16 Wells, ÂOctober,Â Musings and Memories, p. 75.

17 Robert Browning, ÂAndrea del Sarto,Â in James Dalton Morrison, ed., Masterpieces of Religious Verse (New York: Harper and Row, 1948), p. 604.

18 Gerard Manley Hopkins, ÂPied Beauty,Â in Arthur Quiller-Couch, ed., The Oxford Book of English Verse (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1939), p. 1011.

19 Oliver Wendell Holmes, ÂThe Chambered Nautilus,Â in Morrison, Masterpieces, p. 370.

20 Wells, WomanÂs Exponent, 15 July 1872, p. 32.

21 Annie Wells Cannon, ÂMothers in Israel,Â Relief Society Magazine, 3 February 1916, p. 68.

22 Relief Society General Board Minutes, 10 December 1913, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

23 History of the Church 5:25.

* Elaine L. Jack, general president of the Relief Society since 1990, was born and raised in Cardston, Alberta, Canada. She was a member of the Relief Society general board for 11 years and served as a counselor in the Young Women general presidency. She is the author of Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart, as well as several articles for Church publications. She and her husband, Joseph E. Jack, have four sons and 13 grandchildren. Elaine says that in writing this essay she has renewed her appreciation for EmmelineÂs bold leadership, which she hopes to emulate.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
