Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

15 EMMA LOU THAYNE [^1] Wherever You Are, Emma Turner Emma Turner Stayner

1833Â1875

You come for me, Great-Grandmother Emma. Dreaming or waking I sense you, in my blood, in my looks, in my perceptions and perspectives. How can this be when I know so little about you?

My only connection for most of my life was a yellowed photo of you, hand colored, I imagine, by my artistic mother with her cotton rolled on a toothpick and dipped in her oils. Subtle, inviting, it was in her scrapbook beside my grandmother, also, like you and me, an Emma. Your hair pulled into a thick bob is dark brown, like your deepset eyes hugged by your dark eyebrows. Even though youÂre scarcely smiling, the clarity of your gaze and the turn of your mouth below your slender nose and high-boned cheeks invite me to listen for you and expect your eyes to turn and meet mine. But there is a sadness about you, a drawn immersion in something behind your eyes as they look beyond me into some space, and a yearning contradicted by your velvet-trimmed, lace-

collared dress and jawline set to take on childbirth or dispose of chagrin. A beauty born of resolution and expectation lights kindness in your eyes.

And something else of you talks to me.Hanging in the same lighted corner of what used to be my motherÂs room in our home, where she lived with us for 15 years, is a sampler, rather large, 10 by 17 inches, stitched by you. On it you cross-stitched meticulously the alphabet in capital and small letters, each a different color, above numbers to 14, and a verse:

When daily I kneel down to pray As I am taught to do God does not care for what I say Unless I feel it too.

You stitched geometrics and trees, a flowered border, and, most important:

Emma Turner, aged seven years, September, 1840

There are mended tears in the ochre linen, breaks in some of the dividing borders, and your initials ET toward a middle edge. Concerned about its weathering for more than 150 years, I had it framed and covered with glare-free glass. I pass it daily going in and out of our bedroom. But only recently have you come after me to find you. You have become a real presence. About two years ago I began to ask, Who were you? How did you live? When? Where? And why do you want me, a non-genealogist, to find you, know you?

Finally, one day, after a Deseret News board meeting in the Church Administration Building on South Temple, I thought, Why not? Why not pay a very novice visit to the Family History Library next door in the Joseph Smith Memorial Building and find that Emma Turner? Amazing. A young sister missionary from Brazil fed me a keyboard, some instructions-and lo, unto me were delivered some 15 pages identifying you, my great-grandmother Emma Turner. In the Ancestral File, backward and forward run your lines, from four generations back to 1721, and a pedigree chart from your birth in 1833 in Malvern, England, to your marriage to Arthur Stayner in 1857 in Salt Lake City, and finally to your death in 1875in Farmington, Utah. The lines then run on the descendency chart from you to oldest child, Emma Louise Stayner, my grandmother; to my mother, Grace Richards; to me, Emma Lou Warner. Bonanza! I was thrilled. I had found you.

But had I? I knew your years, your coming to Deseret, your marriage at 24, your 10 childrenÂs births, your death at 42, my genetic connections to you. But what did I know of you? Not one thing. I longed to have beside me my historian friend, Laurel Thatcher Ulrich. She, a detective of fabric and its relation to womenÂs lives, could have found you in the material of your sampler, in the letters and figures of your writing, in a history of Farmington, or in a recipe book handed down to my grandmother to my mother to me. She might even find a connection between your birthplace, Malvern, England, and Malvern Avenue that leads into solid Tudor Highland Park Ward in Salt Lake City, where I housed my first 25 years and where I am in the cornerstone as the first baby blessed there in 1924. Into the skeleton lines on those pages I needed to have injected so much more of your story than lines and dates on a chart. I longed suddenly to know about your laughing and tears, passions and frustrations, dreams and disaffections. I needed to be brought into the picture knowing why you and I hang there on those lines I punched up on a computer in the Joseph Smith Memorial Building.

Since then, after that first tantalizing taste of your history, you have become an enigma. Daughters of Utah Pioneers, with their extensive records, had little to offer me. The youngest of your 10 children, my great-aunt Katherine Elizabeth Stayner, who was four when you died, never married, and became like my second mother. She tells in her written story only that you were a beautiful seamstress and a meticulous homemaker, that you made all of your sonsÂ suits out of broadcloth from your husbandÂs cast-off trousers, and that you wanted him, Arthur Stayner, to have lots of land in Farmington. When he was secretary-treasurer to the Union Pacific Railroad, you saved a little box full of $20 gold pieces to enable him to buy that land. More, you were the ÂMalvern nightingaleÂ in Farmington. You had a beautiful voice and a Âsmile that lighted the world.Â And you were ArthurÂs first wife.

Whatever might erupt from your story, Emma Turner, could be spun like flax as the linen of your sampler. I want that story. What kind of woman grew up from that little seven-year-old who knew how to read and write in a time when so few girls did? A cousin said you resisted joining the Church with the rest of your family because you were away in Ireland in a Âfinishing school,Â that you wanted an education. Rumor? And what did you do with that learning? Ten babies in 14 years? Did you ever read or ruminate on what you were about? Or laugh with neighbors? Maybe question how a doctrine or an edict might affect your days? Were you hardy? Sickly? Why dead at 42?

I asked my older cousinÂs wife, who lived with Aunt Kate till she died at 95, what Emma Turner died of. ÂThe family legend is that she died of a broken heart when Arthur took another wife.Â True, Emma? Aunt Kate adored her father, Arthur Stayner, with his aristocratic English background, his fluency in four languages, and his bringing sugar-making from France to Utah. She faithfully cared for him until he died at 64. Fascinating that in January of 1935, on the back of her typed pages, she painstakingly wrote by hand, ÂSometime after Emma died-he married Alice Turner, EmmaÂs sister, had 2 children. And after she died-he married Helen Hyde, had 6 children. And later he married Clara Miller, had 3 children.Â (Emphasis added.) Did Aunt Kate, like you, Emma, need desperately for him not to be polygamous? Because not a word of her statement about his marriages was true.

I ache that the charts tell such a different story: By the time you died, he had married and divorced Mary Elizabeth Clark and married Helen Hyde. A third wife, Clarissa Ruth Miller, he had married the January before you died in March. He did wait until the November after you died to marry your sister, Alice Turner.

As you elude me in the tangles of contradicting facts and rumor, I only want to know more about you, Emma. What were you drawn to in that finishing school at 15? What did you sing about? Get angry over? Who taught you the prayer about God in your sampler? Did you go on believing it? What finally led you, unmarried, to join the Mormons, cross the Atlantic and the plains? In whose company? Did you believe in a prophet and revelation? Where did you meet Arthur? How did he, at 27, attract you at 24 to be his first wife?

What was life like in Farmington as you bore 10 children in 14 years, lost two before they were two? Where was your fire? Your solace? Did you keep that meticulous household to keep your husband? Why were you eager for land? And how did you save that box of $20 gold pieces? I hope that, like Mother and Grandma, you laughed as well as you worked. Was my grandmother, your first child, primed by 17 to raise the other seven when you died? Did you teach her to stitch as a child as you had? Did she choose her role or run from it to marry at 21 a man four years younger, to have 12 children of her own, tailor their suits and dresses as you did, and give a home to your youngest, Katie, when her beloved father, your Arthur, died 19 years after you?

What pride made Kate sign formally her careful story that her father was never polygamous? Why the family legend about your death from a broken heart at 42 from his taking other wives? I need you to be real, to speak with your own voice. Did you have options without chains, opportunities without strings? Did you retain your ability to question your own or anyone elseÂs assumptions about your history, your education, your church, your relationships? What did you feel? Know? Were you comfortable with not knowing some things? Were you comfortable with yourself?

Your oldest daughter, my grandmother Emma Louise, who lived with us as we grew up, could make the ordinary extraordinary. From what my mother, Grace, told me, with no deep, self-conscious search for self-expression Grandma Emma Louise, my namesake, read hungrily, loved sociability, and was her surgeon husbandÂs scrub nurse in their kitchen; she simply took enjoyment in everything she did. What could she have told me of you, her mother? I slept with her till she died there when I was 12. ÂWe slept with breaths that matched. I went to sleep every night restraining deliberately one extra breath in five to let her slower time teach mine to wait.Â [^2]Could your story have come through her-not only her genes but her breath teaching me?

I want to imagine a journal kept nightly by you, Great-Grandmother Emma, as I have grown into keeping mine just before I sleep. If I had done a sampler, it likely would have been of MotherÂs truism, ÂPray at night and plan in the morning.Â In that night, Iyearn to derive who you were, beg for you to come alive. Under the exquisitely tuned eye of what I find the night provides, you visit me and invite me into your world. I picture you like Laurel Thatcher UlrichÂs Martha Ballard, Âmustering grease and ashes, shaking feather beds and pillows to attention, scrubbing floors and lines into subjection, [to restore] a fragile order to a fallen world.Â [^3]And singing as you muster.

It may be that only in my life to come will I hear your singing, maybe me singing with you in the voice you never bequeathed me, as we join Mother and Grandma, we three Emmas and a Grace, eyes meeting and holding, hands clasped in each otherÂs, knowing everything there is to know.

Notes

1 Emma Lou Thayne, Until Another Day for Butterflies (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), p. 28.

2 Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A MidwifeÂs Tale (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991), p. 219.

* Emma Lou Thayne, a lifetime resident of Salt Lake City, has taught secondary and college-level English and served on the University of Utah alumni board of directors and the Pioneer State Theatre Foundation. She is a 1996 recipient of the People of Vision award from the National Society to Prevent Blindness. She and her husband, Melvin E. Thayne, have five daughters and 18 grandchildren. Emma LouÂs essay expresses her recognition of the bond that draws spirit and heart to previous generations.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
