Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

16 MICHAELENE P. GRASSLI WITH DWAN J. YOUNG [^1] ÂAll That Is Wanting Is Faith SufficientÂ Aurelia Spencer Rogers

1834Â1922

It has been said that no woman was ever really a little girl. Perhaps this observation is what prompted Louisa May Alcott to write about girls as Âlittle women,Â a phrase that could describe Aurelia Spencer Rogers, the first Primary president, as a child. AureliaÂs childhood seems to have been very brief indeed.

Aurelia Spencer Rogers was born into a world that was physically and emotionally demanding. She would be submitted to the rigors of a persecuted people establishing Zion and colonizing a desert. Yet her faith, her optimism, and her industry, as well as what she considered to be a natural affinity for children, would give her a vision of possibilities for the children of a fledgling Church organization, and the courage and tenacity to carry out that vision.

My admiration for Sister Rogers began when I was a member of the Primary general board and we were preparing for the Primary centennial in 1978. Primary general president Naomi M. Shumway and her counselors wanted board members to understand the background and motivations of the woman who deliberated about the future of the children of the Church and asked the questions that would turn the wheels forthe beginning of Primary. President Shumway accomplished her goal, because I am in awe of Sister RogersÂs ability to face and execute faithfully and cheerfully the burdensome responsibilities that fell upon her.

Through all time, little girls of tender ages have rocked the cradle and swept the floors. It was not unusual that I, the eldest of six children, tended babies, cooked a little, and swept a floor once in a while. But AureliaÂs girlhood duties quickly advanced to full-fledged mothering when her mother died during the exodus from Nauvoo, leaving Aurelia, her older sister, Ellen, and four younger children. Aurelia was then 10 years old.

Her believing heart would help carry her through. She wrote later that in her very early childhood, ÂI remember having been told that God lived in Heaven, above us. So one day I went outdoors and looked up in the sky, thinking I might see Him walking among the clouds. And I was quite disappointed, that He did not make Himself visible.Â [^2]Her faith, born early, sustained her throughout her life.

While the Saints were at Winter Quarters, AureliaÂs father, Orson Spencer, left to serve a mission in England. Ellen, age 14, and Aurelia, age 12, were in charge of the family for three years, with neighbors, a Brother Bullock and his wife, counseled to look in on them when they could. After two years in Winter Quarters the little family of children crossed the plains to Salt Lake City in Brigham YoungÂs company.

Today all this seems appalling-indeed, I can hardly bear to think about it-but sacrifices such as AureliaÂs and her sisterÂs are the foundation of strength that made heroines of our mothers of the Restoration. Sister RogersÂs story is much the same as that of my own heritage. Some of my ancestors were in Nauvoo and Winter Quarters. Like Aurelia, they saw the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum as they were brought from Carthage. They, too, suffered persecution, deprivation, and expulsion. I feel a genuine kinship to Aurelia.

I have developed a love for these people who cut a swath through the wilderness to settle even more wilderness because of their love of God and the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. They made it possible for me to grow up in the gospel in relative peace and security.

The Spencer children were hungry, cold, and shoeless much of the time their father was away, and their suffering caused him to suffer as much or more than they did. Brother Spencer wrote to his children of his love and concern for them: ÂDearly Beloved Children: . . . Elder Hyde wrote me . . . [that] you had seen rather straitened circumstances, which made me weep with sorrow. . . . Â [^3]ÂMy dear Children . . . whom I love with the most inexpressible fondness. You are my dearest treasures upon the earth. . . . Â [^4]

Brother Spencer gave strength to his children through occasional money he was able to send and through his letters: ÂI knew that you were suffering for ChristÂs sake, which gave me some comfort. . . .Â [^5]ÂThus far, your lives are full of promise, your minds are all intelligent and your hearts innocent and pure. . . . I desire so to live that my example and teaching shall tend to give you a mould and polish which will make heaven happier at your approach, and angels to rejoice over you. . . .Â [^6]ÂMy dear children, I trust God, who counsels us to walk the narrow way, will be your shield and defence, and provide for your wants and keep you all alive till we meet again. . . . I shall plead for your lives to be spared, and your minds kept unpolluted. Love one another and bear each otherÂs faults. Cherish the spirit of God by patience and kindness. Never yield to sin or do anything that you would be ashamed to ask God about or tell me of. . . . Believe that God can hear and help you when you need it. . . . Â [^7]

Orson Spencer was a constant and stable light to Aurelia throughout her life. Later she wrote of his spiritual influence and of his testimony and wisdom being a strength to her during hard times. As I have matured and contemplated my love for my children and my extended family and how I can help them the most, I have come to realize the importance of the example of constant faith in rearing children and helping them in their adulthood.

In our Gospel Doctrine class during a discussion of Job and the responses of his family and friends to his trials, class members shared the most helpful responses they had received from others as they met their own challenges. We had a good discussion, with people sharing many positive observations. Then one young man said something that struck me as being obviously simple, yet mostsignificant-something that describes the influence of my own parents. He said, ÂWhat has helped me the most in difficult times is that my parents and others whom I admire continue to be strong and confident in their faith and their courage. I look at them and think, ÂIf they can have faith, so can I. If they can have courage, so can I.ÂÂ

Orson Spencer did this for his daughter Aurelia. She truly needed to draw on his strength, faith, and courage, because she had a physically and emotionally rigorous existence all her life.

Aurelia matured in Salt Lake City and married Thomas Rogers, whom she had met on the trek across the plains. She later buried five of the 12 children she bore, as well as many friends and relatives. Her first home as a wife was a two-room log house with a roof of willows and dirt. Besides the bed, her furniture consisted of a table, four chairs, and a cupboard made of unpainted wood, all of which, along with her wood floor, she scoured once or twice a week. ÂHaving no scrubbing brush I had to use sand and a cloth,Â she wrote. [^8]She carried water in a bucket up a hill from a stream, swept with a homemade willow broom, and cooked over a fire. She was 16.

Later she wrote about Âhow lovely and romantic the [Valley] looked, with high mountains on the east and the Great Salt Lake on the west. . . . There was nothing for me but the bright side to look upon, and I imagined myself equal to the emergency. . . . I would not like the reader to imagine that I was unhappy; far from it; with the exception of certain times of trial, . . . ÂI was happy as a bird.ÂÂ [^9]

When she reported hardship in her history, it was often followed with similarly positive observations. Of witnessing the death of a friend, which happened frequently, she wrote, ÂThese things caused a sad feeling to come over me; but such is life. . . . We partook of a nice warm supper. . . . Took train for home, . . . feeling much benefitted by the journey and visits.Â [^10]In assessing her life Sister Rogers later wrote, ÂMy blessings have exceeded all my trials.Â [^11]

Her positive responses to a hard life motivate me. I have wanted to weather my challenges, including my time in the general Primary presidency, in a cheerful and hopeful way. Along with experiencingthe joy of serving with other leaders and the stimulation of constant challenge and growth, I also spent long hours and encountered frequent roadblocks. Traveling during the time I was a Primary counselor and president was particularly taxing for the domestic soul that I am. I felt much was expected of me. I missed my husband and children, my bed, and familiar food. I sometimes felt frustrated when people didnÂt understand my feeling about children and what we needed to be doing for them. Like Aurelia, I needed to return feeling Âbenefitted.Â And I did. What I learned far exceeded my sacrifice.

Aurelia was not afraid of hard work. Her industry, learned of necessity in her childhood, was part of her success and helped her know that children needed direction and training. She had deliberated considerably about the children and youth around her, when her bishop, John W. Hess, challenged the mothers of his ward to teach their children the way they should believe and behave. She pondered for some time that such training required the united efforts of the parents in their community. Similarly, havenÂt we all wished at times that parents in our neighborhoods would commit to adhering to the same standards of morality and behavior that have been set for our children?

Aurelia was rather shy and did not act on her impulse for some time, but continued to ponder the matter. One summer afternoon during a visit at her Farmington, Utah, home with Emmeline B. Wells, Eliza R. Snow, Mary S. Clark, Nancy Clark, and Lorinda Robinson, the discussion turned to the disgraceful state of the young people. They were particularly concerned about the Ârough, careless ways many of the young men and boys had at the time.Â [^12]Many of them were allowed out late at night, and Aurelia referred to them as Âhoodlums.Â [^13]

ÂIt may seem strange,Â Aurelia wrote later, Âthat in a community calling themselves Latter-day Saints, children should be allowed to indulge in anything approaching rowdyism. . . . In many instances our people have been driven about and persecuted on every hand, until it has seemed to be all they could do to make a living for their children. . . . Yet why should anything be allowed to come before the most sacred duty of parentage, that of looking after the spiritualwelfare of the children? was the question which burdened my mind.Â [^14]

During her discussion with her friends, Aurelia asked, ÂWhat will our daughters do for good husbands, if this state of things continues? . . . Could there not be an organization for little boys, and have them trained to make better men?Â [^15]Eliza R. Snow, who also had been concerned about the children, was deeply impressed and agreed with Aurelia.

While Sister Snow proceded to meet with Church authorities about the matter, Aurelia contemplated what needed to be done. As usual, the simple faith that carried her through hardship sustained her during this time. As she reflected on the challenges that lay ahead, she received a spiritual witness that what was about to happen was the will of the Lord. She wrote: ÂWhile thinking over what was to be done for the best good of the children, I seemed to be carried away in the spirit, or at least I experienced a feeling of untold happiness which lasted three days and nights. During that time nothing could worry or irritate me; if my little ones were fretful, or the work went wrong, I had patience, could control in kindness, and manage my household affairs easily. This was a testimony to me that what was being done was from God.Â [^16]

Eliza obtained authorization from President John Taylor, then President of the Council of the Twelve and presiding authority at the time, and Bishop Hess. Then Sister Rogers proceeded to organize the very first Primary.

As she spoke to the group of women called to serve in the first Primary, she expressed her confidence that Primary would benefit the children and the Church. She said, ÂWhen little children pray it will avail much. While they are running loose, the Adversary will feel that he can instill into their tender minds such influences that in their youth will make them subject to him. But I feel that in this he will be baffled.Â She added, obviously sensing what would influence children the most, ÂMy intentions are to speak and act with the Spirit of the Lord.Â [^17]

The children met for the first time on 25 August 1878 in a little rock chapel in Farmington. There were 224 children enrolled in the first Primary, and 115 attended the first meeting.

Sister Rogers worked tirelessly to organize and edify the children. At one time she had a little business of teaching pattern cutting, but she gave it up because it interfered with her Primary work. She did sometimes become discouraged when her optimistic expectations were not always realized. After the first meeting she felt that Âit was not quite a success on account of unforseen hindrances and some of the children not knowing the hour of the meeting.Â [^18]After seven years as Primary president she wrote that she felt she had failed because not very many little boys were attending at the time. But ÂI made up my mind not to worry any more, but leave them in the hands of the Lord.Â [^19]

Later she went to a Relief Society conference in Kaysville, following which some of the sisters met in a home and Âhad a good visit in talking over the things of the Kingdom. I had often wondered whether Jesus could know anything about the pains of women. Sister Eliza happened to say at that time, that God in order to be God, must know the suffering of woman as well as man. Why had I not thought of this before? It opened up a new train of thought. . . . Does not God understand our organization? . . . All that is wanting is faith sufficient. . . . By keeping His commandments, our faith is always strengthened.Â [^20]Sister Rogers was willing to put her trust in the Lord and to wait upon him to make a success of Primary.

However, she learned another important lesson soon afterward. While attending a young peopleÂs meeting, she was called upon to speak. As she was speaking she remembered that Oliver Cowdery, Âwhen called upon to translate, had an idea that the Lord would dictate, and he would have nothing else to do but write it down. The Lord told him by way of revelation, this was not what He wanted; He expected Oliver to think for himself, and if what came into his mind was pleasing to the Lord, his bosom would burn within him, and he would feel that it was right; and if it were not right, he would have a stupor of thought.Â [^21](See D&C 9.)

She mentioned this to the congregation, and afterward recognized that she had received inspiration from the Lord for herself and for Primary. ÂIt was made plain to me that we must think for ourselves, and if we fail in one thing, try another. I felt determinedto be more diligent in my duties ever after, and upon returning home went to work with a will and had good success with the Primary children.Â [^22]She exercised her agency, used her initiative, and moved forward with new plans.

Primary did succeed and has endured. Membership has grown to include well over a million children today because of the LordÂs inspiration to and support of Aurelia Spencer Rogers, and because of many leaders and teachers who have taken on Sister RogersÂs cause by responding to calls from the Lord to serve children.

Today leaders are teaching children the gospel of Jesus Christ and helping them learn to live it. A peek into todayÂs Primary finds teachers in classrooms with children busily engaged in meaningful gospel learning activities. Members of the bishopric teach children when they give messages in Primary opening exercises. Primary presidencies teach children in opening exercises and sharing time. Music leaders teach children the gospel of Jesus Christ through song. Nursery leaders are teachers who help give little ones their first feelings that Church is a safe and happy place. All Primary leaders today teach and inspire by the example of their behavior, their love for and attention to each child, and the quality of their performance in their callings.

Sister Rogers would be pleased to know that Primary has thrived and that teaching truth is at its heart. She undoubtedly knew that helping children develop testimonies of Jesus Christ and his Church is a sacred trust.

When Moses was called by the Lord and entrusted with assisting in the LordÂs work, he was shown the earth from beginning to end. He saw all the inhabitants of the earth, as well as of numerous other worlds. (See Moses 1.) When Moses saw all this, he was able to understand that his task was not just to lead one group of people from one land to another but to help prepare a people who would receive the Savior, who would redeem the world.

Like Moses, Sister Rogers seemed to have a broad view of the future of the children of the Church. TodayÂs Primary leaders and teachers are doing more than leading a song, marking a roll, making a visual aid, or setting up chairs. They are helping children find their places in eternity.

Their task, as Aurelia Spencer Rogers hoped to do, is to create an atmosphere in which children can feel a happy spirit as they learn the principles of the gospel. The spiritual preparation that lifts and builds a teacher or leader is the foundation that will enable them to help a child feel the Spirit of the Lord.

Why was Aurelia Spencer Rogers successful? What are her lessons to us?

As she concluded her personal history near the end of her life, she wrote of her faith:

In the sad experiences related, the sacrifices which have been made, I sincerely hope there is nothing which might have a tendency to weaken the faith of any Latter-day Saint, or discourage those who may be investigating our religion. And I wish to bear my testimony, that with all that the members of our family have passed through, I have not doubted the truth of the Gospel which I have embraced, and feel that I have great cause to be zealous in testifying that I do know that God lives, and that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is His true Church.

The one time in my life . . . when my children were taken from me by death, and I did almost question the existence of a God, was momentary. The words of my father comforted me, and the seeming doubt when cleared away never returned. [^23]

Her faith was her strength. It gave her the will to continue, the brightness of hope and its resulting optimism. It allowed her to channel her industry and vision into the righteous cause of providing children with an environment in which they might feel the Spirit of the Lord.

We can keep the same kind of faith. We can be energetic and dependable in our duties. We can radiate the light of the gospel of Jesus Christ as we, like Sister Rogers, Âspeak and act with the Spirit of the Lord.Â

With the other hardy pioneers, the child Aurelia trudged forward at the pace of a rolling, rocking wagon. The growth of the Church during her lifetime was steady but as slow as those wagons. The relative ease of our lives today is a blessing that is allowingtodayÂs Church to race forward at breakneck speed. Children we care for in our families and in Primary need to be prepared not only to keep up with that rapid pace, but to lead it as they seek to find their places in eternity.

Notes

1 Aurelia Spencer Rogers, Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, and History of Primary Work (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon and Sons, 1898), p. 13.

2 Ibid., p. 57.

3 Ibid., pp. 66Â67.

4 Ibid., p. 57.

5 Ibid., p. 67.

6 Ibid., pp. 69, 70.

7 Ibid., p. 126.

8 Ibid., pp. 123, 124, 126.

9 Ibid., pp. 253Â54.

10 Ibid., p. 330.

11 Carol Cornwall Madsen and Susan Staker Oman, Sisters and Little Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 1.

12 Rogers, Life Sketches, pp. 205Â6.

13 Ibid., p. 206.

14 Ibid., p. 208.

15 Ibid., p. 212.

16 Madsen and Oman, Sisters, p. 6.

17 WomanÂs Exponent 7 (1 September 1878): 53, as quoted in ibid.

18 Rogers, Life Sketches, p. 230.

19 Ibid., pp. 245Â46.

20 Ibid., pp. 231Â32.

21 Ibid., p. 232.

22 Ibid., pp. 230Â31.

* Michaelene P. Grassli served as Primary general president from April 1988 to October 1994, having previously served as second counselor to President Dwan J. Young for eight years and for five years as a board member. She is the author of two books, What I Have Learned from Children and LeaderTalk. She and her husband, Leonard, live in Pleasant View, Utah, and have three daughters and eight grandchildren. In writing this chapter Michaelene looked at Aurelia Rogers not just as the organizer of Primary but as a loving, caring woman of vision who knew the needs of children.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
