Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

17 CAROL L. CLARK [^1] ÂWe Were a Happy BandÂ Mary Goble Pay

1843Â1913

A trip to the woods of northern Minnesota triggered in me a deepened understanding of how it is that Mary Goble Pay, a woman who suffered so much, could identify herself and her fellows as a Âhappy band.Â With my family on a lake in those woods, I anxiously watched an evening rainstorm swirl toward us as our fishing boat zoomed to safety. I secured our tackle while my brothers began putting up the rain protection. We beat the storm to shore, and the instant we docked, the welcoming committee of mosquitoes swarmed around us in a ferocious attack.

Fighting the bugs, we sweated and struggled to secure the boat and its contents as the first drops pelted us. With a final whoosh, the last canvas went up, and we sprinted to safety. It was then that I felt the strength of our bond of family camaraderie and mutual goals. It was good to work on a project, even that minuscule one, with my brothers and nephew.

Maybe, I thought as I slipped into bed late that night, maybe being put to a test with oneÂs family and other loved ones, be the task great or small, does brings out the best in people.

I first read Mary Goble PayÂs life historymore than 20 years ago. It has seemed to me since then that the tests Polly (as her mother called her), her family, and associates endured are quite beyond my comprehension. Her writing is plain, so straightforward and understated that, like the words of Nephi, it moves me every reading.

Born in England in 1843, Mary Goble started her journey to Utah in 1856, less than six months after her baptism, by boarding a Âsailing vesselÂ in Liverpool with her family. Before they even left the river Âthe crew mutinied but they were put ashore and another crew came on board. They were a good set of men.Â [^2]

She reports that a shark followed the ship. After one of the 900 Âsouls on boardÂ died and was buried at sea, Âwe never saw the shark any more.Â She tells about what they did during the six weeks of their voyage. ÂAfter we got over our sea sickness we had a nice time. We would play games, and sing songs of zion. We held meetings and the time passed happilyÂ (p. 1).

She records a miraculous incident: ÂWhen we were sailing through the banks of Newfoundland we were in a dense fog for several days. The sailors were kept night and day ringing bells and blowing fog horns. One day I was on deck with my father when I saw a mountain of ice in the sea close to the ship. I said, ÂLook, father look.Â He went as white as a ghost and said, ÂOh, my girl.Â At that moment the fog parted the sun shone bright till the ship was out of danger when the fog closed on us againÂ (p. 1).

All of that was mere adventure compared with the tragedies that lay ahead. From Boston the family went with the Saints to Iowa City. Purchasing two unbroken yoke of oxen, one yoke of cows, a wagon, and a tent, the family, who Âdid not know a thing about driving oxenÂ (p. 1), made their way to Council Bluffs. En route the first casualty occurred. A sister, Fanny, had contracted measles on the ship. In her characteristic, matter-of-fact style, Mary Goble Pay tells us, ÂThere came up a thunder storm that blew down our shelter, made with hand carts and some quilts. My sister got wet and died the 19th of July 1856. She would have been two years old the 23rd. The day we started on our journey we visited her grave. We felt very bad to leave our little sister thereÂ (pp. 1-2).

They arrived in Council Bluffs on the first of September. Theycontinued to move west 15 to 25 miles a day, a thousand miles between them and other Saints. The Indians, Âon the war path and . . . very hostile,Â and the wilderness itself necessitated that Âthe men had to travel all day and guard every other nightÂ (p. 2).

At the Platte River Âit was bitter coldÂ and I wonder if those wanderers felt like the Âgreat lumps of ice floating down the riverÂ about which Mary wrote. At camp, they Âwent to prayersÂ and Âsang ÂCome, Come, Ye Saints No Toil Nor Labor Fear.Â Â Mary, sounding so young and vulnerable, wrote, ÂI wondered what made my mother cry. That night my mother took sick and the next morning my little sister was born. . . . We named her Edith. She lived six weeks and died for the want of nourishmentÂ (p. 2).

This tale reminds me of my own forebears. In my living room I daily look at a portrait of Jane Alder Bourne, my great-great-grandmother. She is very real to me. On my coffee table I keep her crystal wine decanter, the only wedding present she was able to bring with her from England. On the ship, in a handcart, in a tent, she protected that gift. My paternal grandmother, who gave it to me, was her oldest granddaughter. It makes me wonder, what might young Mary have then protected on the ship, in her handcart, or under those flimsy quilts, that has been passed down to succeeding generations?

Once in Utah, my great-great-grandmother Jane and her family took shelter in a cave along the foothills outside of Kaysville. She gave birth to a child in those circumstances. When her brother George came to visit her, he saw that as the baby suckled, blood trickled from its mouth. As my grandmother told me the story, he immediately left for Ogden, some 25 miles away, where he traded his greatcoat for a bag of flour. Carrying the flour on his back, he returned to his sisterÂs shelter with what proved the gift of nourishment and life. The child lived.

Mary tells one of the most poignant stories in her life as follows:

We had been without water for several days just drinking snow water. The captain said there was a spring of fresh water just a few miles away. It was snowing hard, but my mother begged me to go and get her a drink. Another lady went with me. We wereabout half way to the spring when we found an old man who had fallen in the snow. He was frozen so stiff we could not lift him, so the lady told me where to go and she would go back to camp for help for we knew he would soon be frozen if we left him. When she had gone I began to think of the Indians and looking and looking in all directions I became confused and forgot the way I should go. I waded around in the snow up to my knees and I became lost. Later when I did not return to camp the men started out after me. It was 11:00 oÂclock before they found me. My feet and legs were frozen. They carried me to camp and rubbed me with snow. They put my feet in a bucket of water. The pain was terrible. The frost came out of my legs and feet but not out of my toes (p. 2).

After their last crossing of the Platte River, they journeyed in snow. MaryÂs group traveled in wagons and so they helped handcart companies they came across on their way. Lack of food, in part caused by the grazing of enormous buffalo herds, made cattle give out. The company inched along, moving only a few miles a day. The snow became so deep and the cattle so weary that the Âbrethren would shovel the snow to make a track for our cattleÂ (p. 3).

At DevilÂs Gate they left a wagon and Âlots of our things.Â MaryÂs Âbrother James ate a hearty supper and was as well as he ever was when he went to bed. In the morning he was deadÂ (p. 3).

The journey was Ânothing but snow.Â Unable to drive the pegs in their tents, they had to pile the snow to keep the tents in place. Mary wrote, ÂWe could not get enough flour for bread as we got only a quarter of a pound per head a day so we would make it like thin gruelÂ (p. 3).

Four companies dragged across the plains. ÂWe did not know what would become of us,Â wrote Mary. Finally, help and hope arrived in the form of Eph. Hanks, Âa living Santa Claus.Â He told the camp Âthere would be plenty of flour in the morning for Brother Brigham Young had sent men and teams to help us. There was rejoicing that nightÂ (p. 3).

The rejoicing was short-lived for the Gobles. ÂMy mother had never got well, she lingered until . . . the day we arrived in Salt LakeCity. . . . Three out of four that were living were frozen. My mother was dead in the wagonÂ (p. 4).

So began life in Zion:

Bishop Hardy had us taken to a house in his ward and the brethren and sisters brought us plenty of food. We had to be careful and not eat too much as it might kill us we were so hungry.

Early next morning Brother Brigham Young and a doctor came. . . . When Brigham Young came in he shook hands with all of us. When he saw our condition, our feet frozen and our mother dead, tears rolled down his cheeks.

The doctor wanted to cut my feet off at the ankles. But President Young said no, just cut off the toes and I promise you, you will never have to take them off any farther. The pieces of bone that must come out will work out through the skin themselves.

The doctor amputated my toes using a saw and a butcher knife. The sisters were dressing my mother for her grave. My poor father walked in the room where mother was then back to us. He could not shed a tear. When my feet were fixed they packed us in to see our mother for the last time. Oh how did we stand it. That afternoon she was buried (p. 3).

They stayed with relatives; some months later MaryÂs father remarried. In July 1857 Mary went to live with Dr. Wiseman so she could work off medical services. As she put it, Âinstead of my feet getting better they got worse. . . . But it was no use he said he could do no more for me unless I could consent to have them cut off at the ankle. I told him what Brigham Young had promised me. He said all right sit there and rot and I will do nothing more until you come to your senses.Â

The story takes a miraculous twist here:

One day I sat there crying my feet were hurting me so, when a little old woman knocked at the door she said she had felt that someone needed her there for a number of days. When she saw me crying she came and asked what was the matter. I showedher my feet and told her the promise Brother Brigham Young had given me. She said, ÂYes, and with the help of the Lord we will save them yet.Â She made a poultice and put on my feet and every day after the Doctor had gone she would come and change the poultice. At the end of three months my feet were well.

One day Doctor Wiseman said ÂWell, Mary, I must say you have grit. I suppose your feet have rotted to the knees by this time.Â

I said, ÂOh no, my feet are well.Â

He said, ÂI know better. It could never be.Â

So I took off my stockings and showed him my feet. He said that it was surely a miracle and wanted me to tell him what I had been doing. I told him never to mind that they were now healed.

I have never had to have any more taken from them. The promise of Brother Brigham Young has been fulfilled and the pieces of bone have worked out (p. 4).

Having sat so long, her legs had become stiff and she could not straighten them. She returned to her fatherÂs home. ÂWhen he saw how my legs were we both cried. He rubbed the cords of my legs with oil and tried every way to straighten them, but it was no use. One day he said ÂMary, I have thought of a plan to help you. I will nail a shelf on the wall and while I am away to work you try to reach it.Â I tried all day and for several days. At last I could reach it and how pleased we were. Then he would put the shelf a little higher and in about three months my legs were straight and then I had to learn to walk againÂ (p. 4).

Mary moved to Nephi and became reacquainted with Richard Pay, who had traveled with MaryÂs group and was now a widower. When Richard Pay and Mary Goble married, Âit was very hard times. My husband bought a one room adobe house. For the window we had sack. That did all right until one day it rained and that spoiled our glass. We then put up factory (unbleached muslin). We had a bed stead, three chairs, a table, a box for our flour. Our bed tick we filled with straw. We had two sheets, two pillow slips andone quilt. I used to take them off the bed and wash them and put them on again. For dishes we had three tin plates, three cups, a pan or two to cook in and a spider (a flat iron skillet) to bake our breadÂ (p. 5).

Richard and Mary made a living ranching in Nephi, Utah. Mary described where the couple resided: ÂThe people all lived inside of a large mud wall with a north and south gate. At night our cattle and sheep were brought home and we were all locked inside the fort for safety from Indians. Guards were at both gates to see that no one came in or went out of the gates. They were locked at eight oÂclock every night. If you did not get in by then you were locked out. We were a happy band of brothers and sisters. We felt safe locked inside the fort wallsÂ (pp. 5-6).

That clause, ÂWe were a happy band,Â tells so much about Mary and her fellow Saints and about the nature of unity and faith. I have never been one to compare the here and now with the there and then. I have no idea what it might have been like to live before airplanes and automobiles. IÂve never sent a husband to war or watched a child die. IÂve never even made soap. Yet in my own way, I know what it is like to feel safe inside the fort, to relish moments of unity with my fellow travelers.

Several years ago I attended church in Rio de Janeiro. A guard sat at the front door, supposedly to keep armed gangs from robbing all of us. I went to the youth Sunday School class, which was also the seminary class, only to find that their teacher hadnÂt shown up. With the help of a missionary, I asked the five young men and women present about their lives. They told me about the daily struggle to stay pure, to remain faithful. I learned much from a single mother who stopped me after church to tell me about her errant son. I needed no interpreter to know of her angst over this boy, or to sense how difficult putting bread on the table was for her.

Later my friend and I talked about these good souls, and she said something that has profoundly stayed with me: ÂTo have the fulness of the gospel and not to appreciate it is so ungrateful.Â She was right, of course.

Mary Goble Pay, five Sunday School/seminary students, and a single mother in Rio understood that, I believe. I supposethat understanding within Mary was why she could call her group a Âhappy band.Â They had the truth, they had faith, and they had each other-a potent combination that could overshadow much privation.

Life demanded a great deal of the Pays. Native Americans and daily survival loomed large in MaryÂs life. ÂMy husband took his turn on guard and when the Black Hawk war broke out he was a minute man called out any moment night or day. . . . I got to know the rap of Brother Peter Sutton. He would say, ÂBrother Pay, I want you on the march as quick as possible.Â He would kiss his wife and babies and be gone. We did not know if we would ever see each other again. All we could do was prayÂ (p. 6).

From the wife of the chief of a Âsmall tribe of Indians[call[ed] Pagwats that stayed around Nephi,Â Mary learned their language. ÂI well remember one day,Â she wrote, Âwhen I was dressing my baby and two of the boys were playing on the floor when the door opened and two Indians came in. One was the meanest looking Indian I have ever seen. They started to talk. He said, ÂLetÂs kill them, see there are four scalps.Â The old chief said, ÂNo, you cannot kill them.Â He talked a little while trying to get his consent but when I looked at the chief I knew he was my true friend. He said, ÂNo, you cannot kill them for she and her husband are my friends.Â He got mad and said, ÂI would like to cut their throats.Â Then I answered him. I tell you he was a frightened Indian for he didnÂt know I knew what he said. He stood there ramming his gun. I told him to go. The old chief laughed and made fun of him because he did not know I understood him. I loaded the old chief down with something to eat because he had saved my life and my childrenÂ (pp. 6-7).

My own maternal grandmother told stories of being the oldest daughter in charge of 10 siblings on a Moroni, Utah, farm. One day while my great-grandmother was in Mt. Pleasant on Relief Society business, Native Americans came seeking food. Grandma Colt had all the children crawl under the bed, and when the men knocked again, she called from under the bed, ÂNobody home.Â

Mary Goble Pay had a remarkable capacity to take counsel. Obedience saved her life more than once. ÂI could relate many more incidents of our dealings with the Indians, but we followed President YoungÂs advice to be good to them, feed them and not fightthem. An Indian never forgets a kindness and he never forgets a wrong. They are truthful. If they say they will do a thing, they will do itÂ (p. 8).

Mary Goble PayÂs life revolved around church and family. She served in Primary and Relief Society. She bore 13 children, 10 sons and three daughters. Two died in infancy; she also lost Âone little son two years old.Â She outlived several other children and her husband. Richard Pay left her Âwith nine children, two were marriedÂ and little else. ÂIt looked pretty dark with nothing coming in. I had to depend on my boys and they did not get much work, so I started to nurse the sick. In this I had good successÂ (p. 9).

Fifty years after they had Âleft their homes over the sea for Utah,Â Mary Goble Pay and Âquite a few of us that are leftÂ went to Salt Lake City Âto celebrate our Jubilee. . . . We met the captain of our company, Brother John Hunt, and some of the people that came in our company. We were very happy to see one another and talk of the times that are goneÂ (p. 10).

While in Salt Lake City she looked up cousins and, poignantly, with members of her family, found her motherÂs grave. ÂIt was the first time I had seen it, for when she was buried our feet were so we could not go to the funeral and later we moved south. No one knows how I felt as we stopped there by her grave. . . . There were three generations and our mother was a martyr for the truth. I thought of her words, ÂPolly, I want to go to Zion while my children are small, so they can be raised in the Gospel of Christ for I know this is the true church.Â . . . I think my mother had her wishÂ (p. 10).

Later in life, writing her remarkable story brought painful reminiscences:

October 24, 1909. I went to Sunday School and was asked to relate a few incidents of our journey across the plains. I told them we had the first snow storms the 22nd of September in 1856. There were fifteen who died through the cold and exposure while crossing the Platte River. Sister McPherson sat by me and she said her mother was the fifteenth to die. They were all laid side by side and a little dirt thrown over them.

November. I have been to the reunion. I met Brother Langly Bailey and had a good time talking over incidents of our trip across the plains. It made me feel bad. It brought it all up again. Is it wise for our children to see what their parents passed through for the gospel? Yes, I think it is (p. 11).

President Gordon B. Hinckley wrote of Mary Goble Pay, his wifeÂs grandmother:

[Her] story is representative of the stories of thousands. It is an expression of a marvelous but simple faith, an unquestioning conviction, that the God of Heaven in his power will make all things right and bring to pass his eternal purposes in the lives of his children.

We need so very, very much a strong burning of that faith in the living God and in his living, resurrected Son, for this was the great, moving faith of our gospel forebears.

Theirs was a vision, transcendent and overriding all other considerations. When they came west they were a thousand miles, a thousand tedious miles, from the nearest settlements to the east and eight hundred miles from those to the west. A personal and individual recognition of God their Eternal Father to whom they could look in faith was of the very essence of their strength. They believed in that great scriptural mandate: ÂLook to God and liveÂ (Alma 37:47). With faith they sought to do his will. With faith they read and accepted divine teaching. With faith they labored until they dropped, always with a conviction that there would be an accounting to him who was their Father and their God. . . .

Let us look again to the power of faith in ourselves, faith in our associates, and faith in God our Eternal Father. Let us prayerfully implement such faith in our lives. [^3]

My personal feeling is to echo President Hinckley and to add from my womanÂs heart that Mary Goble Pay blesses me as surely as she must bless her direct descendants. A consummate model of faith and faithfulness, she reminds me how good my life is evenwhen it isnÂt going well. She calls to me, just as my forebears do, ÂYou have the fulness of the gospel. Have faith. Be true.Â

Edgar Lee Masters wrote in his wonderful poem ÂLucinda Matlock,Â ÂDegenerate sons and daughters, life is too strong for you-it takes life to love Life.Â [^4]Of that truth the lives of Mary Goble Pay and her happy band bear witness.

Notes

1 Mary Goble Pay, Life of Mary Goble Pay, typescript, p. 1, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

2 Gordon B. Hinckley, ÂThe Faith of the Pioneers,Â Ensign, July 1984, p. 6.

3 Edgar Lee Masters, ÂLucinda Matlock,Â Spoon River Anthology (New York: Macmillan, 1916), p. 221.

* Carol L. Clark, who resides in Salt Lake City, earned her Ph.D. from the University of Utah and is the chief operating officer of a financial corporation. She has received many honors for her consumer and other professional work, including the National Council of WomenÂs Leaders of the Future award. She served for almost 14 years on the Relief Society general board and is the author or editor of several books and articles. Carol gained an increased appreciation for the positive attitude born of faith as exemplified in the life of Mary Goble Pay.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
