Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

18 MARIE W. MACKEY [^1] ÂUp the Rugged Hill of KnowledgeÂ Romania Pratt Penrose

1839Â1932

The summer before I left my childhood home in Salt Lake City to attend faraway Harvard University was a difficult, worrisome one. I had never been apart from other family members for more than five days, and then only to attend a girls camp some 30 miles away. It hardly compared to the 2,400 miles I would soon be traveling. As I packed up my belongings and prepared to relinquish my bedroom to my too-excited younger sister, I nervously wondered how I would fare on the East Coast. For me, Harvard represented the geographical, cultural, even religious antithesis of my Utah upbringing.

ÂYou need to move your stuff out of your closet by Monday,Â my younger sister suddenly informed me one morning in mid-July. ÂThe carpenter will be coming over on Tuesday to measure the closet for shelves.Â She sighed to express her sorrow, whether real or feigned, at my fast-approaching departure. ÂIt will be so quiet here after you leave,Â she added, gathering up the wallpaper samples she had been scrutinizing against my walls. As soon as I left, she planned to strip my bedroom walls of my navy print and replace it with a new floralpattern. Six weeks remained before I left for Boston, but already I felt displaced.

As the weeks dwindled into days, my apprehension grew. Would my high school preparation be enough? Suppose I didnÂt measure up to the universityÂs expectations. Suppose the brigade of prep school graduates knew more than I. Would the roommate horror stories I had heard prove all-too-painfully true?

As I prepared myself physically and psychologically for college, I began to liken myself to the pioneer women about whom IÂd recently been studying. I had spent the summer researching some Mormon heroines as part of the preliminary work needed to establish the William and Patricia Child Chair at the University of Utah Hospital and School of Medicine. This chair recognizes and honors UtahÂs early women doctors. Those female medical practitioners had journeyed outside the center of Mormondom to obtain an education, just as I would now journey to Harvard. Their personal and academic successes both comforted and inspired me.

That summer Romania Penrose, Ellis Shipp, Margaret Roberts, and Martha Cannon, all early Utah doctors, had become familiar names, like those of old, beloved friends. Yet even from the beginning of my research I felt an especial kinship with Romania. True, Romania lived a century ago and was 16 years older than I when she left the Salt Lake Valley to attend the WomanÂs Medical College in New York. Nevertheless, I felt a link because she, like me, went east for her education, and she, like me, came from a Mormon background. So it seemed natural that, as a soon-to-be college freshman, I would look to Romania as a role model, as the epitome of the woman of Ânerve, energy, and ambitionÂ I needed to be. [^2]

Now that IÂm a junior in college, I still find Romania Pratt Penrose to be a wonderful example of survival and success in the micro-world of college life. Her distinguishing characteristics of hard work and persistence are becoming my own. I now understand firsthand what Romania meant when she spoke of Âplodding daily up the rugged hill of knowledge.Â Accounts of how she studied up to 16 hours a day in medical school inspire me to follow uncomplainingly in her tracks. [^3]

Even as a child Romania exhibited the insatiable thirst for knowledge that characterized her in later life. As a young girl she attendedthe Western Agricultural School, a Quaker institution in Ohio, and later boarded at the Female Seminary in Crawfordsville, Indiana. In addition to the basic subjects of education at the time, Romania studied German, painting, and piano. She claimed that she Âshould have obtained a very finished education; but my blooming womanhood began to draw around me admirers which warned my mother to flee from Babylon before I became fastened by Gentile bonds.Â [^4]

RomaniaÂs mother had long wanted to join the Saints in Utah. Concern that teenaged Romania might marry one of her many non-Mormon admirers hastened that move. Six years earlier, RomaniaÂs father, Luther Bunnell, had traveled to California during the gold rush, hoping to Âget rich quick.Â He did, but at too great a personal sacrifice. After amassing a small fortune in the gold mines, Luther contracted typhoid fever and died. [^5]

RomaniaÂs mother, Esther, used some of LutherÂs reclaimed gold to purchase oxen, a wagon, and other supplies for the familyÂs westward trek. Romania, her mother, and three siblings joined the John Hindley company and journeyed to Utah in 1855, basically without incident. They arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, however, during a severe famine caused by drought and crop-eating grasshoppers. ÂNow for the first time in life did I face its stern realities,Â Romania solemnly recalled in her Memoirs. [^6]The knowledge and skills she had acquired from her early schooling suddenly also became her livelihood. While her mother took in laundry, 16-year-old Romania taught day-school to Brigham YoungÂs children. She also gave music lessons on the side.

Whenever she could, Romania read and reread her treasured books from her early school days in Ohio. Even after her marriage to her first husband, Parley P. Pratt Jr., in 1859 and the subsequent births of their children, Romania continued to be a self-appointed student. Sharing her love of learning with her children, Romania taught her five sons how to read and write and play their prized piano. But 16 years after her marriage to Parley Jr., RomaniaÂs education would far exceed the fundamentals she learned as a child and later passed on to her own children. Her decision to study medicine marked her biggest step and greatest challenge in pursuing her formal education.

Leaving home to attend medical school was not an easy decision for Romania. She was 34 years old and the mother of five boys who ranged in age from nine months to 14 years. It pained her to leave her young children behind, even in the care of her own mother. But Romania sadly remembered how two of her children had died in infancy: a son, Luther, who died just days after birth, and a daughter, Corinne, who died shortly before the age of two. Their deaths left scars in RomaniaÂs memory that strengthened her resolve. She did not want other mothers to suffer such losses. Unfortunately, the deaths of her own babies were not isolated instances. Infant mortality was high at that time in Utah, as in other places. Romania had also witnessed the death of a friend who died for lack of medical assistance. Watching her friend die and feeling her own inability to save her or even relieve her pain had affected Romania deeply: ÂI saw her lying on her bed, her life slowly ebbing away, and no one near knew how to ease her pain or prevent her death; it was a natural enough case, and a little knowledge might have saved her. Oh, how I longed to know something to do, and at that moment I solemnly vowed to myself never to be found in such a position again, and it was my aim ever afterward to arrange my life work that I might study the science which would relieve suffering, appease pain, prevent death.Â [^7]Never, Romania promised herself, never again would she allow anyone within her sphere, especially women and children, to die for lack of medical care. It was then that she resolved to go east and study medicine.

In her decision to become a doctor, Romania knew she had an ally in President Brigham Young. In a general conference address three years earlier President Young had called for women to venture into the professional world and fill those jobs vacated by the men. Because Utah and the Church were still in their early stages of growth, men were needed to serve missions or perform manual labor. Women could therefore best be spared to perform professional services. ÂWe believe,Â the prophet had declared, Âthat women are useful, not only to sweep houses, wash dishes, make beds, and raise babies, but that they should . . . study law or[physic[s]. . .and all this to enlarge their sphere of usefulness for the benefit of society at large.Â [^8]Of primary concern to Brigham Young was UtahÂs lack of doctors.Most of the outlying settlements had no access to doctors, and the core settlements could barely boast of better medical conditions.

One of Eliza R. SnowÂs first responsibilities as central board Relief Society president was to ensure that every ward had at least three women skilled in midwifery and nursing. Most of these women, however, had no formal training. They learned from textbooks, memories of their own labor, or, as was more often the case, trial and error. Brigham Young knew only too well of UtahÂs health care crisis, and he called upon women to remedy it. Eliza R. Snow echoed President YoungÂs call, rallying women of Ânerve, energy and ambitionÂ to go east to become doctors. [^9]With her natural curiosity, intellect, and hard-work ethic, Romania Pratt fit Sister SnowÂs description perfectly.

To pay her high tuition Romania sold her treasured piano, one of the first pianos brought across the plains to Utah. She and her husband also sold their home and a small farm that Parley Jr. had inherited. RomaniaÂs mother recognized the educational motivation and frontier necessity fueling her daughterÂs ambition. She generously offered to care for RomaniaÂs children during her absence.

Bidding her mother and children a tearful farewell, Romania boarded the train that would take her to New York City. Once there, she joined her husband and helped him edit and prepare for publication the autobiography of his celebrated father, Elder Parley P. Pratt. [^10]After they submitted the book for publication several weeks later, Romania enrolled at the WomanÂs Medical College in New York City.

RomaniaÂs transition to eastern life and the pressures of medical school were difficult at first. Like me, Romania suffered from culture shock and homesickness. A week before my own freshman year began, my father flew with me to Boston to help me get settled into my new life. Any excitement about my new surroundings or new-made friends quickly vanished when he left to return to Utah. I felt like Remus and Romulus of Roman mythology when they were abandoned to the wolves. Romania, in writing of similiar feelings as a new college student far from home, described herself as Âa stranger in a strange land, beside being almost a Âhiss and a bywordÂ on account of my religion.Â [^11]

Romania was a new student but certainly not an ordinary one. She was older and a mother. She enrolled at the WomanÂs Medical College very late in the term. On her first day of class, Romania lagged weeks behind the other students in her medical readings and course work. She felt ignorant, different, and alienated from her more homogeneous peers. During her first term at medical school, she audited her classes, trying to grasp the basics of the very unfamiliar material.

Shortly after her enrollment at the college, one professor, forgetting that Romania was a new, auditing student, called upon her during an oral exam. As he directed his question at her, 50 pairs of eyes fastened upon an embarrassed Romania. Unable to answer the question correctly, Romania explained her predicament to the professor. He apologized for his oversight and moved on to question another student. Flushed and flustered, Romania leaned back in her seat. Out of the corner of her eye she noticed the Âmischievous smilesÂ of the other students gloating in her Âextreme confusionÂ [^12]and Âtotal rout.Â [^13]Those knowing smiles became the last straw. Never would she suffer such humiliation again. Romania silently resolved that she would learn the material, would never be unprepared, would be overprepared if need be. In her Memoirs she recounted: ÂDuring the summer vacation, while [the other students] were recreating, sea bathing and visiting with friends, I daily plodded studiously up the rugged hill of knowledge; reciting as a private student every day to the professor of physiology. I also took lessons in opthalmology of Dr. Wm. Little . . . also a course under Dr. P. A. Callan and finally by special permission I joined a class taught by Prof. H. D. Noyes in Bellevue College. Dr. Little said I was the first woman ever admitted to Bellevue.Â With evident satisfaction Romania added, ÂMy revenge was more than complete at the beginning of the next term in witnessing their astonishment because of my advancement.Â [^14]On her first day of class for the new term, Romania marched confidently into the lecture hall and took her seat at the front. Her ready answers to the professorÂs questions astounded the other students who remembered her only as the Âquivering mouseÂ of the previous year. [^15]Romania continued to excel in her studies, especially in her dissections, which received praise from studentsand professors alike. One of RomaniaÂs fellow students confided to her that a certain professor Âwould go to her table every day after she had left, and calling his class to him, would show them the model and style of [RomaniaÂs] dissection, using it as an example for the other students to pattern after.Â [^16]

Overcoming her academic hurdles did not end all RomaniaÂs obstacles to earning her medical degree. As for most college students in any era, money was a constant worry and did not come easily. For just $1 a week Romania rented a small room and Âlived much of her time on insufficient food for days togetherÂ in order to save enough money to pay for her costly tuition fee of $1 per hour. [^17]In spite of her economy, RomaniaÂs funds ran so low after her first year that, without more money, she could not afford to remain another term at the medical college. Romania returned to Salt Lake City that summer and applied to Brigham Young for financial assistance. President Young listened to RomaniaÂs account of her poverty and medical ambition. He then alerted Eliza R. Snow, still central board president of the Relief Society, to RomaniaÂs financial plight. ÂShe must continue her studies in the east,Â President Young told Eliza. ÂWe need her here, and her talents will be of great use to this people.Â [^18]Sister Snow collected enough money from the Relief Society sisters to help Romania meet her college expenses. After her graduation, Romania repaid this debt by teaching free midwifery classes to the Relief Society sisters for many years.

Financially secure, Romania returned to medical school that autumn. This time she attended the WomanÂs Medical College of Philadelphia, which was less costly. Clinics, dissections, and lectures in chemistry, anatomy, physiology, surgery, hygiene, obstetrics, and diseases of women filled her busy school schedule. [^19]ÂThe days all seemed so much alike that it was as one long day,Â Romania wrote of her years at medical school. ÂI was ever ready to do extra work that I might add to my store of knowledge.Â [^20]Clearly Romania did just that, spending one summer working at the New England Hospital for Women and Children in order to put her textbook knowledge to hands-on use. Her senior year she wrote a thesis entitled ÂPuerperal Hemorrhage, Its Cause and Cure.Â Finally, on 3 March 1877, Romania passed her academic Âgolden gate.Â [^21]She describedher long-awaited graduation day as Âone of the most eventful days of my life.Â [^22]

Not content with just a medical degree, Romania later completed her postgraduate studies in Philadelphia and New York in order to specialize in diseases of the eye, ear, nose, and throat. She attended classes at the WillsÂ Hospital and Philadelphia Dispensary and later at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary. With her specialized medical knowledge, Romania subsequently performed numerous surgeries, including UtahÂs first cataract operation.

After completing her medical and postgraduate studies, Romania happily returned home to her much-missed children. She soon opened an office on Main Street and established a busy medical practice. Sick women and mothers with sick children flocked to her for treatment. To accommodate all of her patients, Romania purchased a horse and buggy so she could travel quickly and safely to visit them over long distances and even during the night. In addition to running her medical practice, Romania taught two midwifery courses each year. Most of her pupils were women from rural settlements who, often supported financially by their towns, came to certify as midwives under Dr. Penrose and then return home to practice as such. The WomanÂs Exponent heavily advertised her obstetrics courses:

We are pleased to notice that Dr. Pratt commences a new class in obstetrics during the winter. She has been requested to teach this branch of medicine by the leading sisters who are constantly visiting through the Territory and witnessing the painful lack of knowledge in this department. Her office is central, and she has the necessary charts, mannikin, etc., requisite to teach as thoroughly as can be expected in such a partial course. Not only are the sisters interested in these classes, but the brethren of the highest authority have extended their approval and expressed their desire that the people take advantage of the opportunity opened to them. [^23]

RomaniaÂs professional skills proved particularly valuable when circumstances forced her to live by them. Four years after her returnfrom medical school, Romania obtained a Church-sanctioned divorce from her husband, Parley P. Pratt Jr. Reasons for their divorce are unclear. The coupleÂs many years apart, first while Parley Jr. was serving missions for the Church and later while Romania was attending medical school, helped to estrange them. ParleyÂs polygamous marriage to a second wife during RomaniaÂs absence may have provided the crowning blow. For the next five years until her second marriage to Charles W. Penrose, Romania single-handedly supported her aging mother and five growing sons. During those struggling years of single parenthood and growing professional responsibility, Romania sometimes worked literally around the clock caring for both her patients and children.

Romania, driven to learn, never acquired enough knowledge to satisfy herself. Over a decade after her graduation the WomanÂs Exponent remarked, ÂHer desire for knowledge compels her to devote much time to study, that she may improve every passing hour.Â [^24]Graduating from medical school proved only one of RomaniaÂs academic plateaus, not the peak of her Ârugged hill of knowledge.Â Her thirst for knowledge reminds me of the importance of making my own education a lifelong pursuit. One semester during finals, friends and I commiserated about our heavy work loads. Some commented on how eagerly they anticipated tossing aside their textbooks. I disagreed. Although none of us relished the stress of final examinations, I could not imagine ever reaching a day when I would no longer want to learn. I cannot imagine such a day was ever a part of RomaniaÂs life.

RomaniaÂs education greatly enhanced the effectiveness of her service in Church and community. Romania played an active role in the Deseret Hospital for nearly 14 years, from the time it opened to the time it closed, and it Âowed its existence largely to her enthusiastic labors.Â [^25]Since her graduation from medical school, Romania had dreamt of opening a hospital that would care for the poor and prosperous alike. With the prophetÂs approval, she and other Relief Society sisters set about raising the necessary funds and renovating their small quarters into a well-equipped institution. At the dedication of the hospital in 1882 President John Taylor praised the Relief Society sisters for Âtheir labors of loveÂ in establishing a hospitalwhere Âthe sick of the LordÂs people could be attended and have the benefit of the ordinances of the Church as well as skillful treatment.Â [^26]The completed Deseret Hospital became UtahÂs fourth hospital after the Williams, a small, family-run facility, and the Catholic-sponsored St. MarkÂs and Holy Cross Hospitals. It was the first LDS hospital in the state. [^27]

Romania served on the hospitalÂs board of directors from the very beginning, volunteering her time and services as a visiting physician. She later served as resident physician. This full-time position entailed a hectic schedule: Âcalls daily to all parts of the city and county, as well as all the details and heavy labors of the hospital work to superintend; then up at night and off, perhaps to some distant country place, and never knowing one moment what she may be called to perform in the next.Â [^28]For eight years Romania served in this tiring position until the hospital closed, presumably for lack of funds, in 1895.

Romania championed the woman suffrage movement, rallying at not just local but national and even international conventions. ÂWhy not let capacity and ability be the test of eligibility and not sex?Â she demanded of Exponent readers. [^29]ÂIt is high time woman set a high price on all her works and abilities, and see which bill foots up the highest,Â a daunting challenge for her day. [^30]Utah men and women, however, did set a Âhigh price on all [womanÂs] works and abilities.Â In 1870 the Utah territoryÂs legislature passed a statute granting women the right to vote. Utah women enjoyed that right for the next 17 years. In 1887, on the wave of an anti-polygamy crusade, the national Congress passed the Edmunds-Tucker Bill, which, among other things, revoked woman suffrage. In the 1890s, the United States government finally concluded to admit Utah into the Union. During UtahÂs Constitutional Convention, Utah lawmakers inserted a provision reinstating woman suffrage. The United States ultimately approved UtahÂs constitution, woman suffrage provision and all. It was years later before they passed the Nineteenth Amendment, which guaranteed that right to other women in the nation.

During these decades of woman suffrage and revocation of woman suffrage, Romania was among those who enthusiasticallypursued the cause. She addressed many gatherings on the benefits of woman suffrage, including one suffrage meeting held at the Ogden Tabernacle. While completing her postgraduate studies in New York, Romania attended the National WomanÂs Suffrage Convention in Washington, D.C. There she met the legendary suffragette Susan B. Anthony, with whom she became friends. Years later, while she presided with her second husband, Charles W. Penrose, over the European Mission, Utah governor John C. Cutler asked Romania to represent Utah women as a speaker and delegate at a convention of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance in Amsterdam, Holland. Standing there before a crowd of thousands from around the world, Romania extolled the advantages of woman suffrage in Utah. [^31]The following year Romania again attended the convention of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance, this time in London, England, where she represented the ChurchÂs Relief Society.

RomaniaÂs love of learning applied to her religious as well as secular education. Perhaps it is because of RomaniaÂs love of knowledge that she so readily embraced the gospel, which offered her the most perfect source of truth. ÂIt has been a matter of great satisfaction to me to remember how fully and easily I received all the principles of the Gospel,Â Romania later wrote. ÂI can truly say I do not remember when I did not believe.Â [^32]

From the outset of her medical schooling Romania perceived her profession as a sacred calling, always conscious of the divine assistance she was given. While a medical student in New York, she wrote, ÂI was not wholly deprived of hearing the sound of the Gospel in New York, for there was a branch of the Church in Williamsburgh to which I repaired each Sunday to partake of the sacrament for I felt it gave me more strength and power to perform my daily duties.Â [^33]Like Romania, I, too, have found that partaking of the sacrament and attending Church strengthen me and help me in my studies.

Romania was certainly blessed in her medical work. During her 35 years of practice she successfully delivered hundreds of babies, including many of her own grandchildren and great-grandchildren. During her 28 years of teaching she trained hundreds of midwives, who in turn delivered thousands of other babies.

For more than 30 years Romania served as a member of the Relief Society central board (now general board), mostly as the assistant secretary. In her Memoirs Romania speaks of her spiritual education, the spiritual Âfeasts,Â as she calls them, that she experienced with other Relief Society sisters.

Romania continued to serve on that board while she and her second husband, Charles W. Penrose, presided over the European Mission. While President Penrose inspected the missionary work among the brethren, Sister Penrose organized the European sisters into Relief Societies. ÂThere are over forty Relief Society organizations in the British Isles, with an average enrollment of twenty each, and an average attendance of ten or twelve,Â Romania wrote in an ÂAddress to the Relief Society in the British Isles.Â However, Romania later wrote that Âmany of them soon broke up, on account of the members emigrating, and the scattered condition of the Saints.Â [^34]

By the time of her death in 1932, Romania had acquired dozens of textbooks on countless subjects. Even more remarkable, she had learned their contents mostly on her own. After the age of 60 she painstakingly taught herself two languages: French and Spanish. She was one of the few, if not the sole, pupils to graduate from a private French class offered in the Salt Lake Valley. Having studied French since the age of six myself, I am amazed that Romania possessed the ability and self-discipline to learn the language so fluently during her later years. Her knowledge of French and Spanish, and the German she had acquired as a young girl, ultimately proved to be of practical as well as intrinsical worth. Romania was 67 and Charles was 74 when he was called to preside over the European Mission. In this capacity he served as president of the British Mission and oversaw the Scandinavian, Swedish, Netherlands, Swiss, German, French, and South African Missions. Fortunately, with Romania as interpreter, President Penrose functioned ably in many of these foreign countries.

An amusing incident reveals the practical value of RomaniaÂs knowledge of foreign languages. While visiting France with her husband, Romania decided one day to take a taxi by herself to visit a friend who resided in Paris. When the taxicab arrived, Romania, perhaps a little insecure about her French, handed the driver a slipof paper with the friendÂs address and, without saying a word, climbed into the backseat. After a few minutes en route, Romania felt that the ride was taking longer than it should and that the driver wasnÂt following a direct course. Her speculations were confirmed when the taxi pulled up next to another cab and the two drivers momentarily conversed in French.

ÂWhere are you going?Â the first inquired in French.

ÂIÂve got a stupid American woman in the backseat,Â replied the other driver, Âand when the meter gets high enough, IÂll take her to her destination.Â

Romania understood clearly what the unsuspecting driver had said and, in perfect French, ordered the cab driver to take her immediately to her destination or she would report him to the police. Astounded, the driver quickly obeyed. [^35]

After returning home from Europe, Romania retired from her medical practice at the age of 72. Her teaching now shifted from the Relief Society sisters to her own grandchildren. She taught many of her grandchildren and even great-grandchildren to read from a large-print primer specially ordered so that her failing eyes could still see it. Her grandchildren and great-grandchildren recalled sitting next to RomaniaÂs big leather lounge chair, sounding out the words in her primer and printing out the longer words such as butterfly over and over again beneath RomaniaÂs stern gaze. Romania even organized a Spanish class for her older grandchildren so that she could teach them the language she had painstakingly learned from her textbooks.

If all of this sounds as if Romania lived a phenomenally long and busy life, it is because she did. In 1881, at the age of 42, Romania wrote her Memoirs-since she lived to be 93, she had not yet passed her lifeÂs halfway point when she sat down to write her reminiscences!

As I read RomaniaÂs rather intimidating list of accomplishments, I took comfort in Susa Young GatesÂs praise of Romania. More than highlighting her material achievements, Susa lauds Romania as a good mother and daughter, a religious woman, and a kind, gentle friend. In an 1891 article published in the Young WomanÂs Journal, Susa describes her longtime friend Romania as:

. . . a wonderful woman. Not because she has done anything impossible to be done by other women, but because in becoming a doctor able to sever a limb, or take out an eye, now delivering with gentlest care the sick bed of some poor old man at the hospital, yet with it all she has a home on another street where she keeps a corner warm and cosy for her mother and her unmarried boys; also is she a woman with religious duties devolving upon her shoulders, and with it all she is the same sweet, quiet-voiced, gentle lady that my childish memory so vividly produces. . . . She is honored and loved by all who have the pleasure of her acquaintance and their name is legion. [^36]

ÂNot because she has done anything impossible to be done by other women . . .Â That phrase strikes me most in SusaÂs commendation of Romania. It says to me that Romania exemplified the possibilities in all men and women. These several generations later, she exemplifies the possibilities present in me, particularly as I now pursue my own education. I see Romania having done what I am currently preparing to do-venture out to fulfill the possible.

RomaniaÂs life also reminds me of the importance of taking my own life in stages. ÂTo every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heavenÂ (Eccl. 3:1). Right now my scale tilts towards school and Church. At times I feel frustrated and a little guilty that studying consumes so much of my time. I donÂt have enough time to participate in as much community service as I would like, my family genealogy doesnÂt head my to-do list, and domestic chores like sewing on buttons or taking out the trash frequently come dead last. I am hopeful that this season and the succeeding seasons in my life will eventually fit together as harmoniously as did RomaniaÂs.

In an art history course I attended the professor classified as a 20th century fallacy the idea that great people are born great. Michelangelo, he noted, employed an apprentice, Ascanio Condivi, to rewrite his biography and to deliberately exclude certain references to his early artistic schooling and years as a struggling sculptor. Before MichelangeloÂs death, the great artist destroyed many of hisearly, technically imperfect pieces in order to hide traces of his early workings and reworkings. The professor cited Michelangelo as a prime example of his theory that individuals, even legendary geniuses, achieve success primarily through hard work.

Just as Michelangelo reminds my professor of the benefits of hard work, Romania Penrose inspires me to persevere. ÂIt is a trite but true saying,Â she wrote, Âthat ÂThere is no excellence without great labor.Â God virtually says to each of us, The world is before you; be as good and great as you will and I will assist you.Â [^37]Romania was not born accomplished or successful. With practical realism, she diligently applied herself and sacrificed in order to achieve her objectives.

There is a clear message in all this for me. I may not become a doctor; I need not become a suffragette. The Lord may have experiences in store for me far different from RomaniaÂs. Yet through RomaniaÂs example I recognize that if I possess Ânerve, energy, and ambition,Â if I dare to dream, and work hard enough to achieve my dreams, my possibilities can become realities.

Notes

1 WomenÂs Exponent, as quoted in Lori L. Nickerson, Women of Nerve, Energy, and Ambition: The Relief SocietyÂs Commitment to Frontier Health Care (Provo, Utah: WomenÂs Research Institute, Brigham Young University, 1992), p. 1.

2 See Romania Pratt Penrose, Memoirs, 1881, p. 12, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

3 Ibid., p. 3.

4 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon and Sons, 1904), p. 600.

5 Pratt, Memoirs, p. 5.

6 WomanÂs Exponent, 1 September 1888, p. 49.

7 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 13:61.

8 WomanÂs Exponent, as quoted in Nickerson, Women of Nerve, Energy, and Ambition.

9 See Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985).

10 Pratt, Memoirs, p. 16.

11 Ibid., p. 11.

12 Susa Young Gates, in Young WomanÂs Journal, September 1891, p. 533.

13 Pratt, Memoirs, pp. 11Â12.

14 Gates, in Young WomanÂs Journal, p. 533.

15 Ibid., p. 534.

16 Ibid., pp. 533Â34.

17 Ibid., p. 534.

18 Romania Pratt Penrose Papers, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

19 Pratt, Memoirs, p. 15.

20 Ibid., p. 17

21 Ibid., p. 16.

22 WomanÂs Exponent, 15 September 1880, p. 59.

23 WomanÂs Exponent, 1 September 1888, p. 49.

24 Gates, in Young WomanÂs Journal, p. 535.

25 History of the ReliefSociety 1842Â1966 (Salt Lake City: General Board of the Relief Society, 1966), p. 33.

26 Ralph T. Richards, Of Medicine, Hospitals and Doctors (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1953), p. 232.

27 Gates, in Young WomanÂs Journal, p. 535.

28 WomanÂs Exponent, 15 August 1890, p. 331.

29 WomanÂs Exponent, 1 October 1880, p. 65.

30 See Journal History, 15 June 1908, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

31 Pratt, Memoirs, p. 5.

32 Ibid., p. 13.

33 Romania Pratt Penrose Papers.

34 See William C. Sutherland, letter, 21 June 1996, in authorÂs possession.

35 Gates, in Young WomanÂs Journal, p. 535.

36 Pratt, Memoirs, p. 7.

* Marie W. Mackey is a junior at Harvard University majoring in English. She was born in Oxford, England, and spent most of her childhood in Utah. While attending high school she worked for two years as an intern for the New Era magazine and was first runner-up in UtahÂs Sterling Scholar foreign language category. Through her research Marie has come to feel a special sisterhood with Romania, whose life provides a wonderful example of persistence, dedication, and faithfulness.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
[^25] 25 Ibid., p. 49.
[^26] 26 Susan Sessions Rugh, ÂPatty B. Sessions,Â in Vicky Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 316.
[^27] 27 Sessions, as quoted in Willis, ÂVoice in the Wilderness,Â p. 44.
[^28] 28 Sessions, as quoted in Noall, p. Guardians, 45.
[^29] 29 Ibid., p. 50
[^30] 30 Ibid., p. 48.
[^31] 31 Ibid., p. 50.
[^32] 32 Ibid., p. 51.
[^33] 33 Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ed. Parley P. Pratt Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), p. 2.
[^34] 34 Sessions, as quoted in Willis, ÂVoice in the Wilderness,Â p. 44.
[^35] 35 Ibid., p. 45.
[^36] 36 Ibid., p. 43.
[^37] 37 Deseret Evening News, 22 December 1892.
