Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

20 SUSAN EVANS McCLOUD [^1] ÂAn Extraordinary Initiative PowerÂ Susa Young Gates

1856Â1933

Most of us have a sincere curiosity concerning the children of famous people; all the more so with Brigham Young, whose sons and daughters numbered 57. How did it work? Did the prin-ciples he expounded as a prophet find practical application within his own home?

After I became a docent, or tour guide, at BrighamÂs Beehive House over 30 years ago I was afforded insights into the structure and spirit of a family where the needs and feelings of each individual were regarded with tender, almost sacred care. BrighamÂs daughter and 51st child Clarissa grew up believing she was her fatherÂs absolute favorite until she became old enough to realize that, in his wisdom, he had made each child to feel the same way. At one time, after learning of the illness of one of his children, Brigham Âstopped a council meeting declaring to the assembly that the meeting could wait, but his sick child could not.Â [^2]He encouraged his daughters as well as his sons to obtain an education-to educate their minds and spirits in all ways possible-teaching that in educating a man, you educate an individual; in educating awoman, you educate an entire household. His daughters exercised implicit trust in him, mindful as they were of his gentle dealings with their mothers and with themselves.

ÂHis beautiful courtesy,Â daughter Susa Young Gates wrote, Âwas never more in evidence than when he approached any one of his wives whom he loved and who loved him.Â [^3]In candid yet nevertheless nearly incredulous appraisal she added, ÂIn all my life in that beloved home I never heard my father speak an unkind or irritable word to one of his wives.Â [^4]From the viewpoint of a daughter, she added, ÂHis presence was like light and sunshine and Âbenediction after prayer.Â Â [^5]

Despite the inevitable confusion inherent in so large a family as BrighamÂs, his daughters were raised in an atmosphere of diversity, encouraged to educate their minds and develop their talents as well as to perfect their housewifery skills. Physical exercise was stressed (Brigham installed a gymnasium on the west corner porch of the Lion House fitted up with Âwooden steps, trapeze, vaulting and climbing poles, hoops, backboards, jumping ropes, and the likeÂ), and a harmony or balance between the physical, mental, and spiritual was an openly stated goal. [^6]Nurtured and encouraged, all of the children grew up with a lively awareness of their potential, and a firm assurance that they were valued and loved, that the great man who, to them, was a tender and interested father believed in the ability of each to make a place in the world, a contribution to the kingdom.

All well and good, as long as it lasted. What then, when the storms of life beat upon the spiritual structures that had dwelt so long beneath the powerful, nurturing sunlight of such a fatherÂs protection and love?

Susa attended the University of Deseret (later the University of Utah) and was there appointed associate editor of one of the first western college publications, the College Lantern. By the age of 14 she was expert in the fields of stenography and telegraphy. But at this time Brigham moved SusaÂs mother, Lucy Bigelow, down to St. George, partly to remove her daughter Dora from an unwelcome relationship with a young man who was given to drinking and weak-willed ways. The attempt was to no avail. On 3 October 1870-hermotherÂs birthday-shortly before they were to start for St. George, Dora Âslipped out of a party in the school house, met the young man, and was secretly married.Â [^7]

Banished from the city and society she loved, with the shadow of her sisterÂs disgrace hovering above her, Susa could have become discouraged and despondent. But she possessed an inner vitality that came to her aid, an Âextraordinary initiative power . . . inherited from her father.Â [^8]She taught music lessons, joined the dramatic club, and organized a club of her own Âwhich promoted social graces and self-improvement.Â [^9]

What possessed her to marry the cousin of her sisterÂs handsome but dissolute husband? At the age of 16 she became the wife of Alma Dunford. Alma was a dentist, but he was also a drunkard, and the match was a most unfortunate one. Both Susa and her sister Dora returned to Salt Lake and had babies born during the same month, August of 1875, and Susa returned to St. George that fall. On a personal level both young women were struggling and unhappy. Several months later Dora left her husband and rejoined her mother and two of her sisters, Susa and Mabel, and surely the contrast between their present existence and the gentle happiness of their childhood must have been keenly felt. But here we see coming into play one of the strengths Brigham taught his children, both by precept and example. Keep your troubles to yourself, in the sacred privacy of your own bosom-that was how Brigham lived, even within the intimacy of his own home, never imposing his difficulties upon others. Eliza R. Snow had inspired BrighamÂs daughters with the same admonition. ÂNever tell any body if you are sick or sorry,Â she was wont to say. ÂDonÂt make others weary with your complainings.Â [^10]Indeed, Susa had seen BrighamÂs wives exercise this high level of control. Writing about the quality years later, as editor of the Young WomanÂs Journal, she told the girls of the Church: ÂWords are the weakest as well as the strongest things on earth. They are weak when they betray our spirits, and they are strong when they obey an intelligent will.Â [^11]

So in June of 1876, when Brigham turned 75 years old, mother and daughters put their cares aside. Lucy prepared an outstanding dinner for her husband, and Susa wrote and delivered an address inthe new tabernacle where the people of St. George had arranged a public celebration. Lucy was chosen as president of the sister workers in the temple, and both Dora and Susa were called as ordinance workers. Half a year later, on New YearÂs Day, 1877, the preliminary dedication of the new temple took place. The April conference of the entire Church was held in St. George the following spring, as well as the formal dedication of the sacred building. Less than five months later Brigham lay dying in the Lion House-the light, the strength, the loving presence suddenly removed from their lives.

DoraÂs husband died, but when she married for a second time it was to a Catholic judge. Mabel married twice, and her second husband was also a non-Mormon. Susa sought a divorce from her husband in 1877, probably feeling the dark emptiness of her fatherÂs support and counsel, being only 21 years old at the time. After heartrending battles she was able to obtain custody of her son, Bailey, but never permanent care of her two-year-old daughter, Leah. During the time of these struggles she confided to her mother: ÂGod help me to be worthy of the good opinion of all of the true Saints. For verily I want to be as near what father would wish me to be, as it is possible for my weak queer disposition to be. Oh mother, donÂt you long to see father, to clasp his arms around your neck, and hear his blessed voice pronounce those sweet words ÂWelcome, my beloved, to your home.Â Oh I know I am young and have a destiny in this Church to fulfill, but how I would love to go to father!Â [^12]

She had made mistakes, and she was paying for them, feeling the anguished weight of her mortal condition-and making vital choices that would greatly determine the remainder of her life. With every reason to abandon hope and give way to despair, she yet fought her way upward. She returned to Provo and the Brigham Young Academy, determined to learn and grow and make herself useful. There she taught voice and piano, directed the choir, and, in 1878, organized a department of music.

Susa had never expected to marry again and had reconciled herself to a patient existence of sustaining her family and serving others. But in 1880, when she was nearly 24, she married Jacob Gates and enjoyed a fulfillment she had not allowed herself to dream of. Five years later she traveled with him to the SandwichIslands (Hawaii), where they served a four-year mission. Three of her children were born during these challenging years, away from home and the conveniences to which she was accustomed. It must have challenged her powers to the utmost to be almost continually pregnant, with little ones to care for, while at the same time doing all in her power to support her husbandÂs work and serve the local Saints. Of the 11 children born to this marriage, only four lived to adulthood. This, with the haunting sorrow of separation from her first daughter, kept SusaÂs heart tender and empathetic to the sufferings of others.

Susa lived a life of service by choice, trying to achieve the balance her father had taught her. Her diversity of talents led her into many fields of endeavor, from politics to science, writing to nursing and womenÂs health, and one of her great loves, genealogy and temple work. She helped establish the domestic science department at Brigham Young Academy; founded many organizations, including the Daughters of Utah Pioneers and the first state chapter of Daughters of the Revolution; established the Young WomanÂs Journal in 1889; and wrote extensively for Church periodicals and purposes and authored half a dozen books, both fiction and nonfiction. She was a powerful figure in the womenÂs rights movement, being selected by the National Council of Women to serve as chair of the powerful press committee for three years, to speak at the International Council of Women in London in 1889, and to serve as sole delegate for that council in Denmark in 1902, penning a pamphlet setting forth the views of both men and women in the state of Utah on the issue of womenÂs rights. Susa taught theology, domestic science, and music at the Brigham Young Academy and was a member of its board of directors for 25 years; she became a member of the general Relief Society board in 1911 and organized and edited the Relief Society Magazine in 1914. In private life she was known as an excellent cook and charming hostess, skilled at conversation and the art of putting those around her at ease.

In her ÂNotes for the DayÂs WorkÂ we gain powerful insight into how she brought all this work to pass:

Notes for the DayÂs Work: Provo, Utah, August 19, 1895

Go down cellar with Emma Lucy [later, a world-famous coloratura soprano] and show her how to clean it.

Go to Aunt CorneelÂs and take her to Eikens and get hers and my fruit. Darn DanÂs stockings. Boil over the bottle of spoiled fruit.

Practice on my bicycle. Write down plan of altering the house which came to me in the night.

Clean my office. Answer LeahÂs, SterlingÂs, Sis. TaylorÂs, and Mrs. GreyÂs letters, and CarlosÂs. Prepare talk on ÂWomen and LiteratureÂ and go to the [Brigham Young] AcademyÂs opening exercises at 10 oÂclock.

Talk to Aretta Young about her story. Write to Pres. Joseph F. Smith, Pres. George Q. Cannon, Apostle Franklin D. Richards, and Elder B. H. Roberts about writing for Young WomanÂs Journal. Also write Mrs. M. E. Potter and Marie D.

Write and thank Carol for her lovely gift. Get the cloth for DanÂs pants and boysÂ clothes and send them to the tailor. Finish the last chapter of ÂJohn StevensÂ CourtshipÂ for The Contributor. Sketch out editorials for Young WomanÂs Journal.

Wash my head. Get the kitchen carpet and have the girl and Dan put it down. Get cot and crib from store. Also washstand and glass and wardrobe. Get vegetables and fruit for dinner. Take my bicycle dress over to Polly and have it fixed. Take clothes to the Relief Society. Get consecrated oil. Bless Cecil [B. Cecil Gates, later director of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir] to do his chores well. Administer to baby Franklin [later an outstanding figure in the early days of radio]. [^13]

Such an exhaustive list could not be accomplished in todayÂs world where television and other entertainments divert us. Brigham had taught his daughters that work was ennobling; Susa had proven the truth of his words for herself.

What about the balance? What of the motivation behind all the activity? From what I have gleaned about Susa, she struggled daily to do what her father had done: to live what she preached. Veryearly Brigham had given her the special mission of uplifting the youth of the Mormon people with her pen. Yet at the same time he had gravely admonished: ÂYou may become the finest writer in the whole world; you might be the most famous and gifted woman of your day, and you might be of great use to thousands of your fellow beings, but if you should fail in your duty as wife and mother, you would find in the morning of the first resurrection that your whole life upon the earth had been a failure.Â [^14]

His words are withering, all-pervading; they leave us nowhere to hide, no loose ends we can hold forth as excuses. I believe Susa possessed her own testimony of this deep, challenging counsel. She had lost her children to death, she had been denied the blessing of raising her first precious daughter, she had seen the tragic effects of her sistersÂ marriages and felt her motherÂs anguish at their weak and unwise choices. She knew from personal experience where true power and true peace could be found.

SusaÂs own daughter Emma Lucy was a living example of this great truth. Having performed and won musical honors from the age of 14, at 18 Lucy traveled to Germany with Elder John A. Widtsoe and his wife, LucyÂs half-sister Leah Dunford. While there she first studied piano and then voice. She made her debut as Anchen in Der Freischuetz in the Royal Opera House in Berlin, very possibly being the first American woman to debut there. During her four years in Germany she sang over 50 roles and was invited to perform at Kaiser WilhelmÂs palaces. With the advent of World War I she concentrated on performing in the United States only, at length organizing her own opera company in Salt Lake City. Her marriage, somewhat late in life, was to a widower with two young twin boys. Once the experience of wife and mother came to her, she said: ÂLooking back on my life now, if I had to choose between home and children and a career, IÂd take the home and children.Â [^15]

These testimonies stand as beacon lights for us to follow amid the confusion of worldly voices that beckon us away from those paths which lead us to true fulfillment and true joy, both in this life and the next.

Not merely endurance but obedience was the hallmark of Susa GatesÂs life, and a love for others that was based on a firm foundationof testimony-not the borrowed light of the father she adored, but her own hard-won conviction. In a special publication for the Deseret News Press she told at length how she had obtained her testimony of gospel truths. As a young girl she had confided her desires to Brigham and he had advised her to obtain her testimony the same way he and her mother had obtained theirs-to go down on her knees in prayer to God. ÂFlesh and blood did not, could not, reveal that truth to Peter, nor to any other man or woman-but only through God the Father can that conversion or testimony come to the human heart,Â [^16]she later wrote, recalling her fatherÂs counsel. She began to pray for light upon this question, delving deeply into every prin-ciple of restored truth, examining, questioning, proving it for herself.

It thrilled me to see this process laid forth before me, for it reminded me of my own experience when I began writing for the Church and coming in contact with that class of Saints we sometimes deem Âprivileged.Â I remember as a girl believing that it had to be easier for some than for others; surely those born to wealth and ease, or those blessed with strong Latter-day Saint roots and loving examples-surely for them the path to testimony, to perfection was less stony, less uphill. But I soon determined for myself that in this crucial matter the process is a fair one, the same for each individual, no matter what his or her exterior circumstances might be. BrighamÂs love and strength could not be transferred to his daughter; the inner, very personal struggle must take place for her as well as for him. She must desire, study it out, then seek, in faith and humility, the confirmation of the Spirit to her own heart. BrighamÂs experiences, powerful though they might have been, could not carry her. He might testify: ÂDaughter, so precious to me is the testimony of the Gospel as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith . . . that I could be cut into inch pieces every night of my life and put together again in the morning to live out that day rather than I would do anything to lose that testimony.Â But this Âspirit of flaming truthÂ she longed for had to be kindled within her own soul. [^17]

I realized this myself when people would come to me with tears in their eyes and tell how some song I had written had blessed them and strengthened their testimony. I realized that having written the Âinspiring wordsÂ was of no lasting benefit to me-these people hadincorporated the principles into their beings more strongly than I, and I must utilize the same sacred process as they if the words were to ever become truly mine.

Susa wrote:

The Holy Ghost was the medium of communicating that testimony to me and to all others-I must pray for that Spirit to rest upon me and to communicate to me, in some way, the actual testimony of the Truth.

During one year when I was nearly 40 years old, I disciplined my taste, my desires and my impulses-severely disciplining my appetite, my tongue, my acts, for one whole year and how I prayed!

Then one day at the close of that year . . . it came to me in the simplest, homeliest environment possible. . . . I was sweeping the floor one day, and a voice within my soul-that same calm, deliberate, yet soul enlightening voice I had heard in the Lion House years before-spoke to my spirit these simple words: ÂYou know it is true! Never doubt it again!Â

I never have! All other truths and facts and philosophies which came to my attention, and come today, I measure by one standard only: Does this or that idea or theory agree or does it conflict with the truths of the Gospel . . . if it agrees, it is mine! If it does not, I cast it out, or lay it upon the altar of prayer till God reveals the truth to His Prophet at the head of His Church. [^18]

This living testimony which empowered all her deeds is what unites SusaÂs spirit with ours-this makes us sisters in every true, joyous sense of the word.

ÂBy their fruits ye shall know them. . . .Â Susa Young Gates left a bountiful harvest that we, in gratitude, may still garner today.

Notes

1 Susa Young Gates, with Leah D. Widtsoe, The Life Story of Brigham Young (New York, 1930), p. 340.

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid., p. 354.

4 Ibid., p. 337.

5 ÂHow Brigham Young Brought Up His 56 Children,Â Physical Culture, February 1925, p. 141.

6 Susa Young Gates, ÂFrom Impulsive Girl to Patient Wife: Lucy Bigelow Young,Â ed. Miriam G. Murphy, Utah Historical Quarterly 45 (Summer 1977): 283.

7 Andrew Jenson, comp., Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, 4 vols. (1901Â36; reprint, Salt Lake City: Western Epics, 1971), 2:629.

8 Susan Evans McCloud, Mothers: Praising the Daughters of God (Salt Lake City: Covenant, 1996), p. 20.

9 Young WomanÂs Journal 4 (1893):426.

10 Ibid., p. 427.

11 McCloud, Mothers, p. 21.

12 Leonard J. Arrington, ÂWomen as a Force in the History of Utah,Â Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Winter 1970): 5Â6.

13 Young WomenÂs Journal 5 (November 1893):91.

14 ÂRoyalty Has Heard Her Voice,Â Salt Lake Telegram, 26 July 1937, as quoted in Raye Price, ÂUtahÂs Leading Ladies of the Arts,Â Utah Historical Quarterly 38 (Winter 1970):74.

15 Susa Young Gates, Why I Believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, n.d.), p. 3.

16 Ibid., p. 27.

17 Ibid.

* Susan Evans McCloud is the author of more than 30 books, including Sunset Across the Waters, the Mormon Girls series, and Who Goes There?. She has also written screenplays, biographies, talk tapes, and lyrics, among them the loved ÂLord, I Would Follow Thee.Â She and her husband, James, live in Provo, Utah, and have five daughters, one son, and four grandchildren. In the example of Susa Young Gates, Susan has found a sweet power that has lifted her own sights higher and warmed her paths with its light.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
