Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

21 JANATH CANNON [^1] ÂTaking the Great Plan into ConsiderationÂ Martha Hughes Cannon

1857Â1932

When Martha Hughes married Angus Munn Cannon on 6 October l884, she became the sister-in-law of his brother George Q. Cannon, my husbandÂs grandfather. In the complex family patterns of plural marriages, we can now proudly claim Martha as our ÂAunt Mattie.Â

However, Mattie, as she was familiarly known, was not real to me until the mid-1960s. That was when AngusÂs granddaughter Beatrice Cannon Evans asked me to help compile a book later published as the Cannon Family Historical Treasury. When I read MarthaÂs minibiography submitted by her only surviving child, Elizabeth McCrimmon, Mattie became my friend and an example to follow-not in her success as a pioneer physician, legislator, and suffragette, but as one who overcame frailties I share and hard circumstances I can scarcely imagine, in order to accomplish noble ends. Her story has also deepened my appreciation for my own pioneer heritage and for those who created it.

Martha was Welsh, born 1 July l857 in Llandudno to Peter and Elizabeth Evans Hughes. They and their two little girls immigrated to Utah as Mormon convert pioneers, like my own Welsh great-grandparents, John and Martha Cozzens. But the Hughes family was less fortunate than mine. PeterÂs poor health delayed them for nearly two years in New York, where a baby sister, Annie, was born. They resumed their journey, sharing a covered wagon with another family after leaving Florence, Nebraska. Annie died along the way and was buried beside the trail. Three days after the family finally reached the valley of the Great Salt Lake, Peter also died. Elizabeth was left a widow with two little girls to support. [^2]

Elizabeth Hughes was strong. She had walked beside the wagon on the journey west so her little girls and sick husband could ride. Their care must have been an added burden. What mother has not been weary at the end of a day caring for her sick family-even without walking across the plains! My great-grandmother Mary Ann Rich had also driven a covered wagon and walked beside the oxen to the Salt Lake Valley, but without the added burden. Looking back years later, she could remember: ÂWe did not grieve or mourn over it; we had some very nice times when the roads were not so bad. We would make the mountains ring with our songs, and sometimes the company would get together and we would have a dance in the evening on the grass.Â [^3]But Mary Ann had no children to worry about, and her husband, Apostle Charles C. Rich, was firmly in charge of the pioneer company. That made a big difference.

Elizabeth must have known her two little girls needed a father and she needed a husband, not only to help support them but to love them. She soon found one to marry-James Patton Paul, whose wife had died leaving him with four children of his own. James was a carpenter, and a good one; he and Elizabeth soon built a new home for the expanded family. Together they added five more sons and daughters to the six they had brought to the marriage. It was a big family to feed, and everyone needed to help. MarthaÂs daughter Elizabeth (probably named for MarthaÂs mother) described some of their activities: ÂThe family picked the native currants that grew along the creeks. They planted fruit pits and seeds they had brought with them across the plains. The children gleaned in the grain fields to feed the pigs.Â [^4]

Perhaps the necessity of working together helped to lessen the conflicts still inherent today in second-marriage families. At least Martha and her stepfather, James Paul, seem to have developed a real respect for each other. She used Paul as her last name when she was Âset apartÂ to study medicine; James offered to help pay for her schooling. After she married Angus Cannon, Martha named their first son James. I like to think she was honoring her stepfather.

These are real people to me now, deserving of recognition and respect, along with other Mormon pioneers. The tiny body of Annie Hughes is only one of the legendary 6,000 Latter-day Saints who lie buried on the plains and in the mountains between the Mississippi and the Great Salt Lake-mute evidence of the willingness to sacrifice even life itself for the right to practice their unpopular religion. Their sacrifices and their hard-won success in building a Zion Âin the tops of the mountainsÂ have been deservedly honored across the world by their fellow members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In l992 my husband and I took part in a day-long Pioneer Day celebration in Berlin that featured children who had never been to America pulling their handcart replicas around the block singing ÂCome, Come, Ye SaintsÂ-in German, of course.

The Mormon pioneers made the land fruitful with irrigation and hard work, and built their towns with broad, tree-lined streets for future generations to inherit. The American Indians and other migrants who came before and the non-Mormon immigrants and visitors who came after them-the religious groups, businessmen, miners, and others who contributed to UtahÂs culture-all deserve a place on the broad stage of UtahÂs history. But as we survey the grand diversity of that crowd, let us not lose sight of little Annie Hughes or of her parents: Peter, who died three days after successfully crossing the daunting plains, and Elizabeth, who walked that her loved ones might ride, who brought her surviving daughters safely through and then gave them a loving stepfather, and who helped her new husband build the house in the Valley that nurtured 11 children within its sturdy walls and still stood in 1978. Elizabeth Hughes Paul is also a heroine of the Restoration, along with her daughter Martha, for it was her faith in the restored Church that sustained her.

Disease and death were common at the time Martha was a child in Salt Lake City. Healing by faith was often the best resource available, and faith in divine providence the only consolation. ÂAnd should we die before our journeyÂs through,Â the Saints continued to sing, ÂHappy day! All is well!Â [^5]The usual healing arts of herbalism and midwifery were truly more art than science, but some common medical practices such as blood-letting were more dangerous. Brigham Young counseled the Saints to rely on faith and natural remedies, and to avoid doctors.

Then medicine took a quantum leap forward, as the discoveries of the French chemist Louis Pasteur, the German bacteriologist Robert Koch, and the English surgeon Joseph Lister began to be taught in the medical schools of eastern America. Some well-trained non-Mormon doctors set up practices in Utah. The astute President Young desired his peopleÂs independence in the medical field as well as in economics, and no doubt he also saw the value of the new discoveries. He changed his mind about doctors.

ÂThe time has come,Â said he in October conference of 1873, Âfor women to come forth as doctors in these valleys of the mountains.Â Eliza R. Snow, his wife and then president of the central board of the Relief Society, also called for women of Ânerve, energy, and ambition to attend medical school.Â [^6]That same year she announced at a Relief Society conference in Ogden that ÂPresident Young is requiring the sisters to get students of Medicine.Â She then gave information about classes in Âphysiology, anatomy, and other branches,Â which young women could attend in Salt Lake City to prepare themselves for further study. [^7]The sisters were the logical ones to be called, for they were the traditional caregivers to the sick. Those who took part in Relief Society health programs would be ready to answer the call.

. Sixteen-year-old Martha Hughes Paul was ready in her heart and ambitions, even without such a call. She had taught in public school at age 14 and worked as a typesetter for the Deseret News and WomanÂs Exponent for several years, saving money for her medical education. Martha knew the road would be long and hard, but she was determined to become a doctor.

The following account appears in the Journal History of theChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on the date of 13 August l878: ÂThis morning in the HistorianÂs Office the following sisters were blessed and set apart to practice medicine and surgery among the Saints: Romania Bunnell Pratt by John Taylor; Ellie Reynolds Shipp by Geo. Q. Cannon; Margaret Curtis Shipp by John Taylor; Martha Hughes Paul by Geo. Q. Cannon.Â [^8]

Martha would eventually receive her medical degree from the University of Michigan on 1 July 1880, the day she turned 23. But she was not satisfied with that. She wanted to educate others in the principles of public health, such as sanitation, clean water, disease prevention, and other challenges posed by UtahÂs rapidly growing population. To help achieve that end she went on to get a degree from the National School of Elocution and Oratory (to improve her speaking skills) and a bachelor of science degree from the department of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

What had motivated a pretty little teenager to attempt such a demanding goal, and then to pursue it with such tenacity? We know that strong impressions in early youth can affect our later lives. I have heard my grandfather Dr. Edward I. Rich describe some of his experiences growing up in 19th-century Bear Lake, Idaho-suffering a fractured leg, having an infected tooth yanked out by the local blacksmith, being kicked in the chin by a horse. The experiences were not unusual in that pioneer community, and they all helped lead him to his M.D. from Jefferson Medical College at Philadelphia in l893. He knew the need!

Martha Hughes had seen her little sister die on the trail to the Salt Lake Valley, and her father die at its end. She had witnessed the chills and fevers of the ague, the sufferings and deaths of mothers and children. All of that must have made a profound impression on young Mattie, whose grown-up letters to her husband reveal her as an idealist, sensitive to the pain of others as well as to her own. So it seems likely that her chief motive for becoming a doctor was an honest, even passionate, desire to relieve pain, to teach the prin-ciples of hygiene that would help people avoid it, and to supplement with science the healing power of God, in which she truly believed. She had been blessed by a prophet to achieve this goal.

For a short while she was able to use her professional skills inprivate practice, first in Michigan as part of her training, then in Salt Lake City on her return. Soon she was called to serve as the second resident physician at the Deseret Hospital, which had been started in l882 by the Relief Society. She served there less than four years but found a new focus for her life during that short time.

That focus was her marriage to Angus Munn Cannon, a member of the Deseret HospitalÂs board of directors and president of the Salt Lake Stake. He had been the business manager of the Deseret News at the time Mattie was working there as a typesetter.

As a prominent Church official, Angus was living the principle of plural marriage when Martha became his fourth wife on 6 October 1884 in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. No fanfare or festivities accompanied the wedding, for Angus was already targeted to be a test case for the antipolygamy forces. Three months later he was arrested and tried for Âcohabitation.Â He would still be in prison when MarthaÂs child, Elizabeth, was born 13 September 1885.

Why would a beautiful 27-year-old woman, well educated and independent in her medical profession, want to marry a 50-year-old man who already had three wives, thus making her marriage illegal? The first answer is simple-she loved him. Her letters to Angus from England during her exile there from l886 to l888 are full of endearing terms and expressions of genuine affection and trust. Just before her return to Utah, she wrote, ÂI would rather spend one hour in your society, than a whole life time with any other man I know of.Â [^9]

Angus was handsome, financially secure, and prominent in Church and civic circles. More important to Martha were his kindness and spirituality. No doubt she was particularly attracted to certain qualities described by a granddaughter: ÂIn disposition [he] was both frank and genial, . . . noted for his choice use of language and his quickness at repartee.Â [^10]

MarthaÂs reasons are more complex for accepting a plural marriage at a time when polygamy was under determined attack. Perhaps she underestimated the determination; in 1885 the Supreme Court struck down an argument that the federal Edmunds Act prohibiting polygamy was unconstitutional.

Martha firmly believed the principle of plural marriage to beboth divinely sanctioned and eugenically sound. Moreover, Âthe principleÂ offered some practical advantages. She may not have been entirely facetious in pointing out to a reporter that a plural wife had more freedom than a single one, because Âif her husband has four wives, she has three weeks of freedom every month.Â [^11]

Martha evidently had a friendly, if not close, relationship with the three older wives who preceded her. The first two, Sarah Maria and Ann Amanda Mousley, were actual sisters. They had been married to Angus by President Brigham Young in a joint ceremony on the same day, 18 July 1858.

When Angus was being tried for Âcohabitation,Â Martha successfully eluded the summons served on her at the Deseret Hospital and never had to testify. Clarissa Moses Mason, AngusÂs third wife, was not so lucky and was subjected to the ignominy of being the chief witness against her husband. AngusÂs conviction was upheld-even though by that time he was only taking meals with his families-under a new court ruling that ÂcohabitingÂ included Âproviding food and shelter on a regular basis for more than one woman.Â [^12]This decision seemed to make it illegal for a man to support even wives he had married before the passage of the Edmunds Act. The determination of the federal government to bring an end to plural marriages could no longer be mistaken. AngusÂs determination was just as firm. Rather than agree to abandon his wives and children, he paid his fine and went to prison.

Mattie had been prepared to share her husband. ÂI assure you,Â she wrote to Angus from England, Âtaking the great plan into consideration a quarter section, aye! even less, is preferable to none at all of your precious self.Â [^13]She was not ready to endure the persecution, the constant dread of discovery on the ÂundergroundÂ evading the federal marshals, or the demeaning need for secrecy about a relationship she deemed worthy of recognition by the law and by society, as well as by the Lord.

In a letter to a close non-Mormon friend she explained another reason for her desire to escape: she had delivered the children of several polygamous wives, and Âif it can be proven that these children have actually come into the world, their fathers will be sent to jail for five (5) years. . . .To me it is a serious matter to be the causeof sending to jail a father upon whom a lot of little children are dependent, whether those children were begotten by the same or by different mothers-the fact remains they all have little mouths that must be fed.Â [^14]

What to do? Stay home and chance the game of hide-and-seek she abhored? Flee to Canada or Mexico, as some of the Saints were doing? MarthaÂs solution was to go to England, where relatives would take her in, along with seven-month-old baby Elizabeth. Angus consented sadly, realizing her need. He would continue to send her money and support her emotionally with letters assuring her of his love-to which she responded according to her volatile moods.

MattieÂs letters reveal what she calls her ÂmercurialÂ temperament in full spate. Reading them is like showering under a high waterfall. She pours out her emotion-laden thoughts in forceful language, often replete with exclamation points and underlinings. A letter to Angus written from her hiding place just before she left Salt Lake is typical. First she inquires about his health, as she often does with real concern. Then she bursts forth: ÂO dear oh dear!!! If we ever live through this present strait I trust we will be Âwiser and better menÂ and women. I grow heartily sick & disgusted with it. Polygamy in these days reminds me of Bishop HunterÂs polygamy in the days of Nauvoo. He remarked, ÂPolygamy in the days of Nauvoo-law, law, law!! DonÂt talk about it. Law! law! law! DonÂt talk about it.Â Â [^15]

Presiding Bishop Edward Hunter had suffered the more drastic persecution of suspected polygamists in Nauvoo, and he was noted for his short, often enigmatic exclamations. Mattie relishes quoting his remark, which seems to reflect her own feelings about the antipolygamy laws and the need for secrecy that have caused her approaching exile. Next she becomes abruptly practical, asking Angus to get her horse ready for use, as she has Âa little running aroundÂ to do before she leaves-Angus had supplied her with her own horse and carriage for her medical practice.

She closes with ÂBest love, MarthaÂ-probably the last time she will sign her own name to her Âletters from exileÂ or address her husband as ÂAngus.Â From then on, as she tries to maintainanonymity, she will usually sign ÂMariaÂ or ÂMÂ and address her husband by a variety of pet names such as ÂDear Old Duck,Â ÂMy Dear Lover,Â ÂOld Chick,Â ÂOld Boy,Â but most often ÂMy Own Loved OneÂ or simply ÂDearest.Â Only once does she break the rule, with ÂMy Dear Husband,Â and then continues in her impetuous style: ÂThere! now . . . that is a very ÂuncautiousÂ heading for these perilous times, but then the thing was running through my mind, and down it came on paper, and as it looks rather nice to me, and will probably sound rather nice to you-I risk the business.Â [^16]

Angus, in his steady, consistent way, usually addresses her as ÂMy Own Dear MarthaÂ and signs himself ÂA. Munn,Â ÂA,Â or not at all. His letters are full of love and solicitude for her and Lizzie, with offers of help and no complaints. He seems to accept MarthaÂs teasing with good humor and to sympathize with her moods. (In this he reminds me of Âmy dear husband,Â his great-nephew.) Martha refers to his ÂbuoyantÂ spirit and Âlightheartedness,Â as well as to Âyour own dear pleasant self.Â No wonder she missed him!Â

Fortunately Angus saved all her letters but one, although she often asked him to burn a certain one or Âall my letters.Â The one he burned at her insistence was written toward the end of her exile. In it she evidently accused him in frantic terms of never having loved her, and this hurt him deeply. His reply took all the blame on himself, expressed his true, ardent love, and so moved her that she wrote back: ÂOh Papa, Papa- . . . I feel like crying myself sick to think what a wicked girl I have been to hurt your feelings as I have. I did not know what mean things I had written until I read your quotations from my letter. I was half beside myself when I wrote, sobbing & hysterical, and did not know half what I said-but this is a paltry excuse for so grave an error. The only thing I can do now is to humbly ask forgiveness and pray to our Heavenly Father that my petition will be granted. . . . I shall be the happiest woman in the world, if I am permitted to meet you and hear from your own lips I am forgiven.Â [^17]

It is good to know that as proof of his love Angus traveled to New York to meet his Âown dear MarthaÂ when she returned from England. He spent several days with her and their child before returning to Utah.

Reading MarthaÂs letters has given me new insight into the power of steadfast faith and endurance. Her writing, so often poured out impetuously under stress, has also confirmed a lesson I learned long ago: candor may be good, but kindness is better. Before I graduated from college I asked a dear cousin and confidante to return any of my girlish letters she had saved. She did, and I found that many of them held complaints or unkind comments. I have never been sorry that I burned them.

Moreover, I have found a theory of the philosopher William James to be true: expressing an emotion may increase it. ÂA baby doesnÂt cry only because itÂs uncomfortable,Â he said, as I recall. ÂItÂs uncomfortable because itÂs crying.Â Mattie was certainly uncomfortable long after the end of the distress that prompted the damaging letter. IÂm glad Angus burned it. Perhaps another lesson might be: if you think your letter should be burned, do it yourself before you send it.

Martha had some positive experiences during her European exile. She enjoyed trips to France and Switzerland, where she indulged in sightseeing and also visited hospitals and acquired textbooks to be used in the nursing school she helped establish after her return to Utah. In Switzerland she sought her genealogy.

According to her daughter Elizabeth McCrimmon (the sickly ÂbabeÂ of MarthaÂs letters), Mattie assisted in the British Mission headquarters under Daniel H. Wells. Her babyÂs frequent illnesses were helped by the faith and administrations of the missionary elders and other Latter-day Saints. In her letters to Angus, Martha details the success of their help with fervent testimony. She was not alone, though often lonely. Yet she did not wish to stay.

So what were the ingredients of MarthaÂs bitter cup of exile? The main factor was illness, both hers and her babyÂs. ÂWhen one is dragged down with a bodily ailment,Â she writes, Âthe shadows of life hang more heavily about them.Â [^18]When her headaches and postpartum uterine problems are in abeyance, when Lizzie is not suffering from her frequent colds and fevers, teething, or the aftermath of her near-fatal accidental poisoning, Martha expresses heartfelt joy and gratitude. When illness strikes, depression flows into her letters.

A second disappointment was the continuing need for secrecy,from which she had not escaped. Her efforts to conceal her identity became burdensome, with frequent changes of address and frustrating contacts with certain other Utah Âundergrounders.Â With a dash of jealousy over AngusÂs younger (by a mere six months!) wife, Maria Bennion, the bitter cup is full. Mattie could not drink it alone, so she shared it with Angus.

Hope for better medical help was one important reason for MarthaÂs decision to return home. They left in December of 1888. After seeing Angus in New York, she went to Michigan, where she had received her medical training, rather than to Salt Lake City. There she stayed for six months, enduring an unusually cold winter and LizzieÂs chicken pox, scarlet fever, and pneumonia, with dental work but no corrective surgery for herself. But by spring she was feeling more cheerful and Lizzie was responding to treatment for her bladder inflammation. Mattie was in no hurry to go on west; she was beginning to be aware of the increasing tension there and decided to wait until mid-May. She explains to Angus: ÂWhen I left Utah two years ago, it was with the full determination to relieve you of all apprehension on my account-and I have not changed on that point. . . . I might come home now and keep under cover, but another determination on my part would prevent that. That was to breathe the Rocky Mountain air freely or not at all.Â [^19]

Meanwhile Angus was in the midst of the increasingly vindictive crusade against polygamy and the fight against the political influence of the Church. The Edmunds Act of 1882 had been supplemented by the more punitive Tucker Amendment, which was being contested in the courts. Some of AngusÂs property might have been in danger of being confiscated.

Yet he wanted Mattie home and supplied her with her own horse and buggy again when she arrived. He could not give her the home of her own for which she longed, however. She stayed with her mother and stepfather while she set up a school for nurses and began her private practice again.

On 19 May 1890 the United States Supreme Court upheld the seizure of Church property under the Edmunds-Tucker Act. On that same day a son was born to Martha and Angus. James Hughes Cannon was a symbol of the ongoing vitality of their faith.

Soon after that, Martha took her children into exile again, this time to San Francisco. She could not be present in the Salt Lake Tabernacle at the October conference of 1890 to hear the historic announcement of the Manifesto or to raise her hand with that great congregation to sustain it. No doubt she would have done so, even if it put her own situation as a fourth wife in jeopardy, for she had faith in the principle of revelation to a modern prophet. Perhaps hoping the persecution of plural marriage would have subsided, she returned to Salt Lake after two years and resumed her medical practice.

The Manifesto closed the door to future plural marriages, but the status of those already in place was cloudy. Most husbands and fathers of polygamous families, including Angus Cannon, were unwilling to disown them. Some took the route to exile in Canada or Mexico; others decided to possess their souls in patience and maintain contacts with their plural families as much as possible. The fact that a third child, Gwendolyn, was born to Angus and Mattie in 1899 shows that he chose the latter route.

The door was now open to a successful petition for statehood. After much jockeying to realign political parties, that was accomplished in 1896, nearly 50 years after Brigham Young had begun the attempt. The new state constitution included a restoration of Utah womenÂs right to vote. For Martha Cannon that breakthrough also opened up a whole wide field of achievement in the area of her greatest professional concern-public health education and legal enabling acts.

Martha achieved fame-or perhaps notoriety-both in her time and ours by an event that has been popularly misinterpreted. In the first election for the new Utah state legislature, Martha was one of five Democratic candidates for senator. Angus was one of five Republican hopefuls on the open ballot. Theoretically both Angus and Martha could have won senate seats or both lost. As it happened, the top five vote-getters were elected in a Democratic sweep, and Martha was one of them. Angus and his fellow Republicans all lost. Of course Martha became known as Âthe woman who beat her husbandÂ in that first election. But as she later explained to an English visitor, she should rather be viewed as running against Emmeline B. Wells, the only other woman - and a Republican. [^20]

Her husband had wished her well on the eve of the election, Martha said, and was not the least jealous of her success. [^21]Judging by his loving, good-humored responses to her unhappy letters, Angus might well have been glad that she now had an outlet for her ambitions, one that could bring her the recognition he honestly felt she deserved. Toward the end of her exile in England she had written that her life was Âa failure.Â [^22]She was about to prove it was not.

Martha had no intention of being just a token woman. She began briskly by introducing three significant bills. The first was ÂAn Act providing for the Compulsory Education of Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Children.Â That one has a unique meaning for me: in 1941 my father was superintendent of the State School for the Deaf and Blind in Ogden (dumb had long since been dropped). My husband and I had our wedding reception in the superintendentÂs home, located on the spacious grounds of that school. I wish I had known about Martha then.

The second bill was even more far-reaching: ÂAn Act Creating a State Board of Health and Defining its Duties.Â MarthaÂs interest in public health and sanitation was not only related to her medical profession; it was the main reason she had entered politics. Indeed, it was the main reason she had determined as a young girl to become a doctor. Governor Wells appointed her to the new seven-member Board of Health, and her continuing concern for children was shown in two measures she introduced: a law prohibiting school attendance of children with contagious diseases, and rules for the inspection of school buildings.

The third was ÂAn Act to Protect the Health of Women and Girl Employees,Â which required employers to provide seats for women when they were not working. This bill may seem irrelevant today in the equal opportunity workplace, but Martha had experienced the relationship between fatigue and Âfemale problems.Â Who can doubt that the women who used the seats appreciated her concern! Other bills that she introduced or supported testify to her ability to represent both the women and the men of Utah. She also gave Utah the distinction of being first in the nation to elect a woman state senator.

Her Utah political career ended with the birth of her youngest child in 1899, but her goals reached beyond that state. Before,during, and after her four years in the Utah senate she traveled and spoke for causes in which she believed, particularly womenÂs right to vote in the whole nation.

Her oratorical skills became well known. The Salt Lake Tribune described one of her speeches enthusiastically: ÂSenator Cannon prefaced her vote with an address so eloquent that despite parliamentary decorum and the rigid rules against demonstrations she was cheered and cheered again at its conclusion.Â [^23]Apparently the same dramatic expression that makes her private letters to Angus so overwhelming was put to effective use in the political arena.

Even during her hectic years this vibrant woman nourished her roots in the Salt Lake City 10th Ward, where she served for eight years as secretary of the Young WomenÂs Retrenchment Association and taught a Gospel Doctrine class. She shared her testimony of the restored gospel with others at home and abroad. Such ways of serving others are available to all of us and can be as healing as a doctorÂs skills.

After her retirement from public life Martha enjoyed living in Los Angeles, California, with her inventor son, James, and also in West Salt Lake Valley with her daughter Elizabeth and son-in-law on their ranch. Her other daughter, Gwendolyn, died in l928. Angus died 7 June 1915, 17 years before Martha.

According to Elizabeth, her mother spent the last five years of her life in her own home at last, in Los Angeles. She freely gave her services as a volunteer in the orthopedic department of the Graves Clinic, an adjunct to the University of California. Martha died at age 75 on 10 July 1932.

We can be grateful that the sickly babe Lizzie, whom Martha nursed through countless illnesses during their exile abroad, lived to care for her mother and become her loving biographer. Like her Welsh grandmother Elizabeth Evans, Elizabeth Cannon Porter McCrimmon has brought Martha to life, that we might know her. Would not every mother of a difficult child hope for such a reward!

MarthaÂs life means different things to different people. To some she is the envied model of the independent woman, to others a great lady to admire but impossible to emulate. (No one these days can be the first woman state senator in the United States!) To me sherepresents the ability to triumph over weaknesses. To me she says: Our Heavenly Father did not send us here to fail, but to learn. We can learn from our mistakes-learn not to repeat them. We can learn from our weaknesses by strengthening them with good deeds. We can turn our uncontrolled emotional waterfalls into channels of living water to irrigate a thirsty land. Mattie did that. We can too. With her we can say, ÂI know that this is His work and that what we are passing through is for our benefit.Â [^24]

In Salt Lake City on the corner of South Temple and what is now Second West, a simple stone monument honors Martha Hughes Cannon. According to the bronze plaque, her home and office were located nearby. This tribute was erected in 1970 by medical and public health groups who wanted MarthaÂs life remembered. More than a quarter century later she would be remembered as one of the pioneer women doctors honored by a Presidential Endowed Chair in Radiology at the University of Utah School of Medicine, with Dr. Ann Osborn Poelman as the first occupant. In the historic City and County Building, a conference room where MarthaÂs portrait hangs was dedicated to her memory.

On 24 July 1996, following the traditional Pioneer Day parade, the rotunda of the Utah State Capitol gradually filled with relatives and friends, dignitaries and well-wishers. On the wide stairs leading up to the balcony stood the International ChildrenÂs Choir. In one of the four tall niches a full-length statue waited to be unveiled and dedicated. The childrenÂs choir sang. The dignitaries spoke. The bronze statue was unveiled-Dr. Martha Hughes Cannon, first woman state senator in the United States, standing erect, looking confidently to the future.

President Thomas S. Monson, First Counselor in the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was one of the speakers. In his dedicatory talk he praised Martha for her worthy goals and pointed out that although she experienced some disappointments and unfulfilled dreams, she never lost her eternal perspective; she endured to the end. With a little smile, he added that he wished she could have been in the parade that morning, leading the way. The thought came to some of the listeners: Perhaps she was!

Notes

1 See Jean Bickmore White, ÂMartha H. Cannon,Â in Vicky Burgess-Olson, ed., Sister Saints (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978), p. 386.

2 Mary Ann Rich, ÂAutobiography of Mary Ann Phelps RichÂ (Logan, Utah: n.p., 1951), p. 20.

3 Elizabeth C. McCrimmon, unpublished manuscript, Utah State Historical Society Library, as quoted in White, ÂMartha H. Cannon,Â p. 387.

4 William Clayton, ÂCome, Come, Ye Saints,Â in Hymns, no. 30.

5 Church News, 31 March 1996, p. 7.

6 Jill Mulvay Derr, Janath Russell Cannon, and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Women of Covenant: The Story of Relief Society (Salt Lake City:Deseret Book Co., 1992), p. 106.

7 Journal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 13 August 1878, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.

8 Martha Hughes Cannon, letter to Angus Munn Cannon, 3 February 1888, in Constance L. Lieber and John Sillito, eds., Letters from Exile: The Correspondence of Martha Hughes Cannon and Angus Munn Cannon, 1886Â1888 (Salt Lake City: Signature Books in association with Smith Research Associates, 1989), p. 255.

9 Beatrice Cannon Evans, ÂAngus Munn Cannon,Â in Janath R. Cannon, Cannon Family Historical Treasury, 2d ed. (n.p.: 1995), p. 215.

10 White, ÂMartha H. Cannon,Â p. 391.

11 James B. Allen and Glen Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992), p. 405.

12 Lieber and Sillito, Letters, p. 11.

13 Ibid., p. xv.

14 Ibid., p. 3.

15 Ibid., p. 8.

16 Ibid., p. 238.

17 Ibid., p. 202.

18 Ibid., p. 269.

19 See Beatrice Webb, Beatrice WebbÂs American Diary, ed. David A. Shannon (Madison, Wisc.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1963), p. 132.

20 See ibid.

21 ieber and Sillito, Letters, p. 213.

22 Salt Lake Tribune, 2 February 1897, as quoted in White, ÂMartha H. Cannon,Â p. 389.

23 Lieber and Sillito, Letters, p. 65.

* Janath Cannon, a graduate of Wellesley College in Massachusetts, served as first counselor to Barbara B. Smith in the Relief Society general presidency. She and her husband, Edwin Q. Cannon, presided over the Switzerland Mission, Nauvoo Visitors Center, Germany Hamburg Mission, and the Frankfurt Temple, and, together with the Rendell Mabeys, were the first official Church representatives in West Africa. They have six children and 25 grandchildren. In researching Martha Hughes Cannon, Janath has come to think of her as a valued friend whom she hopes to meet in the life to come.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
[^2] 2 Orson F. Whitney, ÂBlessings in Disguise,Â Relief Society Magazine, November 1924, p. 547.
[^3] 3 Ibid.
[^4] 4 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^5] 5 Ibid., p. 3.
[^6] 6 Whitney, ÂBlessings,Â p. 549.
[^7] 7 Ibid., pp. 549, 550.
[^8] 8 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 4.
[^9] 9 James E. Faust, ÂThe RefinerÂs Fire,Â Ensign, May 1979, p. 53.
[^10] 10 Eyring, ÂFaith,Â p. 3.
[^11] 11 Smith, History, p. 313.
[^12] 12 Ibid., p. 36.
[^13] 13 Ibid., p. 161.
[^14] 14 Ibid., pp. 215-17.
[^15] 15 Ibid., pp. 195-205.
[^16] 16 George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986), pp. 264-65.
[^17] 17 Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 39.
[^18] 18 See Lucy Mack Smith, History, p. 208.
[^19] 19 Ibid., pp. 273, 289-91.
[^20] 20 Ibid., pp. 323-24.
[^21] 21 Ibid., pp. 324-25.
[^22] 22 Eliza Partridge, in Emily D. P. Young, ÂIncidents of the Early Life of Emily Partridge,Â as quoted in Newell and Avery, Mormon Enigma, p. 309.
[^23] 23 Ibid., p. 40.
[^24] 24 Ibid., p. 42.
