Blythe Darlyn Thatcher, Barbara B. Smith, Heroines of the Restoration ( 1997)

22 MAUREEN URSENBACH BEECHER [^1] ÂThe Place for Us to GoÂ Mildred Cluff Harvey

1866Â1949

I was only 12 but I felt like a giant, towering over the small woman swaddled in white flannel blankets on the gurney that the ambulance men had deposited on the sidewalk in front of our house.

ÂHello, Grandma,Â I ventured. The eyes in the wrinkled face looked at me, beyond me, seeming to see nothing. During the following two years that Grandma lived with us she never spoke to me or gave sign that she knew me. I met Mildred Cluff Harvey too early in my life, too late in hers, ever to know her as she was for most of her life. It remained for me years later to piece together her story, to learn its lessons and appreciate her greatness. For greatness, said Eliza Roxcy Snow, is simply usefulness. And Millie Harvey was useful.

Millie CluffÂs first memory, she had said, was of walking down a path through tall grasses, carrying a bucket of brown sugar to the thatch-roofed house where she lived. She was the daughter of Benjamin and Mary Ellen Foster Cluff, Latter-day Saint missionaries who ran the ChurchÂs sugar operations in Laie, Hawaii. Both Millie and her sister Ella were born there, in 1866and 1869 respectively, the CluffsÂ fourth and fifth children. Millie was five before she ever saw more white people than the other missionary families on the island. Her strongest memory after the family returned stateside was of Âstanding at the fence and looking through just to see all the Âwhite mothersÂ pass.Â

One of those Âwhite mothersÂ was Aunt Eliza, MillieÂs fatherÂs other wife, whom they rejoined in Logan, Utah, on their return. Even with husband and both wives working-he at carpentry and farming, they at spinning and weaving and keeping boarders-there was not enough to sustain both families at home in Logan. So, leaving Aunt Eliza there, Benjamin and Mary Ellen moved to less-populated Coalville, where there was more land, more opportunity. There, two more boys were added to the family. When Benjamin, the second child, was ready for higher schooling, Mary Ellen, leaving Benjamin Sr. on the farm, moved her brood into her parentsÂ house in Provo and began for the family a long association with Brigham Young Academy, then a combined elementary and secondary school. Young Benjamin was later to preside over that academy when it made its official transition to Brigham Young University.

Even after the rest of the family had returned to Wasatch County, settling now in Center Creek, near Heber, Millie stayed on in Provo with ÂBennieÂ as her guide and mentor. ÂRight nobly did he care for me,Â she remembered.

Meanwhile Mary Jane, the oldest daughter, who had been teaching school in Hoytsville, had married, and at termÂs end Millie returned to the mountain valley to care for her at the birth of her baby. MillieÂs work extended from house to classroom, and by age 15 she was assistant schoolteacher, then teacher. Alternating between Provo to learn and Center Creek to teach, Millie filled her teen years happily, as she remembered them. Across the street from ÂAunt MargaretÂs,Â where Millie boarded for part of her time at school, Âsix girls were living and keeping house for themselves, and what good times we did have.Â

Meanwhile young Richard Harvey, son of one of the ecclesiastical leaders of the community, determined that Âit was about time to make some arrangements for the future,Â as he later wrote, andtherefore ÂI started my first courtship, with the BishopÂs daughter.Â Richard and Millie were married in the Logan temple 15 December 1886 and moved into the four-room frame house Richard had built, Âone of the best in the county,Â he later boasted.

A hundred years later my mother and I visited that little house, in which she had been born in 1900. Imagining away the lean-tos and shacks since added, I saw newly married Millie in 1886, arriving by train in Coalville, met by RichardÂs brother Will in a buggy on a disagreeable December day. ÂI thought I had married a king, a man among men,Â Millie wrote 30 years later. ÂAnd I have not changed.Â The Harveys felt the same enthusiasm about Millie. She recalled that WillÂs response to her apology for inconveniencing him was, ÂGee, IÂd go farther than this for a sister!Â

That was the model I grew up with: The young couple, stars in their eyes and hard work in their bones, riding off into the sunset of bright promise. The young woman, as well prepared for a profession of community usefulness as she was for domestic life. Serious about her ecclesiastical duties but aware of her social responsibilities. Fun-loving-they spent their first New YearÂs on an outing to Coalville with two other young couples-yet home-loving.

Would I have exchanged my life for GrandmaÂs? I wondered, looking those many years later at the sad little house and the weed- bestrewn yard. Many of her values I certainly shared-home, family, a life of productive effort: Even after her first children were born she continued teaching and attending school. Music was important to her mental and emotional well-being. The library she accumulated and passed on bespeaks her love of reading. Like me a bishopÂs daughter, she was at home in the Mormon community. As I have done, she loved parents and siblings, loved babies. More than I might have done, she supported Richard in filling a mission, leaving her behind with three children under four years old.

I found in GrandmaÂs recollections one of my favorite stories told me by my mother:

One time in particular, Richard had written asking me to send him five dollars. At that time (it was winter) Howard was just out of shoes, and not one cent in sight. I did not know what todo except to ask God to open a way for me to get it. An evening or two after, my brother Foster came to spend the evening with me-he came so often and was such a comfort to me. Our evenings were spent singing, I at the organ. This evening he was looking for a particular piece of music, and in doing so emptied the place at the organ which held the music. The last time he put his hand in, when he pulled it out he said, ÂIs this where you keep your money?Â and in his hand he held $6.25-just enough for five dollars for Richard and $1.25 for HowardÂs shoes. We were awed at it, and knew the time of miracles was not passed.

On RichardÂs return the little family of three children grew by two more, and with MillieÂs teaching and RichardÂs farming the family prospered. Two sorrows marred their contentment, however: the deaths a year apart of MillieÂs most-loved sister Mary and of Howard, their firstborn son. Barely eight years old, Howard had been trusted to ride his pony to bring in the cows at night. Stopping by his auntÂs on the way, he promised to deliver her parcel to his mother, and tied it to the ponyÂs halter rope and the rope to his leg to keep the parcel safe. The pony shied, throwing Howard off. But the rope held fast, and Howard was dragged homeward, his neck broken. ÂIt was almost more than we could bear,Â Millie remembered 40 years and a thousand miles later.

Richard was becoming restless in the ever more populated valley with its limited potential for expansion for him or his children. ÂI decided to move someplace,Â Richard remembered. In February 1900 Lucile, the sixth child, was born. A couple of weeks later Richard, on his way home with a load of ice, picked up a pamphlet promoting settlement in Alberta, Canada. Thirteen years earlier Charles Ora Card had led a group of Utah polygamists fleeing prosecution to settle what was by 1900 a thriving group of Mormon towns just north of the Canada-USA border, and he and others were promoting the establishment of permanent communities there. ÂWhen I got home,Â Richard remembered, ÂI told Millie I had found the place for us to go.Â By April the couple had sold their farm and most of the cattle and were on their way north.

Richard went on ahead with the farm machinery and household goods, leaving Millie to follow three days later with the children, Elma Vere, age 12, John, nine, Foster, five, Mildred, three, and the baby, Lucile, just two months old. Leaving the lush beauty of Heber Valley must have been difficult for Millie. Did she share RichardÂs dynastic ambition? Or was she the Âreluctant pioneerÂ historians see in many women following their husbands into the unknown? Did she feel the pull of father and mother in Provo or of two adjacent graves in Heber Cemetery? What fears did she have of taking her children so far from the Academy to a land where, so far as she knew, there was no opportunity for education? Putting myself in her place, I like to think she felt with Richard the call of a new land, the adventure of the unknown. Even so, when I later would have the opportunity to teach school on Lake Athabasca in what was then a similar frontier, I would decline in favor of further education in a known environment. I cannot know what fears Millie Harvey overcame in order to follow her husbandÂs dream, but I admire enormously her love and her courage.

Millie and the children met Richard and his hand, Mormon Hort, at Great Falls. The men had already loaded the cattle and equipment on the northbound train, and since there was no passenger service that day the family accepted gratefully the trainmenÂs generosity and rode the rest of the journey in the caboose, bedding the children in the menÂs cots.

It was dark night and a storm was blowing when the train arrived at Stirling, the closest station to the Mormon settlements. Unloading the cattle, Richard and Mormon Hort would have to ride herd all night to ensure that they did not stray in the storm. A kindly stationmaster housed Millie and the children in the station house until morning.

The rising sun showed the southern Alberta prairie at its most splendid. To Richard, it revealed endless miles of greening grasses Âand nothing to feed but my cattle. I thought this was paradise indeed.Â His account of going inside the station house and finding Millie Âsafe and even cheerfulÂ says volumes to me, however. He must have known her doubts, her fears, her lack of confidence, to have been surprised at her smiles. But knowing my mother, andthrough her, her mother, I wonder at her control of the terror hidden beneath the surface of the smile.

The Canadian prairie is a magnificent experience. I fly often to Calgary and am no sooner on the road than I feel my eyes taking in the full 360 degrees of linear horizon. My smile broadens and my heart swells. I am home. I am back where nothing interferes with my thoughts, where my mind can expand to the very curve of the earth, where my soul partakes of eternityÂs expanse. But I was born there, was reared with the endless possibilities such landscape represents. Millie Harvey was a child of the mountains, nurtured and protected, at least from her fifth year, by friendly hills that walled in verdant valleys. Her mountains were bulwark against the malevolent forces attempting to eradicate Mormonism and its practices; my prairies invited me to expand my Mormonness into the world from which her people had fled. Two generations made such a difference-how can I judge? In any case, I do recognize that where for me the Utah mountains were initially constraining and oppressive, for Millie the Alberta prairies must have left her feeling unprotected and vulnerable.

Leaving Stirling for Mountain View, where Richard had purchased farm and house, the family created quite an entourage: Richard first, driving four horses hitched to a big double bed wagon loaded with machinery and furniture; then Millie, baby in arms, driving the covered wagon with boxes and bedding, the food, and two more children. Fastened on the back was a crate filled with clucking chickens, and following that a one-horse buggy in which Elma and John cared for two newborn calves. Trailing behind was Mormon Hort driving the cattle.

But it is the return journey a few discouraging months later that wrenches my sympathies. With faith in Apostle Amasa LymanÂs recommendation, the little company was retracing its path toward Stirling, where they would take up new land on Etzicom Coulee. Not even the frame of a house would meet them there, and they would have to share the building of a home with the cutting of hay and the construction of shelter for the winterÂs care for the cattle. On the way, Richard, driving cattle this time, turned so suddenly that his saddle slipped under the horse and threw him to the ground. For aterrifying minute he felt himself dragged, until his foot eased itself from the stirrup. The horse trotted off to join the teams, leaving Richard herding cattle afoot. I can barely imagine MillieÂs anguish at the approach of the riderless horse; the haunting specter of another horse another time returning with its saddle empty. With what desperation did she run up the rise searching for Richard, and with what relief did she spot him walking toward her?

Arriving at what became know as Mammoth, the Harveys established themselves on the south slope of the coulee, one of those wrinkles on the prairie through which the spring runoff finds its way to the nearest river. For Millie and Richard there was little distinction between manÂs work and womanÂs work. Together they built the first house. An extant photograph shows the walls of uneven boards, the rickety porch, the rough shingles-the work of partners in the enterprise of survival. In front are the children, including Lucile, now about four years old, on her head the ubiquitous sunbonnet-always red, she used to tell me, so her mother could spot her where she played in the high coulee grasses, while Millie herself was plucking wild mustard from among the wheat.

The HarveysÂ nearest neighbors were the Keslers, a mile and a half to the east along the coulee. They, too, were LDS, but most of the rest of the settlers were not. But they shared the camaraderie of the coulee-the four bachelor farmers, the homesteading families, the schoolteacher Mr. Fitch, hired by the Harveys when the government proved too slow to provide a teacher. But with it all there must have been a loneliness for Millie, unacknowledged cabin fever, relieved by weekly Sunday School at the KeslersÂ and occasional Saturdays in nearby Raymond. Pregnancies carried the promise that after Hannah Russell, the midwife from Stirling, had delivered the baby, Mrs. Kesler would ride over daily to care for mother and child. Millie could return the service for her friend at her confinement. But the hunger for adult conversation must have been overwhelming, especially when Richard exchanged his cattle for sheep and supervised the older boys for weeks at a time on the distant ranges.

I have always known that Grandma Harvey was often Âsick.Â A family story reveals how often Elma, the oldest daughter, was required to be surrogate mother: Lucile, complaining about having tobottle-feed motherless newborn lambs, asked innocently, ÂWhy canÂt their mothers feed them?Â ÂTheir mothers are dead.Â ÂThen why canÂt their Elmas feed them?Â The necessity for an Elma in the Harvey family came to me with a shock of recognition when I discovered a brief diary Millie had kept during a trip to Vancouver with Richard. By her description, her Âsick headacheÂ was a classic migraine. Pressing my mother, I realized that that malady often accompanied periods of depression which I have learned to recognize in my own life and in the lives of some friends. There is relief for us in a time when there are medications to relieve biochemical maladjustment. For Millie, there was only herself, the ever demanding work, and Elma, when she was home. No wonder, as my mother told me once, Grandma Millie used to take long walks over the prairie trails.

For all that, Millie was productive. She guaranteed her children secure, stimulating childhoods. The organ she insisted Richard bring with the necessities from Utah brought music into the family. And when one of the itinerant sheep shearers had a talent, the family would hear evening recitations of ÂCurfew Shall Not Ring TonightÂ or ÂThe Highwayman.Â There were Valentine parties, for the children one day, the adults the next. And birthdays and Christmas and conferences-highlights of the year, religiously observed.

Richard bred his sheep wisely to suit the Alberta climate, and eventually became quite rich. The new house-he would surely have described it as the best in the coulee-contained all the amenities he could provide: running water, ingeniously pumped into a cistern uphill and released under its own pressure into taps in the house; a huge oak dining-room table, around which the children, under MillieÂs direction, would study; and, after one particularly successful trip east, a piano. I had wondered how my mother, with her remote upbringing in the days before phonographs, ever developed the taste for opera with which she plagued us children every Saturday afternoon. As I learn about Millie, I am no longer surprised. And it takes little imagination to recognize the source of my motherÂs love of literature-I had to take university graduate work to be able to meet her knowledge, poet for poet.

For all that, Millie never, I think, found peace in the Alberta prairie, though I doubt that she complained. She was proud, andher image of herself as the proper and perfect wife and mother was demanding. Often repeated in our family is a retort she once made to my mother. As they climbed a hill together, Lucile wondered at her motherÂs lack of breathlessness. ÂI do not permit myself to pant,Â explained Millie. I wonder what other natural and needful urges she likewise suppressed. The retort does set in context her confession to her children that Âif your father ever indicated a desire to live in Utah I should be most happy to go.Â What years of loneliness lie buried in that understatement?

It must have been to please Millie as much as to provide opportunity for their children that Richard eventually bought a house in Lethbridge, the nearest city. There Millie thrived. Her involvement in the Relief Society is evidenced by two artifacts I have: a recipe book, 136 pages printed and nicely bound, published under her direction about 1920; and a quilt, embroidered and pieced for her by the board who worked under her presidency in the Lethbridge Stake Relief Society. Logistically the work must have been overwhelming: The stake covered a radius from Lethbridge of 130 miles. Visits were generally overnight, and often AlbertaÂs long winters and changeable weather would force the women to drive on treacherous roads. For 14 years Millie served in that capacity.

And yet, one of her daughterÂs most traumatic memories is of the morning in 1917 when she was preparing to leave for school, where she would take province-wide examinations. Coming downstairs, she discovered her mother in total emotional disarray, her mind wandering beyond recognition. Richard was out on the range, so Lucile called her sister Mildred to come home from the Galt Hospital, where she was in nurseÂs training, to care for their mother and the younger boys. Distraught, Lucile went off to take her exams. Bright though she was, she failed enough exams that she never returned to matriculate. MillieÂs ÂbreakdownÂ passed, and life again resumed its normal activity.

Normal, that is, until RichardÂs sheep empire crumbled. His 45,000 head flock was ready for market as the market fell so low that he sold at a loss. Bank foreclosures cost him and his partner-sons their assets. The boys, now married men, left sheep ranching for salaried jobs, and Richard and Millie finally took their smallremaining herd and moved to the Okanagan Valley in British Columbia. It was from there that my mother brought them back to live with us when they could no longer care for themselves.

And so I wonder. This volume is about heroines. Is Millie Harvey a heroine to anyone else besides me? How does the ordinariness of her life translate into heroic stature? I believe it is through her usefulness, as I noted at the outset, to family, church, and community. And her fortitude, another of Eliza SnowÂs values. Her persistence through the often tedious dailiness of womanÂs domestic duties. Her endurance to carry on through the maladies that beset her. Her faith, and faithfulness. Her leadership, and followership. Her thirst for learning, and the determination to find means to slake that thirst in herself and create it in her children. Her generosity and sense of social responsibility manifested to the neighbors on the coulee and the strangers who passed by her door.

I watched Millie and Richard those last years of their lives. Once Grandma realized that her sentences made no sense, she ceased to speak. She could no longer walk without my motherÂs strong arms under her arms, MotherÂs feet urging first one foot, then the other to shuffle forward. She epitomized ShakespeareÂs last stage, ÂSans teeth, sans hair, sans eyes, sans everything.Â But not quite. In my aged grandmotherÂs eyes I read her devotion to my mother, now her caretaker, and to her Richard. He was determined to outlive her, and after her death his loneliness was absolute. ÂTo me he has ever been the lover, as he was when we were married,Â wrote my grandmother. Perhaps that is what I admire most: that after a lifetime together, because of or despite intimate knowledge of each otherÂs virtues and faults, each received the otherÂs unstinting adoration.

In this context of women of high achievement, of heroic dimension, I find none more praiseworthy than my grandmother, who did with generosity, good will, and stern self-discipline what was hers to do. I could ask for no finer model, no more splendid heroine than Mildred Cluff Harvey. For all her mere five feet height, she was to me a giant.

Note on Sources:

In a mimeographed volume under the title Four Leaves from History, Lucile Harvey Ursenbach has compiled what few life writings remain of Richard Coope and Mildred Cluff Harvey. To their own dictations she has added photographs and biographical notes from her own knowledge and from letters and other family sources, which fill in some of the gaps. From this volume I have drawn heavily. Other sources include the autobiography of Lucile Harvey Ursenbach, typewritten and duplicated; oral histories of her sister Mildred Harvey Davies and her brother Robert Harvey, transcribed from interviews conducted by Charles Ursenbach; and the autobiography of Charles Ursenbach himself. Two small extant diaries-one of Mildred Cluff Harvey, beginning in 1910 and petering out into a notebook, and one of Lucile Harvey, also beginning in 1910 and diminishing in 1912-gave intimate insight into life on the coulee.

Two additional works have been useful: How Beautiful Upon the Mountains: A Centennial History of Wasatch County, compiled and edited by William James Mortimer (Wasatch County Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1963), and Cook Book, compiled and edited by Lethbridge Stake Relief Society (Lethbridge, Alberta: n.p., n.d.). All are in the authorÂs possession.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Henry B. Eyring, ÂFaith of Our Fathers,Â Church Educational System Campus Education Week Devotional, 20 August 1996 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1996), p. 1.
