1: INTRODUCTORY PAGES OF THE BOOK

OF MORMON

Interesting Points about the Text, Structure, and Messages of

the Title Page

Welcome to your renewed study of the Book of Mormon. May this be the most rich and rewarding experience you have ever had while studying this sacred text. And, most importantly, may it help you build and strengthen enduring faith in Jesus Christ.

Take a few minutes to meet the Title Page of the Book of Mormon. It will give you a helpful and impressive overview of the contents and purposes of the Book of Mormon. The Title Page has been printed, with slight modifications, as the opening page of every full edition of the Book of Mormon since it first came off the press in March, 1830.

When was the Title Page translated?

While it is the first page that readers generally encounter in the Book of Mormon, it was not the first page translated by Joseph Smith. In fact, Joseph Smith once remarked that “the Title Page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation, taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side” of the plates of Mormon.1 Because the Small Plates of Nephi (1 Nephi–Words of Mormon) were translated during the month of June, 1829, at the Peter Whitmer home, in Fayette, New York, and the plates of Mormon (containing Mosiah– Moroni) had been translated beforehand during April–May 1829, in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Joseph’s statement means that the Title Page was translated right after he had completed translating the book of Moroni, and just before he commenced translating the book of 1 Nephi.

1 “History, 1838–1856, volume A-1 [23 December 1805–30 August 1834],” p. 34, The Joseph Smith Papers, accessed December 30, 2019, online at josephsmithpapers.org.

Who wrote the Title Page?

The Title Page is really more Moroni’s Title Page than Mormon’s. The Title Page states that the Book of Mormon was being “sealed up and hid up unto the Lord … sealed by the hand of Moroni.” It also mentions that it includes Moroni’s abridgment of the book of Ether, about the people of Jared. So the Title Page most probably was written, or at least given its final form, after Moroni had finished his work on the book of Ether, sometime between AD 400 and 421 (see Mormon 8:6 and Moroni 10:1). Indeed, the presentation of the Title Page found in the third edition of the Book of Mormon, printed in 1840 under the direction of Joseph Smith, ends with an explicit attribution of this text to Moroni. See Figure 1.

Figure 1 Title Page of the 1840 Edition of the Book of Mormon.

Of course, Mormon’s abridging hand and purposes are still clearly reflected in the Title Page, as Moroni had no doubt worked closely with his father on this massive research project, as well as the extensive source-selection process that it surely required. Perhaps the two of them had even discussed how the record should be finished and what declarations the sealing inscription of the Title Page should include. Readers may recall, for example, that Mormon had promised to later include the story of the Jaredites in his book (see Mosiah 28:17–19). It is quite possible that Mormon eventually charged Moroni with the duty of abridging and including the book of Ether because he knew that he would not be able to get around to finishing that part of the project.

While Moroni mentions himself by name in the Title Page as the one who would seal the record so that it could come forth in the Lord’s time and way, it is impressive how much more Moroni honors his noble father, who had died courageously in about AD 385. After all, while Moroni could have called the book “The Book of Mormon and Moroni,” he names it simply “The Book of Mormon.” Furthermore, drawing no attention to his own significant contributions to the volume, Moroni credits his father exclusively, saying that the account was “written by the hand of Mormon.”

Click on this link for a beautiful and engaging video. Its narration substantially draws from the wording of the Title Page to provide an overview of the Book of Mormon and the circumstances out of which the Title Page arose.

Where is the earliest copy of the Title Page to be found? The earliest copy of the Title Page would have been written by Oliver Cowdery at the very end of May, 1829, as Joseph finished dictating the translation of the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God. Unfortunately, that original transcription of the Title Page—along with three-quarters of the Book of Mormon’s Original Manuscript— were either destroyed by water or mold in a time capsule in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House or have gone missing. Fortunately, the wording of the Title Page is triple-attested, thanks to an official legal document filed on June 11, 1829.

In 2005, a fantastic discovery was made in the Library of Congress, as people there were preparing to celebrate the bicentennial of Joseph Smith’s birth in 1805. What they discovered was the application filed by Joseph Smith in a federal court in the northern district of New York to secure his copyright of the Book of Mormon. Attached to that copyright application was a printed version of the Title Page. (See Figure 2, made available by the Library of Congress. The front side of this printed page can be found,

together with added notes, on www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/title-page-

of-book-of-mormon-circa-early-june-1829/1.) It is the earliest printed page from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! It was folded long-ways (as legal papers

were folded and filed in that day), and it was dated with Joseph Smith’s name on the back, making it officially certain that this application was completed and filed on June 11, 1829. That page would have been typeset only a few days earlier from the Original Manuscript, which had been translated by Joseph Smith and transcribed by Oliver Cowdery only about a week before that.

Figure 2 First printing of the Title Page, about June 8, 1829, front

This filed application form (Figure 4, in the Library of Congress) also includes a handwritten description of the Book of Mormon, which reproduces the full language of

the Title Page. That handwritten description would have been copied from the printed sheet onto the form to which the single printed sheet was attached (Figure 3: https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/title-page-of-book-of-mormon-circa-early-june-1829/2).

Figure 3 First printing of the Title Page, about June 8, 1829, back.

Finally, a second copyright application form (See Figure 5 available at https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/copyright-for-book-of-mormon-11-june-1829/1) was completed and signed by R. R. Lansing, the clerk of the court. That duplicate form also contains the full text of the Title Page, filled in by hand and likewise copied from the attached single printed sheet. Joseph Smith retained this copy of the copyright application, which he used in January 1830 in successfully demanding that

Abner Cole cease and desist from publishing in his newspaper parts of the Book of Mormon as it was being typeset in the Grandin print shop.

Figure 4 Copyright application for the Book of Mormon, filed June 11, 1829, containing a handwritten copy of the

complete Title Page used as the legal description of the publication.
