Further Resources Listed Chronologically, with appreciation

to Bryan Kerr

Ludlow, Daniel H. “The Title Page.” In The Book of Mormon: First Nephi, The Doctrinal Foundation, edited by Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr., 19–33. Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1988.

This article compares all major publications of the Book of Mormon Title Page

before 1988 with the handwritten copyright application and the June 26, 1829

publication of the Title Page found in the Wayne Sentinel. Differences include

punctuation, capitalization, and division into two or three paragraphs. Ludlow

shows that in the 1837 publication of the Book of Mormon the clause, “An

abridgement taken from the book of Ether” has been moved “from the last part of

the first paragraph to the beginning of the second paragraph, bringing the two

elements about the book of Ether together” (26). This adjustment may,

potentially, avoid misreading the Book of Mormon’s purpose as referring only to

the book of Ether. In addition to minor changes in the English additions, Ludlow

also states that “Some of the non-English editions of the title page have

paragraphing different from that of the English editions” (27).

Rust, Richard Dilworth, “The Book of Mormon, Designed for Our Day: Annual FARMS Lecture.” Review of Books on the Book of Mormon 2, no. 1 (1990): 1–23.

This is a brilliantly written article. While not directly explaining the Title Page of

the Book of Mormon, Rust nevertheless uses it as a prompt to discuss other

topics. He focuses on five main literary techniques: heroes, setting, action,

supernatural beings, and ceremonial performance.

Skousen, Royal, “The Original Book of Mormon Transcript.” In Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, edited by John W. Welch, 9–12. Provo/Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS/Deseret Book, 1992.

Relevant to the Title Page, this brief piece notes: “Typical of the minor changes

made in the Book of Mormon through its various printings, Joseph Smith in the

1837 edition changed this statement to read, ‘If there are faults they are the

mistakes of men; wherefore, condemn not the things of God.’”

Sperry, Sidney B., “Moroni the Lonely: The Story of the Writing of the Title Page to the Book of Mormon.”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 4, no. 1 (1995): 255–259.

Sperry argues that Moroni wrote the Title Page on two separate occasions.

Basing his ideas on the 1981 edition of paragraph separation, Sperry says, “It is

quite likely that at this point Moroni wrote the first paragraph (as we now have

it) of the page of the Book of Mormon” (257). He then goes on to suggest that

Moroni “did not write the second paragraph of the title page at this time for the

very good and sufficient reason that he had not yet abridged the book of Ether

which is mentioned herein” (257). He even suggests that Moroni may have

deposited the Book of Mormon in the Hill Cumorah after writing the first

paragraph (as contained in the current edition of the Book of Mormon) and then

went to retrieve it between 401 AD and 421 AD to write the second paragraph

(258).

Tvedtnes, John A., “Who are the ‘Gentiles’?” In The Most Correct Book: Insights from a Book of Mormon Scholar, 29–36. Redding, CA: Cornerstone Publishing, 1999.

This article argues that the term Gentile(s) in the title page of the Book of Mormon

does not carry the modern connotation of non-Israelite, but instead refers to non-

Ephraimites.

Williams, Clyde J., “More Light on Who Wrote the Title Page.” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 10, no. 2 (2001): 28–29, 70.

This short study advances evidence that Moroni wrote the entire Title Page of the

Book of Mormon, based on the idea the redundancies were a way to “further

illuminate the divine destiny of this important record.” This study focuses on

“two unusual words or word combinations that appear infrequently in the Book

of Mormon” (29), namely interpretation and sealed up, as used by Moroni.

Nathaniel Hinckley Wadsworth, “Copyright Law and the 1830 Book of Mormon,” BYU Studies Quarterly 45, no. 3 (2006): 77–99. Reprinted and updated as “Securing the Book of Mormon Copyright in 1829.” In Sustaining the Law: Joseph Smith’s Legal Encounters, edited by Gordon A. Madsen, et al., 71–92. Provo, UT: BYU Studies, 2014).

John W. Welch, “Timing the Translation of the Book of Mormon: ‘Days [and Hours] Never to Be Forgotten’,” BYU Studies Quarterly 57, no. 4 (2018): 10–50, esp. 26–29, 47–48.
