42 John W. Welch Notes

1 Nephi 4

1 Nephi 4:1–3 — Let Us Be Faithful

When Lehi had given Nephi his assignment from the Lord, Nephi immediately said that he would go and do it, and as soon as they had found out that it wasn’t going to be as easy as they thought, Nephi said again with a powerful oath, “As the Lord liveth and as we live, we will not go down to our father in the wilderness until we have accomplished the thing which the Lord hath commanded us” (3:15–16). As he said before, he remained convinced that the Lord would provide a way, and so he said to his brothers, “Let us be faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord.”

And interestingly, whom does Nephi think of as the grand example of obedience and the Lord’s deliveries? Moses. I love how connected Nephi feels to Moses. “Let us be strong like unto Moses, for he truly spake unto the waters of the Red Sea and they divided hither and thither and our fathers came through out of captivity onto dry ground and the armies of pharaoh did follow and were drowned in the waters of the Red Sea” (4:2). And I love what he said to Laman and Lemuel. “Now behold, ye know that that is true” (4:3). You know that happened. “You also know that an angel has spoken to you. Wherefore can ye doubt? Let us go up. The Lord is able to deliver us, even as our fathers, and to destroy Laban” (4:3). Little does he know that shortly that’s going to be fulfilled in a way that he did not anticipate.

1 Nephi 4:5–18 — Nephi Enters Jerusalem Alone, Stumbles onto Laban, and Slays Him

As the three brothers stayed outside the walls, Nephi crept alone into the city, at night, going back towards the house of Laban (4:5). Perhaps Moses was again on Nephi’s mind and should be on the reader’s mind here, not only in Nephi’s immediate outburst of confidence as the armies of Pharaoh had been justifiably killed in the Sea, but also as Moses himself had not been punished for earlier having killed a brutal Egyptian overlord (Exodus 2:12). By mentioning Moses, Nephi’s story is already hinting that someone might likewise justifiably die in the unfolding of Nephi’s account.

If a death somehow would occur in Nephi’s attempt to get the plates, one of the main legal issues that would have arisen would concern the state of his mind as he slew Laban. Anticipating that issue, Nephi expressly affirmed that he was “led by the spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which [he] should do” (4:6). Almost as Moses led the children of Israel through the wilderness by the pillar of fire at night, Nephi becomes an embodiment of the children of Israel as they too had faced mortal dangers themselves. Nephi’s testimony that he was led solely by the spirit of God substantiates a lack of pre-

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 43

planning, pre-meditation, lying in wait, coming presumptuously, or desiring revenge, or any wish to harm Laban. He had not schemed to find Laban by guile or by positioning himself somewhere around Laban’s house hoping to be able to ambush him.

Apparently being completely unarmed, Nephi had hoped somehow to gain access to Laban’s treasury and to persuade someone who controlled access to the plates to cooperate with him. But how on earth this was going to happen was still a total mystery to him. When he sat down much later to write his story, Nephi began by saying, “I’ve been taught by my father. I know of the mysteries of God, nevertheless I have suffered a lot of afflictions in my day” (1 Nephi 1:1). What happened there in the dark corners of Jerusalem that night may well have been one of those mysteries that Nephi must have looked back on and asked himself, how on earth did all that happen?

I think it’s really important that Nephi went alone for two reasons. One is, strategically, they didn’t want to enter the city like a gang of robbers and have whatever could happen under those circumstances, and if they went in as a group that was a real possibility. Secondly, I think for the purpose of faith and for the legal thing, it wasn’t a mob that set about Laban; it wasn’t a group of four. It was one person alone. The Lord delivered Laban into Nephi’s hand.

As Nephi approached the house of Laban, the narrative tells, he “beheld a man,” that “he had fallen to the earth” right on Nephi’s path, and that he was “drunken with wine,” and finally that Nephi “came to him.” It seems that Nephi was still just wondering what he might learn or perhaps even how he might help this fallen person. But he only then discovered “that it was Laban” (4:7–8). No one could have been more surprised than Nephi.

Nephi immediately noticed Laban’s personal sword and took it out of its sheath, admired its hilt of pure gold and its blade of precious steel. He may have seen this sword before, but probably had never held it. Considerable irony looms in the fact that Laban would be killed not only by his own sword, after having threatened to kill Nephi and his brothers, but also in the fact that the sword was extremely valuable. The instrument of Laban’s death represents Laban’s lust for gold and precious things, which was a cause of his own undoing.

At this point, Nephi reports that he “was constrained by the spirit that [he] should kill Laban” (4:10). Nevertheless, he resisted and reflected: “Never at any time have I shed the blood of man. And I shrunk and would that I might not slay him” (4:10). With these words, Nephi certifies that he was “constrained” by some urge (4:10) to do this deed. He was constrained. It was not of his own planning or volition. For several wise reasons, his 44 John W. Welch Notes

preferences surely would have been to somehow take advantage of the situation he had stumbled into but without having to kill Laban. Nephi was inexperienced, not bloodthirsty. Nephi’s statements take his ensuing actions out of the legal domain of culpable voluntary homicides.

Hearing words quoted to him from Exodus 21:13, saying, “Slay him, for ‘the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands’” (4:11), Nephi paused and reflected further. He debated with himself on three grounds, but none of these reasons were persuasive: (1) Laban had sought to take away Nephi’s own life (and the life of his brothers)—but that attempt by Laban was unsuccessful and thus was not legally culpable; (2) Laban would not obey the commandment of God—but Laban had no obligation to consider a demand made by Lehi’s sons as tantamount to a divine command; and (3) Laban had taken away their property—but stealing property was not a crime worthy of capital punishment. Although Nephi’s situation—being alone, unarmed, and out of options—was different from David’s situation as David and his soldier Abishai deliberated and decided not to kill Saul, Nephi and David both agonized over the seriousness of taking such an irreversible action.

To make it unmistakably clear that only one other reason ultimately justified Nephi’s action, Nephi then tells that the Spirit repeated the injunction a second time, quoting again from Exodus 21, “Slay him, for the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands” (4:12). These words of the Spirit certify that the Lord had brought together the facts and circumstances, together with the means and methods, necessary for Nephi to slay Laban, and thus it was not so much Nephi, but “the Lord, [who] slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes” (4:13). This motivation was similar to that of divine intervention in military combat. Laban, after all, was carrying weapons of war and was wearing armor.

And finally, the word of the Lord explained: “It is better that one man should perish than a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief” (4:13). This expression resonates with another rule of biblical law found in the story of Sheba, a rebel who was guilty of treason against David (2 Samuel 20). When Sheba ran to the city of Abel seeking protection, one of David’s commanders named Joab demanded that Sheba be released to him, otherwise Joab would kill everyone in the city. When the people of Abel beheaded Sheba, they set an important legal precedent. It was subsequently invoked over the years under Jewish law to justify, under certain rare circumstances, the killing of one person in order to preserve an entire innocent group. This has been called “the one for many” principle. This rationale was reputedly involved again, when King Jehoiakim was turned over to the Babylonians in order to prevent the city of Jerusalem from being

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 45

punished (2 Chron. 36:6). Jehoiakim was then, presumably, to be executed by the Babylonians, and that had happened only a few months before the point at which the account in 1 Nephi begins.

Hearing that twice-repeated command and legal justification from the Spirit of the Lord, Nephi cut off Laban’s head. He took him “by the hair of the head” (4:18), as Judith reportedly also did. She cut off the head of Holofernes, whose armies had surrounded Jerusalem. No one witnessed either of these beheadings. Like Phinehas in Numbers 25, Nephi and Judith are portrayed as righteously and justifiably taking the law into their own hands, acting under extreme circumstances solely for the benefit of their entire people.

1 Nephi 4:9 — What Did Laban’s Sword Look Like? People often wonder what Laban’s sword looked like. Several studies have dealt with this question.

One thing we know is that this sword had to have been very sharp, because it could, with probably just one swipe, decapitate Laban. They did have swords or knives like that, used for making sacrifices. How did one sacrifice a lamb, a goat, a bull? By slitting its throat, and they knew how to do that. For Passover, for example, men would kill the lamb that would then be blessed, prepared, and the blood properly removed.

Nephi was a metallurgist; he knew how to make plates. He marveled at the workmanship of the Liahona. He also recognized the qualities of Laban’s sword, its steel blade, gold hilt. It reminds me of a dagger from King Tut’s tomb. I imagine it was a ceremonial sword or sacrificial dagger. There are ancient depictions of soldiers slitting the throat of captives. They knew how to do this.

Book of Mormon Central, “What was the Sword of Laban Like? (1 Nephi 4:9),” KnoWhy

401 (January 23, 2018).

1 Nephi 4:15–16 — Why Did Nephi Need these Plates? The turning point of this story and the reason Nephi tells this whole story is so that we can know how important it is to have and read the scriptures, to know the commandments and be better commandment keepers.

When Nephi was trying to convince his brothers to go back, he says, “We need these records, otherwise, how can we preserve our language for our children?” That was one important reason. And if Nephi had said, “We need these plates so we can obey the law of the Lord,” that would probably not be something that Laman and Lemuel would be very excited about. But preserving the language was one of the main reasons Nephi 46 John W. Welch Notes

gives. Language is important. Especially authoritative religious and legal language. The loss of language by the Mulekites offers a case in point. There are plenty of reasons why having the scriptures is vitally important, for them and for us. And it was especially important for Lehi, as he journeyed, to have a set of scriptures on durable metal. This is extremely expensive and very unusual, but it would not have done Lehi any good to have scrolls written on parchment with water-soluble ink. They would not have survived.

1 Nephi 4:18 — Was Nephi Justified in Killing Laban? For forty years, I have written and taught in the BYU Law School about the technicalities of the laws of homicide in the Bible and in the ancient Near East. It is a complicated and technical legal subject. Here are a few brief comments that may be relevant to how the slaying of Laban may have been understood 2700 years ago.

When the Spirit quoted to Nephi words from Exodus 21:13–14, Nephi certainly would have recognized those words as coming from the Code of the Covenant in Exodus 21– 23. Those words formed the basic requirements of the Law of Moses in Lehi’s day. Exodus 21:13–14 provided a three-pronged exception to the general law against homicide, if: (1) “a man lie not in wait,” and (2) come not upon him “with guile,” and (3) “the Lord delivers him into his hand” (Exodus 21:13–14). The expression, to be delivered into your hands, does not occur very often in the Old Testament, so it would have been rather distinctive. Obviously, Nephi had not been lying in wait, planning what to do. He had not been stalking Laban like a hunter who’s trying to kill an antelope. The details of the homicide law were further developed in Numbers 35, where hatred was a crucial element in finding someone guilty of homicide. Nephi would have been taught these words. He probably could recite these passages by memory. He had probably heard this text read at public gatherings, as required by Deuteronomy 31. His parents must teach their children the law, morning and evening.

In addition, a lot of homicide stories were found in the Hebrew traditions behind the Old Testament. Nephi would have known them, especially the story (found at the beginning of the book of Exodus) of Moses killing an Egyptian, that led to Moses fleeing into the wilderness in Midian for forty years. It will be Moses who almost uniquely in ancient law will provide an exception that differentiated an excusable accidental or unplanned slaying from a culpable presumptuous murder. These stories also were important and memorable. Interestingly, the Bible begins with a homicide, with Cain killing Abel, and the Book of Mormon begins with Nephi killing Laban. Both of these stories tell us something fundamental about God directing the affairs of what’s happening; on the one hand, God protects Cain when he has to be driven out, and on the

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 47

other hand, that God values the scriptures enough that blood had to be shed in order that these scriptures could be taken on plates that would endure.

Ultimately, whatever the legal reasoning of the day, Nephi did what he did for one and only one reason, and that was because the Spirit constrained him and said, the Lord has delivered him into thy hands.

Welch, John W. "Legal Perspectives on the Slaying of Laban." Journal of Book of Mormon

Studies 1, no. 1 (1992): 119–141.

1 Nephi 4:18 — Laban’s Death

Maybe Laban should also be seen as a “type” of the wicked people in Jerusalem. Maybe his death was a final warning. It may have helped the people in Jerusalem to be less confident and to repent. The next morning they would have found Laban with his head chopped off. The only punishment under the Law of Moses that was enacted by a sword was in the destruction of an apostate city (Deuteronomy 13:15). Maybe it was a last-ditch warning to say to Jerusalem, the prophecies about the destruction of Jerusalem are really going to happen.

1 Nephi 4:20 — Was Laban’s Treasury the Treasury of the Temple? There was a treasury of the temple. And what is in the treasury? Gold, silver and all the donations, all the tithing. The safest place in every city was in their main temple. The Temple of Saturn in Rome was the treasury of the Roman Empire, and the walls of the temple of Herod were plated with gold. Laban, as the commander of the city guard, might have had charge over the treasury, which would also have contained the sacred records. Laban’s house would have been right near the temple.

1 Nephi 4:33–36 — Nephi Swears an Oath to Zoram Outside the walls, the brothers waited. Remember how scared they were when they saw Zoram coming, with Nephi now dressed in the armor of Laban. They had already been told that Laban was going to come and try to kill them, and as robbers they could be executed on the spot. Their fears, however, were soon settled, when they swore an oath with Zoram. They could not let him go. To keep him from trying to run away, they swore an oath with him, giving a place in the family, having an inheritance right. Indeed, because of this oath there would be Zoramites in the Nephite world. Zoram was treated as if he were a son of Lehi. When Nephi swears, “As the Lord liveth and as I live,” he puts his life on this. “If this oath is not fulfilled, then I will die.”

When the people in Jerusalem woke up the next morning and saw that the plates were gone, and also that Zoram is gone, they might have now wondered if Zoram had taken the plates, and maybe even Zoram killed Laban. But they have no idea where the plates 48 John W. Welch Notes

have gone. Because there were no witnesses at all, and not even Laman or Lemuel or Sam could stand as witnesses against Nephi, no legal action could be brought against either Nephi or Zoram.

We do not know anything about Zoram’s background. If he was a slave, he would not have been an Israelite. At least he was under some conditions of servitude. Nephi’s promise not only of family membership, but also freedom and standing within the family was obviously an attractive motivator for Zoram, especially considering the lack of any other viable option. The terms of Nephi’s oath were that he would spare Zoram’s life if he will “hearken unto our words” (4:32), then he would be “a free man like unto us if he would go down in the wilderness with us” (4:33) and that he shall “have place with us” (4:34), and “that he would tarry with [Nephi and his family] from that time forth” (4:35). This was a good thing. The brothers could scarcely have let Zoram go. He would have immediately sounded the hue and cry.

1 Nephi 4:37–38 — Nephi and the Group Flee into the Wilderness Nephi’s narrative ends as the five of them flee (“our flight,” 4:36) to Lehi’s tent (or tabernacle) in the wilderness. Having shed blood, Nephi and his accomplices may have faced the legal need to flee to a place of refuge in order find protection and to purge any guilty blood taint. Indeed, in the case of any “unpremeditated” killing, Exodus 21:13 provides that the slayer must take refuge in “a place” which God will appoint. There the slayer was protected from avengers and was to be given a fair trial to determine whether, indeed, he had acted culpably by lying in wait or not.

In times and places where the laws of these cities of refuge were in effect, the “place” of refuge was generally understood to be an altar or place in one of six designated Levitical cities. But the term “place” is ambiguous. It can sometimes refer to the wilderness (as in Deuteronomy 1:33; 9:7; 11:5; 29:6). Thus, it may have been legally sufficient, in such cases of unpremeditated or unplanned slayings, for a killer such as Nephi to go into the wilderness, as was prefigured in the precedents of Cain’s banishment and of Moses’s fleeing into Midian. Of course, Nephi was prepared, in any event, to leave the land of Israel and never return.

1 Nephi 4 — Chiastic Structure of 1 Nephi 4

This story is clearly structured chiastically. It starts “without the walls” and finishes up “outside the walls.” Nephi is in the dark, not knowing what’s happening at the beginning, and Zoram is confused and doesn’t know what’s happening at the end. The sword mentioned twice. The Spirit constrains twice, and so on. The main thing to realize is the central turning point, which is the recognition that decided the matter for Nephi, and this has to do with commandments in general, “Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise,” but “they cannot keep the

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 49

commandments according to the law save they have the law.” To emphasize this crucial middle turning-point, Nephi structured this entire chapter as an extended chiasm.

A Without the Walls of Jerusalem

They [my brethren] did follow me up until we came without the walls of Jerusalem (4)

I caused that they should hide themselves without the walls (5)

B Laban and his House

I . . . went forth towards the house of Laban (5),

not knowing beforehand the things I should do (6)

near unto the house of Laban was a drunk man (7): it was Laban (8) C The Sword

I beheld his sword, . . . and the hilt was of pure gold

. . . the blade thereof was of the most precious steel (9)

D Spirit

I was constrained by the Spirit that I should kill Laban (10)

And the Spirit said unto me again (11)

E Delivered into thy hands

Slay him for the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands (12)

F Perishing

The Lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes; it is better that one man should perish than a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief (13)

G The Law and Commandments

Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise (14)

I also thought they could not keep the commandments of the Lord according to the law, . . save they should have the law (15)

F’ Imperishable

I also knew that the law was engraven upon the plates of brass (16)

E’ Delivered into my hands

And again, I knew that the Lord had delivered Laban into my hands (17)

D’ The Spirit

Therefore, I did obey the voice of the Spirit (18)

C’ The Sword

I . . . took Laban by the hair of the head and

I smote off his head with his own sword (19)

B’ Laban’s House—his treasury, his servant, his voice

I went forth unto the treasury of Laban. . . .

I saw the servant of Laban,

I commanded him in the voice of Laban (20)

He supposed me to be his master, Laban (21),

I spake unto him as if it had been Laban (23)

A’ Without the Walls of Jerusalem

To my elder brethren who were without the walls (24)

[Zoram] did follow me, as I went forth unto my brethren who were without the walls (26–27) 50 John W. Welch Notes

As this case shows, chiasmus was used in literature to serve several purposes. In Nephi’s account of the slaying of Laban, the chiastic structure may serve to doubly emphasize the seriousness of its subject matter, to imbue its outcome with an aura of authoritativeness, and to clarify the logical relationships between the parts of this text. Chiasmus also helps to point and propel Nephi’s narrative to its focal conclusion. The balanced format of chiasmus also conveys here implicit sense of balance, justice, orderliness, and retributive justice. It also conveniently enhances the audience’s capacities for memorization, which promotes oral retellings and uses of this text in legal context and in public instruction. Ultimately chiasmus adds to a judicial verdict any often needed sense of restoration, peace, closure, and finality.

All of these reasons explain why chiasmus works so well here. Nephi used chiasmus in a lot of other places, but this is one of his prime examples. This is one of his most important stories, and he presented it in the most articulate, persuasive way that he knew how. Jonathan Burnside, a biblical scholar, has said, “The use of chiasmus is important in showing completion when divine intervention is involved because God never does anything that is imperfect or incomplete. This literary form completes it.” We have here, particularly, more than in any other story, repeated instances of divine intervention.

What Can We Learn from Nephi’s Example in These Chapters? There are many lessons that we can learn from this foundational story. It’s very difficult to read the whole Book of Mormon and everything that happens afterwards without the story of Laban in the background. It tells us the importance of records, of language, of revelation, of obeying the word of the Lord, of following the Spirit, of doing whatever needs to be done to promote the building of the Kingdom, that God will provide, lessons about making oaths and promises. Nephi at one point even says, “As the Lord liveth and as we live, we shall not return to our Father Lehi until we have done this.” He is swearing an oath, making a covenant, and what is he saying here? We put our lives on the line, we will die if necessary, we will do everything we can, to make this happen. Lessons of covenant making and oath keeping are told and presumed over and over again throughout the Book of Mormon.

Mormon knows this story. He probably grew up hearing this story. But he did not originally begin with 1 Nephi. He began with the Book of Lehi. Would we not love to know what Lehi wrote about this episode? He was not there, of course. But what did he think about this when Nephi came back and said, “well dad, here are the plates, but oh by the way, we are kind of in trouble in Jerusalem.” There was now no going back there

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 51

anymore, if there was ever a question in Lehi’s mind. Lehi may have had some mixed feelings about this, especially knowing the next thing he was going to do is say, was to ask his sons to go back and get Ishmael and his family. And the sons may have wondered, what if we run into any of Laban’s relatives in the process? Still, they went forward with courage. If readers keep this story in mind, they will see its influence throughout the whole Book of Mormon and will ultimately know that if we will go and do the things that the Lord has commanded, he will provide a way that we may accomplish those things, no matter how challenging those commandments may be.

1 Nephi 5

1 Nephi 5:1–2 — Sariah Complains in the Wilderness I personally think Sariah was amazing. The modern-day pioneers who traveled to Utah endured with courage but their journey didn’t last eight whole years in the wilderness— what a difficult thing that must have been for Sariah. When the text mentions that Sariah complained, I don’t fault her for that. This was a terrible trial—not knowing whether her sons were coming back, whether they’d been killed or whether they’d done the right thing leaving Jerusalem. As the absence of her sons stretched on and as she envisioned the task they had been given, it was only natural that her fears would begin to mount. The round trip might have been well over 500 miles and through terrible terrain with dangers lurking in many places in addition to the formidable odds within Jerusalem itself. When she finally says, “Now with a surety I know,” that’s the voice of someone who believed and desperately wanted to absolutely know. There is no question that the most important possession for a woman in the ancient world was her sons. Her sons were her social security. They were her status. It was understandable for Sariah to be worried about the loss of her sons—that was really going to the core of who she was. Nephi shows us an unforgettable tender mercy for Sariah that will be an anchor experience for her and her descendants.

Book of Mormon Central, “Were Any Ancient Israelite Women Named Sariah? (1 Nephi

5:1),” KnoWhy 8 (January 11, 2016).

1 Nephi 5:4–6 — Lehi Bears His Testimony to Comfort Sariah The Holy Ghost is called “The Comforter.” If you are a bishop or in any other position of confidence and people come to you who are facing difficult circumstances, people who are agonizing and in need of comfort—they don’t want sympathy as much as they want to hear testimony and feel the Holy Ghost.

52 John W. Welch Notes

1 Nephi 5:8 — Sariah Rejoices as Her Sons Return

Sariah’s words to Lehi reflect the same poetic effect of Lehi’s exhortations to Laman and Lemuel, “Oh, that thou mightest be like unto this valley, firm and steadfast and immoveable,” and “oh that thou mightest be like unto this river.” We can only guess what her poem might have looked like in the original language: “Now I know of a surety the Lord hath commanded my husband to flee into the wilderness.” Break. “Yea, and I also know of a surety that the Lord hath protected my sons.” It’s a nice couplet, both beginning with, “Yea I know,” and “Know of a surety.” And moreover, “He has delivered them out of the hands of Laban,” Break. “And given them power by which they can accomplish the thing which the Lord hath commanded them,” echoing, of course, Nephi’s own words, “For I will go and do the things which I am commanded.” This makes a beautiful little four-part poem. It begins with “knowing that the Lord has commanded my husband” and it ends “knowing that the Lord has given them power they might accomplish the thing that he has commanded them.” We might call it The Song of Sariah. In Exodus 15:21, there is a short but poetic expression by the sister of Moses which biblical scholars rave about as being a wonderful statement of joy and success, given as the Children of Israel reach the other side of the Red Sea. It’s called the Song of Miriam and I think with Sariah we have the same theme of deliverance by the hand of the Lord with a similar, beautiful testimony of gratitude, faith and love.

I Nephi 5:14–28 — The Brass Plates

We do not know the precise content of the Brass Plates. We know that they included quotations from prophets that are not in our Bible, for example, Zenos, Zenock, Neum, and Ezias, where we see that these prophets testified plainly and specifically about the coming mission and atonement of Jesus Christ and about important elements of the Plan of Salvation, including the nature of the creation and the fall as well as the nature of the Godhead.

In addition to these four prophets the Brass Plates likely contained some version of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, likely some version of the history of Israel from the time of Joshua down to Zedekiah (as in Judges, 1–2 Samuel, 1–2 Kings), books of prophets such as Isaiah, and maybe Hosea, Amos, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah, Jeremiah, some of the Psalms, as well as some lost texts, and others. Certain parts of our Old Testament, such as the books of Daniel and Ezekiel, had not been written at the time of Lehi, so they would not have been on the brass plates.

Book of Mormon Central, “What Parts of the Old Testament Were on the Plates of Brass?

(1 Nephi 5:10),” KnoWhy 410 (February 22, 2018).

Millet, Robert L. "The Plates of Brass: A Witness of Christ." Ensign 18, no. 1 (1988): 26-29.

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 53

1 Nephi 6

1 Nephi 6:1–3 — How Lehi’s Lineage May Explain His Location Even though Nephi doesn’t give a full genealogy of his fathers, we learn of his tribe in the House of Israel: “For it sufficeth me to say that we are descendants of Joseph” (v. 2). Later on, readers learn that Lehi was specifically “a descendant of Manasseh,” who was one of Joseph’s sons (Alma 10:3). It is possible that Lehi, based on his lineage, was a descendent of refugees from the Northern Kingdom of Israel (where Manasseh’s tribal grounds were situated). When the Assyrians invaded Israel around 732–722 BC, Lehi’s ancestors likely fled to Judah and settled in a precinct of Jerusalem called the “Mishneh.” Familiarity with this historical backdrop can help explain why Lehi was living in Jerusalem around 600 BC, instead of in the tribal grounds allotted to Lehi’s ancestor Manasseh. As refugees they may not have been able to bring records with them, even if they had once had them. They may have had a general knowledge of their northern ancestry through oral tradition, but may have been unable to prove this or know it in full detail running all the way back to Joseph, about ten centuries earlier. After Lehi and his sons obtained the plates of brass, they had proof of what they had previously only believed from oral tradition, hence Lehi then “knew that he was a descendant of Joseph” through Manasseh and could prove his important status as such (1 Nephi 6:2; Alma 10:3).

Jeffrey R. Chadwick, “Lehi’s House at Jerusalem and the Land of His Inheritance,”

in Glimpses of Lehi’s Jerusalem, ed. John W. Welch, David Rolph Seely and Jo Ann

H. Seely (Provo, UT: FARMS, 2004), 81–130.

1 Nephi 6:3 — Lehi’s Words in Nephi’s Record

Nephi’s explanation that he didn’t give a “full account” of his father’s record may leave readers wondering how much of Lehi’s record Nephi did record. Careful studies on this matter have been conducted, and they suggest that there is probably quite a bit that Nephi either quoted or paraphrased from his father’s underlying record. Thus, while Nephi’s books may bear his own name, they give readers a window into the personality, teachings, and prophecies of Lehi. Together, as father and son, their teachings and prophecies support, strengthen, and inform one another, working together to persuade readers to come unto Christ.

John W. Welch and J. Gregory Welch, “Writings of Lehi Quoted or Paraphrased by

Nephi and Jacob,” in Charting the Book of Mormon:, ed. John W. Welch and Melvin

J. Thorne (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1999), 49–53.

54 John W. Welch Notes

John A. Tvedtnes, “Contents of the 116 Lost Pages and the Large Plates,” in The Most

Correct Book: Insights from a Book of Mormon Scholar (Salt Lake City, UT:

Cornerstone Publishing, 1999), 37–52.

S. Kent Brown, “Recovering the Missing Record of Lehi,” in From Jerusalem to Zarahemla:

Literary and Historical Studies of the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT: Religious Studies

Center, Brigham Young University, 1998), 28–54.

S. Kent Brown, “Nephi’s Use of Lehi’s Record,” in Rediscovering the Book of Mormon:

Insights You May Have Missed Before, ed. John L. Sorenson and Melvin J. Thorne

(Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 3–14.

1 Nephi 6:4 — Nephi’s Larger Thesis

Have you ever learned about thesis statements in an English class? They are statements, usually given at the beginning of an essay or article (and often in longer works as well) that summarize an author’s main point or purpose in writing. Nephi gives us two important thesis statements. As expected, he gives one of them very close to the beginning of his record, in the very first chapter: “But behold, I, Nephi, will show unto you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance” (1 Nephi 1:20). Thus, one of Nephi’s main points is to show his readers that God is merciful and that if we are faithful, He will deliver us in our trials. Nephi’s stories emphasize this theme over and over.

Yet, in 1 Nephi 6:4, Nephi gives another purpose for his record, and this one is even larger in its scope. He declares that the “fullness” of his intent is to help men (and women) come unto God and be saved. We might ask ourselves what Nephi may have meant when he talked about coming unto God. For Nephi, this was surely a spiritual concept, indicating that if men will keep God’s commandments, they will become spiritually closer and eventually unified in purpose with Him.

However, there is a very physical component as well. Remember, Nephi is writing this many years afterward, so he has already made the arduous journey to the New World, removing himself from the wickedness of the unbelieving people of Jerusalem. He and Lehi have already had their visions of the Tree of Life, where they saw concourses of people pressing forward toward the Tree of Life. Those who are righteous in this life will eventually be resurrected, and be granted the privilege of physically dwelling in the presence of God for eternity. They are saved from the perils of mortal life and literally have come to where God is. It is hard to imagine that Nephi, considering his personal experiences with traveling to divinely prepared locations, didn’t intend his thesis statement to share with readers the results of both his spiritual and his temporal journeys.

2: 1 Nephi 1–7 55

Book of Mormon Central, “How Can We Be Delivered through the Lord’s Tender

Mercies? (1 Nephi 1:20),” KnoWhy 447 (July 5, 2018).

1 Nephi 6:6 — A Pattern in the Small Plates

In this verse, Nephi speaks in the future tense: “I shall give commandment” (1 Nephi 6:6). Evidence that Nephi did indeed pass on this commandment can be found in Jacob 1:1–4, where Jacob gives more details about Nephi’s instructions and the sacred nature of the Small Plates. If you carefully read the rest of the writings on the Small Plates, you will see that Nephi’s instructions were followed by Jacob’s posterity. They passed the record down through their posterity, focused on things of spiritual significance, and only lightly covered the history of their people. These plates give a brief spiritual history that, by divine design, compensates for the loss of the beginning portion of Mormon’s record (which was recorded on the 116 pages that were lost by Martin Harris).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do the Authors on the Small Plates Follow a Pattern?

(Jacob 7:27),” KnoWhy 74 (April 8, 2016).

John W. Welch, “The Father’s Command to Keep Records in the Small Plates of Nephi,”

FARMS Preliminary Report (September 1984), 1–12.

1 Nephi 7

Lehi’s Sons Return to Get Ishmael and His Family. Could Laman and Lemuel and the Sons of Ishmael Have Ever Gone Back?

In the heading for Chapter Seven, it says that Nephi and his brothers “return to Jerusalem.” However, Nephi specifically wrote that they returned to "the land of Jerusalem." It would have been unwise, if not unsafe, for them to go into the city itself. Like Lehi, it is unlikely that Ishmael lived in downtown Jerusalem. So, what was the "land of Jerusalem?" This might reference the entire Judah tribal area, which extended well beyond Jerusalem’s city walls.

Why was Ishmael’s family chosen to join Lehi and his family in the wilderness? When did one marry in Lehi's culture? Often when the children were very young, fathers put a contract together for the marriage of their children. In the case of Lehi's children marrying Ishmael's children, there may have been a previously established understanding. If not, Ishmael may have supported or had an interest in Lehi's calling as a prophet and trusted Lehi's sons when they came for his family. When Nephi and his brothers went back to get Ishmael's daughters, Ishmael seemed to know that something important had transpired, because they were all willing to go—the whole family. 56 John W. Welch Notes

Laman, Lemuel, and the sons of Ishmael didn’t make it far outside of the land of Jerusalem before they wanted to go back to the lives they had left behind. Nephi argued with them, "How could you forget? After all you have seen and experienced, you still lack faith?" And then, in his final argument he says,

"Now behold, I say unto you that if ye will return unto Jerusalem ye shall also

perish with them. And now, if ye have choice, go up to the land, and remember the

words which I speak unto you, that if ye go ye will also perish; for thus the Spirit

of the Lord constraineth me that I should speak." (1 Nephi 7:15)

Did they have a choice? Even if they went back to Ishmael's estate, which is probably where the sons of Ishmael would have wanted to go, it wouldn't have been very safe. Jerusalem was becoming more and more dangerous. The people had animosity toward Laman and Lemuel’s father, not to mention the fact that they were connected to Laban’s death. Nephi essentially said, if you think you have a choice, then go. And they didn't go, so they must not have thought it was much of a choice either.

1 Nephi 7:22 — The Meaning Behind the Sacrifice Offered Upon the Safe Return of Lehi’s Sons with Ishmael’s Family

We see over and over again, every time they get back to the camp, they make sacrifices, Lehi and his family gives thanks unto the God of Israel. It's the first thing they do: acknowledge God in keeping them safe. What happens to a person who gives thanks immediately and genuinely?

There are often two focuses when we give thanks to God for a gift. One is to focus on how happy we are for the thing itself. "Thanks for giving that to me. I'm glad that you— God—were so kind as to do that for me." The other is in an attitude of praise, an acknowledgment of the kindness behind the gift. "You were wonderful to do that, thank you, I reverence you for that." Where, instead of saying, I'm so glad I got it, you are saying, you are so wonderful to do it. They are two sides of the same coin, but interestingly, in Greek and in Hebrew, the word to praise and the word to thank is the same. But in English, there is a difference, thanks and praise are not one and the same. We must pause and remember to worship, to revere God for our blessings, as we see Lehi and Sariah exemplify here.

Book of Mormon Central, “How Could Lehi Offer Sacrifices Outside of Jerusalem? (1

Nephi 7:22),” KnoWhy 9 (January 12, 2016).
