58

I find it interesting that Nephi began this chapter about Lehi’s vision of the Tree of Life by mentioning seeds. In the previous chapter, Lehi’s party was rightly focused on ensuring their own posterity—or, in other words, their seed. And next they gather seed crop. You never know what will trigger a dream or a vision. The group had been caravanning now for several months. They would have been thinking a lot about seeds and about how each little seed, when planted and cared for, would grow into some kind of useful plant. Some seeds they gathered would eventually grow into wonderful trees that could bear fruit to keep them alive. At this time when the families were focused on seeds, plants, and trees, Lehi received a prophetic vision and was inspired with a deep understanding of the Tree of Life, the mission of Jesus Christ, the love of God, and eternal life.

We may also want to remember here Alma’s discussion of the seed of faith in Alma 32. You plant the seed, you get faith as it grows, and you can know that it’s a good seed, and so on. If you plant a mustard seed, you get a mustard tree. If you plant an olive seed, you get an olive tree. But if you plant the seed of faith in Christ and then nurture it as Alma describes in Alma 32, what does he say will grow up in you? “[I]t shall be a tree springing up unto eternal life” (v. 41)—in other words, a Tree of Life within you, bearing fruit “which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure” (v. 42). This is a reference to Lehi’s vision, which evidently became a well-known revelation or religious symbol that endured throughout Nephite history (see 1 Nephi 8:11; 11:8; cf. 3 Nephi 19:25).

The symbolism of the Tree of Life in Lehi’s dream is very powerful and attractive in our culture as well, inspiring artists from all over the world to capture its vivid imagery in paintings, sculptures, and other media. It is the most painted or sculpted single symbol and scene in the Book of Mormon.

Book of Mormon Central, “Have the Valley of Lemuel and the River Laman Been

Found? (1 Nephi 2:6),” KnoWhy 286 (March 13, 2017).

“Fruits and grains are found growing naturally at Wadi Tayyib al-Ism (see 1

Nephi 8:1), and the wadi’s sheer granite walls rising about 2000 ft. are among the

most impressive in the region, easily invoking Lehi’s description, ‘firm and

steadfast, and immovable’ (1 Nephi 2:10). Most significantly, there was a small

stream running through the wadi, and return visits made at various times of the

year confirmed that water flowed in the stream throughout the year.”

1 Nephi 8–10 59

1 Nephi 8:6–7 — Lehi Follows the

Angel

The greatest lesson we can learn from

Lehi’s interaction with the angel is to

trust the Lord. We need to acknowledge

the Lord and trust in what He says.

That’s all part of the greatest

commandment—to love the Lord and

trust in Him.

How many times do the words

“invitation” or “invite” show up in the

Book of Mormon? When Lehi stated that

the Spirit bade me to follow him, it was

an invitation. We don’t use the words

“bade,” “bid, or “beckon” very often.

Was this beckoning of the Spirit a

commandment? I believe that, in essence,

Figure 1 Tree of Life by Hannah Butler. it was. I think, in Lehi’s mind, he

understood it as a commandment and

that he obediently followed. It helps to know that the Lord presents us with options and requests. However, the invitation may be the kind of option that you don’t want to turn down (truly an offer you can’t refuse).

To say that the Lord commands carries a lot of weight in the English language. However, I am not sure that in Lehi and in Nephi’s language they would have understood it quite that way. They had the word mitzvah. A mitzvah is a commandment, but when it says “thou shalt not kill,” the Hebrew reads more like “don’t kill,” “no killing.” The meaning is almost, “please don’t kill.” Yes, the words of the Lord are couched in an imperative form, but it is a negative. Similarly, in German, the expressions “nicht rauchen,” or “rauchen Sie nicht” mean “do not smoke, you had better not,” and you always need to look at the context of such statements to see how these invitations are being extended, what is immediately happening, and how will things move forward. In Lehi’s case, the Spirit “bade” him to follow. Lehi realized that there must be a choice in such matters, and that there was something more going on here than an order or command and the assumption that everybody must blindly follow.

Remember that the texture of the relationship between God and Lehi was very warm. Even though there would be undesirable consequences if Lehi didn’t follow the bidding

60

of the Lord, His gentle commands were all grounded in a loving relationship. After all, the tree that the Spirit is bidding Lehi to approach is a representation of the Love of God.

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Were Lehi and Nephi Guided by Angelic Escorts in

Their Visions? (1 Nephi 11:11),” KnoWhy 492 (December 11, 2018).

“One feature common to [apocalyptic visions], both Jewish and Christian, is the

presence of a heavenly being who guides the recipient of a revelation through a

visionary experience and interprets or clarifies what is being revealed. … Angelic

escorts appear in the visions of Lehi, Nephi, and their contemporaries because in

those days the subjects of these revelations were not already familiar and self-

evidently recognized even by the prophet … .”

1 Nephi 8:10 — World Views of the Tree of Life

Just about every culture and every religion recognizes, in some way, the importance of

the Tree of Life. One of the best sources on this topic is a book called The Tree of Life:

From Eden to Eternity. The widespread presence of Tree of Life imagery may be the result of a distant collective memory of the Garden of Eden and Adam and Eve’s choice to partake of the fruit of knowledge of good and evil and their subsequent banishment from Eden and from the Tree of Life.

It also seems to be a universal cultural phenomenon that people create and recognize life-giving metaphors in relation to trees and the fruit of trees. The Tree of Life is a pervasive symbol of permanence, growth, fruitfulness, shade, and shelter. Furthermore, many trees lose their leaves in winter but come back to life again in the spring, which has led to them being seen as a symbol of death and resurrection.

In the Nag Hammadi Gnostic literature, in a text called On the Origin of the World, we run across a description of the Tree of Life. Margaret Barker, a Methodist scholar of ancient temple symbolism and ceremony, was excited to read this early Gnostic Christian text, which says that the Tree of Life was of “immense height, coloured like the sun, with beautiful branches, leaves like a cypress and fruit like bunches of white grapes” (Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots of Christian Liturgy (New York, NY: T & T Clark, 2003), 244; citing CG II.5.110). Early Christians believed that people could obtain purity, light, and powers over evil beings and destruction by approaching and eating the fruit of the Tree of Life.

1 Nephi 8–10 61

Figure 2 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. The Ways of Life and Death: The Visionary Perception of Lehi and Nephi.

Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999.
