1NEPHI 11–15

John W. Welch Notes



1 Nephi 11

1 Nephi 11–14 — Overview: The Four Stages of Nephi’s Prophetic Worldview Nephi’s vision, which stands at the center of the book of 1 Nephi, is four chapters long. It is a powerful and unforgettable prophetic statement. It clearly sees the future of the world, commencing from Nephi’s moment in time, in four major stages:

Stage 1 foresees the coming to earth of Jesus Christ, the Messiah, the Son of God

(Found in 1 Nephi 11).

Stage 2 laments the rejection of Christ by most of the people He lived with,

visited, and taught, resulting in their being scattered (Found in 1 Nephi 12).

Stage 3 anticipates the role of the Gentiles in preserving parts of the Gospel of

Jesus Christ and bringing the word of God to the remnant of scattered Israel

(Found in 1 Nephi 13).

Stage 4 speaks of the restoration of the house of Israel and Christ’s ultimate

victory over the forces of evil (Found in 1 Nephi 14).

Nephi introduced these four stages in 1 Nephi 11–14. This same sequence will be repeated by Nephi in 1 Nephi 19–22 (See Figure 1).

76 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 1 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Four Stages of the Nephite Prophetic View.” In Charting the Book of Mormon. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999.

Indeed, Nephi will again use this same prophetic worldview as the underlying structure behind his teachings in 2 Nephi 25–30, and it will become the foundational framework within which Jacob, Abinadi, and several other Nephite writers will subsequently see the future of their world. I call this “the Nephite prophetic worldview.” Knowing this framework can help all readers in many ways. For example, it helps readers get through

1 Nephi 11–15 77

the Isaiah chapters in the Book of Mormon, understanding why the Nephite writers used the particular chapters from Isaiah that they did.

Book of Mormon Central, “What Vision Guides Nephi’s Choice of Isaiah Chapters? (2 Nephi 11:2),” KnoWhy 38 (February 22, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Getting through Isaiah with the Help of the Nephite Prophetic View,”

in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1998), 19–45.

1 Nephi 11–14 — Like Father, Like Son: Aspects of Lehi’s Vision Repeated in Nephi’s Vision

One of the most interesting things about Nephi’s vision in 1 Nephi 11–14 is how subtly and how fully it relates to other prophecies given a few years earlier by his father Lehi. Nephi’s vision closely builds on his father’s visions in 1 Nephi 1 and also his father’s dream of the Tree of Life in 1 Nephi 8, as one should expect it to. And why? Nephi’s vision occurred because he wanted to know the meaning of all the things that his father had seen and taught. And consequently, Nephi’s vision unfolds precisely that. Nephi saw, learned, and explained what his father had seen, revealed, and boldly testified. An attentive reader will see how aspects of Lehi’s vision are repeated and amplified in Nephi’s vision.

Indeed, in 1 Nephi 10:17, Nephi tells us that when he heard his father Lehi speaking about the things he had seen in his visions in 1 Nephi 1 and 8, Nephi wanted to “see, and hear, and know of these things” for himself. As he pondered these things, he was “caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceedingly high mountain” (1 Nephi 11:1). Nephi later bore record that he indeed “saw the things which [his] father saw” (1 Nephi 14:29).

Astute readers can draw these connections. For example, in 1 Nephi 1:9, Lehi saw “One descending out of the midst of heaven,” and in 1 Nephi 11:15–28 Nephi learns about the “condescension of [the Son of] God” (1 Nephi 11:16, 26). In 1 Nephi 8:10, Lehi sees a tree whose fruit is “desirable.” Nephi similarly describes the Tree of Life as a representation of the “love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things” (1 Nephi 11:22).

At least twenty-five elements in Lehi’s vision will show up in Nephi’s vision. They are fun to find. For example, there is a great and spacious building in Lehi’s vision (1 Nephi 8:26, 31); this relates to the “great and abominable church” repeatedly mentioned in Nephi’s vision (see 1 Nephi 13–14). There is a man dressed in a white robe leading Lehi (1 Nephi 8:5); for Nephi, this is the Spirit of the Lord who guides him (1 Nephi 11:11). 78 John W. Welch Notes

Lehi is taken to a “dark and dreary waste” (1 Nephi 8:7); Nephi first sees Jerusalem, and he knows that it is a dark and dreary place.

Lehi goes on to see the head of a river. Nephi will see a fountain of living waters—that fountain being Jesus Christ. Lehi will call out with a loud voice. At that point in Nephi’s vision, Nephi sees Christ with John, the apostle, crying out with a loud voice proclaiming the gospel. Later, Lehi sees that Laman and Lemuel will not come to partake of the fruit. Nephi similarly sees that people reject Christ. Lehi then sees numberless concourses of people, while Nephi sees multitudes like the sands of the sea (See Figure 2).

While reading the Book of Mormon, one is always looking for ways to know that it is true. One of the ways that we can know that this text is true is by noticing and appreciating the overall complexity of Nephi’s account. His vision works beautifully as an interpretive, deeper understanding of what Lehi saw, giving us confidence that there are two witnesses of this great story, justifying that we should be commandment keepers who hold steadfastly to the iron rod.

1 Nephi 11:1 — Desiring Knowledge, Nephi Is Carried Away into a Mountain One may wonder: Did Nephi go up to an actual mountain or was he just taken there in spirit? Perhaps both. It may well be that as he pondered on his father’s visions and dreams, Nephi wanted to get away from the group’s base camp, and so he went into a nearby mountain or high place. It was common for Jesus to go to the mountains and there to pray and receive transfiguring manifestations.

Back in chapter 2, the Lord told Nephi that he would be a ruler and a teacher over his brothers (1 Nephi 2:22), and that word from the Lord was confirmed by the angel speaking to Nephi and his three brothers (1 Nephi 3:29). That calling would have weighed heavily on Nephi’s mind. So when he wanted to see what his father saw in vision, it was likely because Nephi knew that the Lord had called him to do something meaningful. Nephi testified, “I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them” (1 Nephi 3:7). How could Nephi accomplish the task of correctly ruling over his elder brothers without seeing what his father saw—without understanding that vision and prophetic perspective?

Nephi puts his account of this vision at the very center of his first book written on his small plates. There are twenty-two chapters in 1 Nephi, and the entire book appears to have been arranged as a chiasm, where elements in the first part of the book are reversed and then repeated in the second part (See Figure 3).

1 Nephi 11–15 79

(Continued on Next Page)

80 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 2 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “A Comparison of Lehi’s Dream and Nephi’s Vision.” In Charting the Book of Mormon. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999.
