3 NEPHI 1–7

John W. Welch Notes



Introduction to 3 Nephi

Worthy of highest celebration are the words and events recorded in the sacred book of 3 Nephi, the pinnacle of the Book of Mormon.This text truly documents one of the most glorious and crowning moments in all of history. The more I study the book of 3 Nephi, the more I come to see it as the Holy of Holies of the Book of Mormon, and the more I come to appreciate it metaphorically as the most sacred inner chamber of the Nephite record.

The book of 3 Nephi opens to view the most sublime public experiences ever enjoyed by Lehi’s branch of the house of Israel. 3 Nephi allows attentive readers a glimpse at the temple in Bountiful, the radiant appearance of the resurrected Savior and Redeemer, the Creator of all things from the beginning. Indeed, it would seem that everything in 3 Nephi has been composed to echo and to call to mind the solemnity of the presence of the Lord, which was traditionally associated in ancient Israel with Jehovah’s appearance in the inner sanctum of the temple, his holy house.

It gives hope for the resurrection and subsequently for entering into the Celestial Kingdom. Mormon knew that Jesus could conquer death, an essential part of the atonement of Jesus Christ, because Mormon had seen the three Nephites. When Jesus blessed the three Nephites, it demonstrated that Jesus had power over life and death. This book is not only a theological treatise but also an action-filled record in which amazing things happened. It is visual in nature, as Jesus heals people, lets them touch him, and blesses the children, and it has a universal message of love.

B. H. Roberts once said that in order for the truth to be known, it must be articulated, and the clearer the truth is articulated, the more able the Holy Ghost will be to bear testimony 896 John W. Welch Notes

of its truth. As one progresses through the Book of Mormon, one gets closer and closer to the inner-sanctum of the temple, in the Holy of Holies. All that has gone before is a prelude to, and a preparation for, bringing the people and the readers to that point where they could stand with prophets and priests in the presence of God.

Several General Authorities have spoken about 3 Nephi. President N. Eldon Tanner said:

Nowhere in scriptures do we have a more beautiful or detailed record of

God’s dealings with man. This will do more than anything else to bring

peace and happiness to the world and to the individual seeking such a way

of life.

He concluded, “3 Nephi gives us additional information in more detail than the Four Gospels in the New Testament, and preserves the doctrines, teaching, and compassion of the Lord.”

President Ezra Taft Benson said, “It is clear that 3 Nephi contains some of the most moving and powerful passages in all of scripture. It testifies of Jesus Christ, his prophets, and the doctrines of salvation.” He encouraged discussion of its sacred contents to determine how readers can liken the teachings unto themselves and apply them.

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland said:

That appearance and that declaration constituted the focal point, the

supreme moment in the entire history of the Book of Mormon. This was

the day that everyone had talked of, they had sung of, dreamed of, and

prayed for, that he was actually there. The day of days, the God who turns

every dark night into morning light had arrived. We have called it the

crowning jewel of the Book of Mormon.”

Robert J. Matthews, a former professor of Ancient Scripture at BYU said, “Third Nephi offers greater insight into the activity and scope of Jesus’ work than that found in the Bible alone.”

Neal A. Lambert, a Professor at BYU offered a beautiful statement:

Any study of the Book of Mormon must acknowledge the remarkable

complexity and sophistication of this unique book. We must assume that

the selection and arrangement of the words and events are not random or

accidental, but rather ordered and intentional, giving to the text an

integrity that invites careful consideration and analysis, even when it may

not follow our usual expectations. To put it in other words, 3 Nephi is not

only remarkably complex, but also remarkably efficient.

3 Nephi 1–7 897

Ed J. Pinegar calls it a “resplendent portrait of what it means to live the gospel, to enjoy the blessings of bringing souls to him and to know the happiness that can come alone from the love of God and obedience to his commandments.”

That was just a small sample of statements that aim to define what a beautiful, amazing book this is. 3 Nephi is the word of God. It reports truly the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the events that those people were blessed with, and the promises that everyone can have equally.

Here are some study questions for you to consider as you read these seven chapters:

• What can we know or discern about who wrote the original record that stands

behind these chapters?

• Why did Mormon choose to include the materials that he did?

• Do we hear Mormon’s direct voice at any points in these chapters?

• In these chapters we read about (1) the sign of the birth of Christ and the various

reactions of the people to this development, (2) the demand of Giddianhi that

Lachoneus surrender, (3) Lachoneus’ defensive response, and (4) the defeat of the

robbers and the execution of their leader Zemnarihah. What lessons for daily

living might a person find throughout these chapters?

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Has 3 Nephi Been Called ‘the Focal Point, the

Supreme Moment’ in the Book of Mormon?” (3 Nephi 11:10),” KnoWhy 201 (October 4, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 19, no. 1, (2010): 36.

N. Eldon Tanner, “Christ in America,” General Conference (April 1975).

Ezra Taft Benson, “The Savior’s Visit to America,” General Conference (April 1987).

Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2009), 250–251.

Robert J. Matthews, “Jesus the Savior in 3 Nephi,” in The Book of Mormon: 3 Nephi 9–30, This Is My Gospel, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1993), 25–39.

Neal A. Lambert, “The Symbolic Unity of Christ’s Ministry in 3 Nephi,” in The Book of Mormon: 3 Nephi 9–30, This Is My Gospel, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1993), 195–209.

Ed J. Pinegar, Teachings and Commentary on the Book of Mormon (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2003).

898 John W. Welch Notes

3 Nephi 1

Consider the following questions as you study this chapter.

• Why do you think Jesus was born when he was? How many answers to this

question might there be? How was the timing of the birth of the Messiah

understood as being foretold in the book of Daniel and in the 600-year prophecy

in the Book of Mormon?

• How critical to the success of the missions of Jesus and Joseph was the precise

timing of their births?

• Was it “reasonable” for people to threaten to put to death anyone who continued

to believe in the words of Samuel the Lamanite if his prophecies had not been

fulfilled? In your heart of hearts, how do you think you would have acted if you

had been among those who believed in the words of Samuel the prophet?

• What reasons might people have given arguing that they could stop living the law

of Moses as soon as the sign of Christ’s birth was given? Why would they have

been eager to stop keeping the law of Moses? (3 Nephi 1:21).

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Early Mormonism and Early Christianity: Some Providential

Similarities,” in Window of Faith: Latter-day Saint Perspectives on World History, ed. Roy A. Prete (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 2005), 17–38.

3 Nephi 1:2–3 — Nephi, the Son of Nephi, as High Priest Keeps the Records It is a little ambiguous whether Mormon or Nephi3 wrote the majority of 3 Nephi. Scholars suggest that it was mostly written by Nephi, but Mormon broke in at a few places. Mormon was very careful to indicate when he was interjecting select commentary.

The text records that Nephi3 had several defining experiences in both his youth and in his leadership role. The early years of Nephi3 were eventful and influential. The various events that affected his training and values led him to become a great prophet at a critical time of that dispensation.

We can estimate an approximate time of birth for Nephi3 by evaluating the surrounding circumstances. Nephi’s father was a missionary that left for long periods to teach various segments of the Nephite population. It is unlikely that Nephi3 would have been born before his father returned from a seven-year mission to the land northward in the sixty-ninth year of the reign of the judges. It is more likely he would have been born around the seventieth year of the judges.

3 Nephi 1–7 899

Therefore, in the ninety-first year of the judges—the year of the fulfillment of Samuel the Lamanite’s prophecy—he would have been twenty-one or twenty-two years old, depending on when his birthday fell in that year. Thirty-four years later, he would stand in the presence of the Savior at Bountiful. He would have been about fifty-six years old at that time, a little longer than the customary fifty years for a high priest.

The birth of a child is a more significant moment for a young parent than almost any other event. We are told that Nephi4, the son of Nephi3, wrote the book 4 Nephi and kept the record for 84 years. Nephi4 was possibly born somewhere in those first five years after the sign of the birth of the Savior. As a 22-year-old high priest, Nephi3 would have had to have been married. Considering the nature and knowledge of this young Nephi, his parents clearly took their responsibilities for teaching the gospel seriously.

Nephi3 was called by his father to be the high priest early in life. He is never referred to as the high priest in the record, but his priestly responsibilities and stewardships are implied or presupposed throughout this book. Since he was not the chief judge (Lachoneus), and he was not a military commander, the only thing that he could have been, in light of his duties, was the high priest. As the high priest, he was accountable for “all those things that had been kept sacred from the departure of Lehi” (3 Nephi 1:2). He was in charge of the church, and he was responsible for the temple in the city of Zarahemla where he lived. He lived in the same city in which King Benjamin had spoken. It was the city in which Alma the Younger, his ancestor, had been the first Chief Judge under the reign of the judges. His great-great grandfather and his ancestors, Alma, Helaman, Helaman, and Nephi, all had their home in the City of Zarahemla.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Should 3 Nephi be Read as the Book of the High Priest Nephi? (3 Nephi heading),” KnoWhy 577 (September 8, 2020).

3 Nephi 1:3 — Why Did Nephi’s Father Leave?

It is hard to know why Nephi2 left. There is no given data on exactly how old he was, but estimates gleaned from the text in other places indicate that he would have been about fifty-four years old. Under the Law of Moses, fifty years old was the mandatory retirement age for a priest. Being a priest involved difficult manual labor. They had to slaughter animals, build fires to make the burnt offerings, and care for the temple fixtures. Thus, the Book of Numbers (8:25) says that at fifty, they had to retire. While we may not think of fifty as particularly old, life expectancy in antiquity was much younger.

There is no information about where Nephi2 went, but he may have been leaving on a mission as he had done before. He had previously gone to the land south to do some missionary work in the sixty-third year of the judges, and returned at the end of the sixty-900 John W. Welch Notes

ninth year, almost seven years later. It is possible that he needed to go on a similar mission and expected to be back. He knew that there had been a five-year prophecy, and that the time was drawing near. However, he did not stay to find out what was going to happen, and he left his young son, Nephi3, and his people with that situation hanging over them.

3 Nephi 1:9 — The Believers Are Threatened with Death Nearly five years earlier, the unbelievers had decided that they were going to draw a line in the sand: if the prophecies of Samuel the Lamanite were not fulfilled within five years, they would take it as evidence that Samuel was a false prophet. The faithful that continued to believe in the prophecies of Samuel the Lamanite after they had not been fulfilled were then to be considered in violation of a capital law. There was a Hebrew saying that if a man followed a prophet, he would get a prophet’s reward. Jesus used that statement. However, according to Deuteronomy 18, if a person followed a false prophet, he would then get a false prophet’s reward, which was the death penalty. If members of the church had continued to follow what the people regarded as a false prophet, the threat of death makes clear sense when viewed strictly according to their law.

3 Nephi 1:11–14 — Nephi Prayed and the Lord Answered Him The book of 3 Nephi begins, not with information about the writer’s childhood and education, but with a very sacred revelation. It came at a critical time when Nephi cried mightily to the Lord for an entire day on behalf of his people, who were about to be killed because they believed the words of Samuel the Lamanite.

In 3 Nephi 11:18–21, when the Savior arrived at Bountiful, he called Nephi out from the crowd first, an event that may have been connected to a previous great and important moment. About thirty-four years before the Savior’s public arrival, the unbelievers were planning to kill those that believed Samuel the Lamanite unless the signs of Christ’s birth occurred by a particular day. Nephi realized that his father, Nephi2, had gone and he knew that the faithful were up against a serious deadline, so he went to pray.

The record does not say where he went to pray, it records only that he “bowed himself down unto the earth,” but as the high priest, he would most likely have gone into the Holy of Holies of their temple. The temple in the City of Nephi was built using the floor plan of the Temple of Solomon (2 Nephi 5:16). One may suppose that the temples in Zarahemla and Bountiful were patterned after that model, because the people continued to live the same Law of Moses. The temples would have accommodated the requirements for the performances and ordinances, including a Holy of Holies where the atonement was prefigured, and where the Lord was expected to appear.

In answer to Nephi’s prayer, the Lord responded, “be of good cheer; for … on the morrow come I into the world.” (3 Nephi 1:13). Thus, Nephi had encountered the Savior about

3 Nephi 1–7 901

thirty-four years before his public arrival in the western hemisphere. That might have been why Nephi was so glad to see the Savior again, and maybe vice versa. It may have been a remarkable reunion after thirty-four years. The Savior, in the early encounter, had reassured Nephi that the prophecies were about to be fulfilled.

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 19, no. 1, (2010): 36.

3 Nephi 1:15 — Samuel the Lamanite’s Prophecy Fulfilled The sign was given as Samuel had prophesied. That night, exactly as the Lord had told Nephi, “at the going down of the sun there was no darkness; and the people began to be astonished because there was no darkness when the night came.” Many who had laid a snare for the believers were afraid and fell to the earth. They were astonished, and probably many were afraid. Even though some believed the earth could move at God’s command, “and it appeareth unto man that the sun standeth still” (Helaman 12:15), Samuel was clearly talking about something else entirely, as he said they would be able to clearly discern the setting and rising of the sun, and there would still be no darkness (Helaman 14:4). So, the sun would not appear still in this instance.

But how did an event like this occur? The answer is simply that we do not know. A miracle can be defined as a beneficial event brought about through divine power that mortals do not understand and of themselves cannot duplicate. God uses miracles so that great benefits may be brought about for mankind “according to their faith” (Mosiah 8:18; Alma 37:40). At the same time, Elder John A. Widtsoe, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and himself a scientist, gave assurances that “this is a universe of law and order,” and thus “a miracle simply means a phenomenon not understood, in its cause and effect relations.”

Hugh Nibley suggested to his students that this sign could have been caused by a supernova, comparing it to one in AD 1054 which “could be seen all over the world” and “was almost as bright as the sun,” yet Samuel made it sound like the new star in the sky

was a separate sign during the night without darkness (Helaman 14:5).

John A. Tvedtnes noted some possible similarities to the atmospheric effects caused by an explosion that took place in a remote part of Russia on June 30, 1908. Known to scholars simply as the “Tunguska event,” scientists are still unsure what exactly caused the explosion. Its effect on the night sky, however, is well documented. As reported by NASA, “Night skies glowed, and reports came in that people who lived as far away as Asia could read newspapers outdoors as late as midnight.”

902 John W. Welch Notes

The Book of Mormon is absolutely clear on the overriding reality that the Lord Jesus did in fact condescend to come and dwell as a mortal among mankind, and to suffer and die, bringing to pass the resurrection and immortality of all the sons and daughters of God. Just as the sign announcing his birth brought light and deliverance to the Nephites, He will bring light and deliverance to all who come unto Him.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How was There a Night Without Darkness? (3 Nephi 1:15), KnoWhy 188 (September 15, 2016) “While obviously no explosion was reported in the Book of Mormon, it should be pointed out that (1) the explosion happened in the morning of June 30, 1908, so would not have been seen immediately before nightfall; and (2) the nightlight effect was stronger at greater distances away from the explosion. If a similar, though perhaps smaller scale, phenomena occurred in a remote area somewhere a few hundred miles from Nephite territory, they likely would not have seen, felt, or heard the explosion. In the Tunguska event, the falling object was seen as “a bright bluish-white light in the sky” from 600 miles away.”

Book of Mormon, “Why Did Mormon Say the Children of Men are Less than the

Dust of the Earth? (Helaman 12:7),” KnoWhy 183 (September 8, 2016).

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does the Book of Mormon Help Date the First

Christmas? (3 Nephi 1:13),” KnoWhy 255 (December 21, 2016).

Paul C. Hedengren, “Miracles,” in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4 vols., ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (New York, NY: Macmillan, 1992), 2:908.

John A. Widtsoe, Joseph Smith as Scientist: A Contribution to Mormon Philosophy (Salt Lake City, UT: YMMIA, 1908), 35.

John A. Tvedtnes, “A Modern Example of Night without Darkness,” Insights: An Ancient Window 18, no. 5 (October 1998): 4.

Hugh Nibley, Teachings of the Book of Mormon, 4 vols. (American Fork and Provo, UT: Covenant Communications and FARMS, 2004), 3:291.

1 Nephi 1:21 — Also a Star

Samuel the Lamanites prophesied not only of the great over-night light, but added that a

new star, “such an one as ye never have beheld,” would also appear (Helaman 14:5). The Book of Mormon made sure that the appearance of a new star was also recorded: “And it came to pass also that a new star did appear, according to the word.”

3 Nephi 1–7 903

3 Nephi 2–7

Many things can be said about the twists and turns in the next thirty-three years covered in the next six chapters. As Mormon himself will say about the complexities of these years, there are more things here in these chapters than I will be able to cover in this installment of these John W. Welch Notes. But everything that is said by Mormon in these chapters is very instructive. So, watch throughout this section for parallels to modern political turmoil, social conflicts, and spiritual problems. They are easy to spot, but hard to solve, except—as this Nephi would like us to learn—by faith in, and faithfulness before, the Lord Jesus Christ. From the Book of Mormon’s perspective, that is what this world ultimately needs now: a continuous striving for the fulness of righteousness by obedience to the complete plan that God the Father has ordained for our salvation and exaltation through the atonement of His Beloved Son.

3 Nephi 2

You may wish to consider the following questions:

• 3 Nephi 2:1–3. What do these verses teach about the role that the heart plays in

baptized members remaining constant or moving toward apostasy? Does the

heart, or our feelings and attitudes, make a difference? Do they play a significant

role? In what way? How can we guard ourselves from hard-heart syndrome?

• 3 Nephi 2:1–3. What role do signs play in conversion? Does it make any difference

how spectacular the signs are? How quickly did the people forget or rationalize

away the signs? Are signs a cure for disbelief? What did Jesus say about signs?

What can we do to keep such blessings in our minds?

• 3 Nephi:5–8. From what three successive points of origin did the Nephites use to

calculate their years?

3 Nephi 2:1–3 — The Role of the Heart in Apostasy The word heart is used five times in these three verses to discuss the influence of Satan over the Nephites who had wandered into apostasy and forgot the sign of the Savior’s birth.

In verse 1, they became “hard in their hearts, and blind in their minds.” They were less impressed by and even disbelieving the wonders and miracles they had seen. 904 John W. Welch Notes

In verse 2, they were imagining “some vain things in their hearts” that those miracles had been conjured up by man with the aid of the devil in order to “deceive the hearts of the people.” Thus, Satan controlled their hearts and led them into disbelieving the doctrine of Christ.

In verse 3, as the people began to resist the Gospel and failed to keep the commandments, Satan continued to lead away their hearts, “tempting them and causing them that they should do great wickedness in the land.”

This makes it clear that apostasy is largely a condition of the heart. Once the people forgot, took for granted, and then rationalized the blessings, they stopped believing and were easily led into sinful behavior.

3 Nephi 2:1 — The Role of Signs

In Matthew 12:38–39, Pharisees asked Jesus for a sign of his authority. Jesus gave his famous response: “An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign.” Jesus taught that signs are not a cure for disbelief (see also Matthew 16:4; Mark 8:12; Luke 11:29; cf. Jacob 7:13–14; Alma 30:44; Alma 32:17).

Noticeable signs did not change these unbelievers very much. They had seen the major sign of Christ’s birth—the night where it did not get dark—but they seem to have rationalized it away. The people may have been behaving sinfully, and may have missed some of the miracles and signs. Even when they had seen them, they ascribed the signs and wonders to “the power of the Devil.” This is exactly the result that Satan had been trying to achieve. Mormon stated, despondently, “and thus did Satan get possession of the hearts of the people again.” Signs that follow faith tend to strengthen faith, but signs do not function well as faith-bringers, and may even generate rationalization.

3 Nephi 2:3 — They Did Not Believe That There Should Be Any More Signs or Wonders

Over the next ten years, the disbelief continued to grow among the people: Thus, in the space of less than fifteen years from the sign of Christ’s birth, the land went from a state of peace, where “the more part of the people did believe” (3 Nephi 1:22–23), to “a state of many afflictions,” where the people faced destruction because of their iniquity and disbelief (3 Nephi 2:19).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Were Many Nephites So Quick to Disbelieve the

Signs of Christ’s Coming? (3 Nephi 2:3),” KnoWhy 189 (September 16, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon,”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 19, no. 1, (2010): 36–55. “These years witnessed gross errors, robbers, secret oaths, anti-establishment rituals, taunting, slaughter, fear,

3 Nephi 1–7 905

blood, execution, iniquity, murder, conspiracy, and assassination, even to the point of stoning the prophets and casting them out from among them.”

3 Nephi 2:4–8 —A New Dating System

Here again we get a brief log of the years from the ninety-sixth year of the reign of the judge to the one hundredth year. They apparently passed uneventfully as far as useful recordable events were concerned, as before when the people “waxed strong in iniquity.” So, one-hundred years had passed since Mosiah established the system of judges. In addition, the record specifies that there had been nine years since the sign of the Savior’s birth, and 609 years since Lehi left Jerusalem.

This is a prelude to the noting of the change in calculating time. “The Nephites began to reckon their time from this period when the sign was given, or from the coming of Christ” (v. 8). Thus, from now on, the years given in the record were calculated from the birth of Christ.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does the Book of Mormon Help Date the First

Christmas? (3 Nephi 1:13),” KnoWhy 255 (December 21, 2016).

3 Nephi 3

As you study, ask yourself the following:

• What did it mean in the ancient world to “seal” a letter or a document? (3 Nephi

3:5) How do we use the word “seal” today?

• What was Lachoneus’ strategy, and why did his seven-year plan succeed?

3 Nephi 3:1–7 Giddianhi’s Letter

The Gadianton robbers had enormous power, and became the chief adversary to the righteous Nephites. Giddianhi was the governor of the band, and he knew the evil covenant. In 3 Nephi 3:2–10, Giddianhi sent a letter to Lachoneus requiring him to surrender to the Gadianton band “because of your wickedness in retaining from them their rights of government.” These were indigenous people who appeared to be an older civilization than the Nephites. They claimed that their land, their power, and their control had been taken away unjustly. Giddianhi offered Lachoneus and the Nephites the “opportunity” to become part of the secret combination, swearing the ancient evil oaths. “Yield yourselves up unto us, and unite with us and become acquainted with our secret works, and become our brethren that ye may be like unto us.” See 3 Nephi 6:28–29 for more on a possible origin for Giddianhi.

906 John W. Welch Notes

Giddianhi began his letter graciously. “Lachoneus, most noble and chief governor of the land, behold, I write this epistle unto you, and do give unto you exceedingly great praise because of your firmness … yea, ye do stand well, as if ye were supported by the hand of a god” (3:2). His letter followed several uniquely ancient conventions of politeness. For example, in his introduction, he deferentially mentioned Lachoneus first, as was customary in the “ancient Hittite-Syrian, Neo-Assyrian, Amarna, and Hebrew format,” as well as in the Book of Mormon itself.

His letter also mirrors forms of politeness found in ancient Egyptian letters. According to Kim Ridealgh, “when a subordinate individual writes to his superior, a longer formal introduction is necessary alongside more fawning language” Such is clearly the case in Giddianhi’s letter, where excessive praise and flattery saturate his opening remarks (3 Nephi 3:2–3).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why was Giddianhi So Polite? (3 Nephi 3:2), KnoWhy 190 (September 19, 2016).

Robert F. Smith, “Epistolary Form in the Book of Mormon,” FARMS Review 22, no. 2 (2010): 125–135.

Sidney B. Sperry, “Types of Literature in the Book of Mormon: Epistles, Psalms,

Lamentations,”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 4, no. 1 (1995): 69–80.

3 Nephi 3:19–20 — Righteous Prayer Used by the Nephite Generals for Aid How would it be to have our civil and military leaders be people who had the spirit of revelation “and also prophecy?” Both Gidgiddoni (the general of the Nephites) and Lachoneus (the chief judge) were prophets. The people petitioned Gidgiddoni to pray to the Lord to confirm their own plan, instead of to align their will with God’s. They asked for prayers that they “may fall upon the robbers and kill the robbers.”

The people had been in tight quarters for seven years, which may have excused them slightly from not following proper patterns of prayer and performances, but they were not offering prayers themselves to alleviate their situation. They expected the General to offer a prayer for them, even with directed content. Fortunately, he did not take the bait.

In contrast, Lachoneus taught them to pray, in verse 25, to “put up their prayers unto the Lord their God that he would deliver them in the time that their enemies should come down against them to battle.” They waited for their enemies to attack, and were protected by the Lord and aided to success.
