3 Nephi 1–7 907

3 Nephi 4

Study questions to ponder:

• What do you think it would have been like to participate in the execution of

Zemnarihah?

• What happened in this episode?

• Was his execution legal? Why was he not given a trial?

• What emotions were certainly involved for all those involved in this event?

3 Nephi 4:4 — The Nephites Stockpile Their Resources Lachoneus gathered the Nephites into a limited space surrounded by defenses with the intent of staying there for seven years if necessary. They had food, flocks and herds, and everything valuable to sustain them for seven years, whereas the robbers had nothing to eat unless they could rob and pillage.

The seven-year storage plan pointed back to Joseph in Egypt. The Egyptians were advised and guided to use the stock of the seven-years of plenty to prepare for the seven years of famine.

President Kimball urged the saints to plant gardens and fruit trees. In April 1976 he said, “We are most grateful for the excellent response by the people of the Church to our urging that gardens be planted and that fruit trees be cultivated.”

In October 2006, President Hinckley advised the following:

“The best food storage is not in welfare grain elevators, but in sealed cans and

bottles in the homes of our people. What a gratifying thing it is to see cans of wheat

and rice and beans under the beds or in the pantries of women who have taken

welfare responsibility into their own hands. Such food may not be tasty, but it will

be nourishing if it has to be used.”

Lachoneus’ strategy was successful not only because the people cooperated with him, but also because he was a good, inspired leader. Lachoneus advised them, “except ye repent of all your iniquities, and cry unto the Lord, ye will in no wise be delivered out of the hands of those Gadianton robbers.” One may wonder if they set up a tent tabernacle in the temporary living quarters. It would have been quite a sacrifice to permanently leave behind their traditional temple and their capital city of Zarahemla.

3 Nephi 4:28 — Zemnarihah Is Hanged and the Tree Is Chopped Down Ancient Israelite law allowed for the execution of people by hanging them on a tree. It was a type of crucifixion. We tend to think that victims were hanged by a noose; however, 908 John W. Welch Notes

they also could hang them by their arms. One way or another when people were crucified by hanging on a tree they died of asphyxiation; they could not breathe. Eventually, their diaphragm became exhausted and they were unable to breathe anymore. That may be how Jesus died. He took his last breath and said “Into thy hands I commend my spirit” (Luke 23:46), and he died.

The detail here about how they killed this robber informs us that they were well aware of this mode of crucifixion or execution. Zenos and Zenock prophesied that Jesus would be crucified. Here in 3 Nephi, leading up to the point when they see the signs of the death of Christ there is a little more information on the topic.

In later Jewish law, once someone had been crucified on a tree, according to the Rabbis, the tree must be chopped down. The reason is that you want to remove from all memory the wickedness of this person who had been so ignominiously put to death. Eventually, some pointed out that they would not have many trees left if they did that. The Rabbis determined that it was acceptable to use a post as a substitute for a tree. Here among the Nephites, there appeared to be plenty of trees around, so they still chopped the tree down as a symbol of bringing Zemnarihah down, and also so that his memory would be obliterated.

I have asked several scholars if they have ever heard of any passages, other than the one in the medieval Maimonides, that talks about chopping down the tree on which a criminal was executed so that people would not have to see the tree and be reminded of that wicked person. None have ever said that they had ever seen or heard of this practice anywhere else. When I showed one scholar in particular this instance in the Book of Mormon, he said, “Well, … that is really interesting.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the People Cut Down the Tree after Hanging

Zemnarihah? (3 Nephi 4:28),” KnoWhy 192 (September 21, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Judicial Punishments: Types and Rationales: Hanging on a Tree (and

Crucifixion),” in The Legal Cases in the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT: BYU Press, 2008), 352–354.

W. Reid Litchfield, “The Search for the Physical Cause of Jesus Christ’s Death,” BYU Studies 37 no. 4 (1997–1998), 93–109.

John W. Welch, “The Execution of Zemnarihah,” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 250–252.

3 Nephi 4:29–33 — The Nephites Praise God and Sing “Hosanna.” This tells us quite a bit about Nephite worship. This hosanna cry was something that they would perform as they approached the temple, as in Psalm 118. It represents a triumph, a

3 Nephi 1–7 909

victory in which the king is coming into his city and into the temple. It is perfectly suitable for this great victory celebration.

Notice also that this victory song talks about the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. The righteous Nephites are still very much involved with the covenant that God made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, even this far into their history in the New World. This triad appears again in 3 Nephi 20—22, in which Jesus talks about the renewal of that covenant and its importance in the temple. In Leviticus 26, which is the conclusion and culmination of the whole book, God makes a promise to Israel. If Israel disobeyed, there would be curses. But no matter where they were, no matter how far away they went, no matter how removed from him they might become, he would never forget them, and he would never forget the covenant that he had made with “Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham” (Lev. 26:42). Notice that these three names appear here in Leviticus in the reverse order that is normally found. This text was used in one of the holiest moments in the ancient Israelite observance of their covenant renewal. It was a recognition of God’s promises to bless them, but also the consequences of their violating that covenant.

We can imagine how desperate the Nephites were. They may have thought they had won the war when Giddianhi was killed. However, when his follower Zemnarihah arose they had to go at it again. Because this was the second time the Lord delivered them, the Nephites responded with a really powerful expression of piety and worship. The next time the people shout “hosanna,” it will be at the Savior’s appearance in 3 Nephi 11.

3 Nephi 5

3 Nephi 5 — Study Questions

• 3 Nephi 5 13–19. Mormon inserted another interlude of commentary. Upon which

plates did he say he was writing?

• 3 Nephi 5:13–14. Why, according to Mormon, was it expedient for him to “make a

record of these things which have been done?” Which prayers were in need of

fulfilment? See Enos 1:13–18 and Doctrine and Covenants 10:46–49.

• 3 Nephi 5:16–17. What two components did Mormon include in his record?

3 Nephi 5:8–29 — “Behold, I Am Called Mormon” This part of 3 Nephi is a third-person abridgement-commentary by Mormon, who identified himself here in a traditional manner used in writing a letter or document. He declared himself to be “a disciple of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I have been called of him to declare his word among his people, that they might have everlasting life” (v. 13). In good scribal style, he assures us that he knew that the record that he made was a just and 910 John W. Welch Notes

a true record (v. 18). Notice also that this is an early statement by Mormon of his purpose in writing the Book of Mormon. On the Title Page, which is more familiar to most readers of the Book of Mormon, Moroni will eventually state the purpose of this entire book somewhat differently from his perspective.

Mormon also noted here that his record was to be kept according to the “will of God, that the prayers of those who have gone hence, who were the holy ones, should be fulfilled according to their faith (v. 14). What a mission, and how well he fulfilled it, even though he struggled because, as he says, there were many things which “according to our language, we are not able to write” (6:18). One wonders about the written language limitations Mormon apparently had to deal with.

3 Nephi 5:25 — Mormon Discusses the Covenants of the Lord In this single verse, the word “covenant,” or “covenanted” was used five times. According to Hebrew numerology, five was the number that represented blessings, gifts, and generosity. Here, Mormon was really going out of his way to say that he sees this as the ultimate covenant; in a way, he is saying that this is covenanting to the fifth power.

And again, in Alma 6:28–30, when wicked men made a covenant to get gain and follow the devil, Mormon went out of his way to imbed the word covenant five times in that instance as well. Just like fighting fire with fire, these robbers are fighting covenant power with covenant power! (see also 3 Nephi 6:28–30).

3 Nephi 6

3 Nephi 6 — Study Questions

• 3 Nephi 6: 14. As often happens, there was a small group that remained firm,

steadfast, and immovable. Who were they? What causes people to remain

steadfast during difficult times? What did Moroni mean by saying they were

“converted unto the true faith?” What steps can we take to ensure that our faith

and commitment to the Lord are immovable?

• 3 Nephi 6:26–30. How did the old oaths and secret combinations arise again? What

did Moroni say the source was in Ether 8:15–26? Who is maintaining the oaths?

What can we do to avoid having these problems in our day?

3 Nephi 6:10–30 — Wicked Men Enter Secret Oaths and Combinations In 3 Nephi 6, peace, righteousness, and prosperity reign for a time. By verse 10, the twenty-ninth year after the sign of the birth of Christ, “there began to be some disputings among the people; and some were lifted up unto pride and boastings because of their exceedingly

3 Nephi 1–7 911

great riches, yea, even unto great persecutions.” Within a short time, we find here another very complete but rapid example of the pride cycle: Prosperity, peace, construction, highways “cast up” (as the new LiDAR imaging shows in the lowlands of the Yucatan), travel, boastings, persecutions, professionalizing, social stratification based on wealth and learning, returning “railing for railing” (3 Nephi 6:13), inequality, breaking up (6:14), but some remained “firm, steadfast, and immovable” (6:14; compare 1 Nephi 2:10). Generally, this led to corruption, anger, murder, and setting “at defiance the law and rights of their country” (6:30), all in preparation for the demise and destruction of the wicked.

By 3 Nephi 6:28–29, the government had collapsed to the point where the people reverted to their family tribes, oaths were sworn by secret combinations; and the wicked leaders, including judges, lawyers, and the priests, had entered into a false and wicked covenant. It was a pseudo-covenant that mimicked the covenants of God.

We might wonder where this old covenant from the Devil came from. It is first encountered historically in the book of Ether, among the Jaredites. When the plates of Ether were translated, the Nephite leaders made a big point to prevent people from reading the terms of that covenant, because these secret promises were preserved in that record. Satan promised that he is the God of this world, and he would grant power unto those who worshiped him. The Jaredites bought into those promises, to their ultimate demise.

At the final Jaredite battle, almost all the people were destroyed, but it is possible that some people fled. One of the survivors, Coriantumr, was found towards the end of the Book of Omni. These Jaredite survivors may possibly be the source of the secret combinations that appear so abruptly in 3 Nephi.

Once the sign of the birth had been given, all the people seemed to have been in agreement for a time. However, the opposers regrouped and presented more arguments against it. It appears that within a very short time, the tide swung back, and a group of people were adamantly opposed to recognizing the signs that have been given.

3 Nephi 7

• 3 Nephi 7:1–6. How many years after the sign of the birth of Christ did the Nephite

society collapse and return to a tribal form of Government? What caused that to

happen? Under whose power were these people? If we see similar problems

arising, can we do anything about it? (Hint: Remain steadfast. See the end of 3

Nephi 7:7, and also 17–21).

• 3 Nephi 7:14–19. Nephi courageously continued in his ministry. How hostile and

resistant were those who opposed him? Like other prophets, Nephi’s brother 912 John W. Welch Notes

Timothy (3 Nephi 19:4) was stoned to death. What great miracle did Nephi

perform on behalf of his brother?

• 3 Nephi 7:23–26. How successful were Nephi’s efforts? What does Mormon say

that helps us remember that repentance is only the first step, and baptism must

follow? How important is that step of baptism, and why is it important?

3 Nephi 7:15–23 — Nephi Is Ministered to By Angels and Visions Important moments during the years after the sign of the birth of the Savior brought Nephi into close contact with the Savior. At the end of 3 Nephi 7, we learn that in years before the Savior appeared in Bountiful, many more miracles were performed. Devils were cast out, people were healed and converted, and Nephi even raised his brother from the dead.

In addition to speaking of these miracles, 3 Nephi 7:15 says that Nephi had “been visited by angels.” When those angels appeared to him, he may have connected that experience with the time when his father, Nephi2, who with his brother Lehi, was likewise encircled and administered to by angels (see Helaman 5). He probably realized that he had filled those great shoes of his father, indicated by his having been blessed with a similar experience. In addition, because of his great faith, he was ministered to by angels daily as he carried out his responsibilities (3 Nephi 7:18).

Verse 15 relates that Nephi had “power given unto him that he might know concerning the ministry of Christ.” This would have been two or three years before the death of Jesus. This does not refer only to the eternal ministry of Jesus up in the heavens. Nephi was aware of what was going on in Galilee and Judea. He could see that Christ was taking upon himself the sins of all people. Because of his love for his people, Nephi wanted everybody to start doing what was right so they could come unto the Savior and avoid having to go through other horrible experiences. He was able to know what was happening in the Old World as miracles were performed, teachings were being given, and apostles were being called. He saw the pattern and was no doubt astonished when he eventually saw the Savior implementing the same system in the land of Bountiful among his own people.

Not only did he see the ministry of Christ, according 3 Nephi 7:15, he was also an eyewitness to the quick turning back of many of his own people to their previous state of wickedness and abominations. He saw many, like the 5,000 who had wanted to be fed and who wanted to embrace the Gospel, but who quickly turned away (John 6). He saw multitudes following John the Baptist, but they also quickly returned to their old ways. In verse 16, Nephi was deeply “grieved for the hardness of their hearts.” He went forth and testified even more boldly of the importance of repentance so that his people would be prepared.

3 Nephi 1–7 913

3 Nephi 7:17–18 — The Righteous Are Prepared for the Calamities When the great catastrophes soon enough came, the righteous were preserved. They had been called, motivated, and inspired to repent and to leave behind their wickedness. Nephi loved the people, but he had seen in vision how quickly they could fall away. He had already learned what was needed to apply the Atonement, and therefore he was personally instrumental and responsible for seeing that righteous people were there to meet the Savior when he came. 3 Nephi 7:17 says, “He did minister with power and with great authority.” “He did minister many things unto them” too sacred to record completely and too interwoven to speak of them only in part. In verse 18, it says that Nephi taught so well and with such a powerful spirit that “it were not possible that they could disbelieve his words, for so great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto him daily.” So, when the calamities struck and when Jesus appeared, Nephi and his righteous followers were prepared in many ways to receive the teachings of Jesus, to begin exercising the authority that he bestowed upon them, and to recognize who it was who came among them as an exalted being. When Jesus appeared at the Temple in Bountiful, he did not just come out of the blue, so to speak.
