1NEPHI 16–22

John W. Welch Notes



1 Nephi 16

1 Nephi 16:2–5 — How to Keep the Commandments Nephi’s brothers, unwilling to listen to what he has told them, complained that he had “declared unto us hard things, more than we are able to bear” (1 Nephi 16:1). In essence, Nephi said back to them, “Well, the guilty take the truth to be hard, so it is not surprising that you think these are hard to bear.” It cut them to the very center. But then Nephi got more positive. Obviously, he had diagnosed their problem, which is that most people who are in some kind of spiritual duress already know that they are in that state, and do not want to be told how hard-hearted they are.

Nephi gave them three very helpful steps. He began, “Now my brethren...” Nephi was shifting his tone away from a warning and condemning tone. “Now my brethren, if ye were righteous and were willing to hearken to the truth, and give heed unto it, that ye might walk uprightly before God, then ye would not murmur because of the truth” (1 Nephi 16:3). This statement can be broken down into the following three components:

“to obey.”

attention to it. Perhaps it involves the semantic notion of heeding instructions

because there are consequences if you do not. A servant heeds the master.

knowing that we are righteous and that the Lord knows we are righteous. We

have confidence that we are in good standing. The footnote points to “walking 98 John W. Welch Notes

with God” in the Topical Guide. There is the idea of the “daily walk” (see D&C

19:32), meaning letting our daily walk be righteous. The Psalms often talk about

how we may walk with the Lord that He may be our constant companion (see,

for example, Psalms 84:11; 86:11; 89:15; 119:1). Wherever we go, He can go with

us. Our daily walk should be righteous, should be good. Thus, it is not only a

matter of knowing the truth, but of doing, and of adhering to a pattern or habit

in which we characteristically walk in this way. We do not wander around; we

walk with God.

Nephi gave us all here a formula for success, a way in which we can help ourselves and others to avoid ending up where Laman and Lemuel did.

Further Reading

Matthew L. Bowen, “‘If Ye Will Hearken’: Lehi’s Rhetorical Wordplay on Ishmael in 2

Nephi 1:28–29 and Its Implications,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship 25 (2017): 157–189.

1 Nephi 16:7–8 — Lehi’s Sons Marry Ishmael’s Daughters Nephi mentioned himself first, which is appropriate: “It came to pass that I, Nephi, took one of the daughters of Ishmael to wife” (1 Nephi 16:7). It sounds as though he chose one of them. More likely though, is that Lehi and Ishmael had already figured out who was going to go with whom, and Nephi married the daughter that he was told to take. Recall that in 1 Nephi 7:19 there was one of the daughters of Ishmael who objected when Nephi was tied up. We may hope that this daughter was the one that Nephi deserved. We do not know that, though. It would have been nice if Nephi and his wife had some say in the matter and if Nephi had said more about it.

Nephi explained that his “brethren took of the daughters of Ishmael to wife; and Zoram took the eldest daughter of Ishmael to wife” (1 Nephi 16:7). Zoram is probably the oldest, so it makes some sense that he would marry Ishmael’s eldest daughter. But think about verse 8: “and thus my father had fulfilled all the commandments of the Lord which had been given unto him.” What commandment was Nephi referring to? This surely refers, at least in part, to 1 Nephi 7:1, where the Lord commanded Lehi’s sons to “take daughters to wife, that they might raise up seed unto the Lord in the land of promise.” In addition, it was a general responsibility of fathers in the ancient world to see that their children were married.

How might this story pertain to us today? Do we as parents or grandparents have any kind of obligation to help our children get married? Or can we just sit back and say, “Well, we have this 32-year-old son who likes playing his video games, and that is

1 Nephi 16–22 99

okay.” What does the Doctrine and Covenants say about baptism? What does it say that parents need to do regarding that ordinance? It says that our children should all be baptized (see D&C 18:42; 68:27–28). And what happens if parents fail to teach that doctrine? “The sin be upon the head of the parents” (see D&C 68:25; cf. 93:40, 50).

Obviously, helping children keep any of the commandments, especially those involving entering into covenants, is part of a parent’s obligation. Parental responsibility involves helping our children choose good companions. To the best of our ability, we should see that they are raised around other children whose values are the same; hopefully that is what they will look for in a mate.

In our day, it has to be our children’s choice. We have responsibility to see that children are baptized, but they still have the choice. They must have “arrived at the years of accountability” (D&C 68:42), indicating that we ought not to take away their agency. The same principle even more strongly applies to the decision of whom they will marry and when.

In his conclusion of this segment, at the end of verse 8, Nephi says, “And also, I Nephi had been blessed of the Lord exceedingly.” That was his comment about his state of marriage. He saw it as a state of great blessedness. I think it is important for us to be a good example, and to talk positively about marriage and the blessings it can bring.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Can the Book of Mormon Strengthen Marriages and

Families? (Jacob 3:7),” KnoWhy 302 (April 19, 2017).

John L. Sorenson, “The Composition of Lehi’s Family,” in Nephite Culture and Society: Collected Papers (Salt Lake City, UT: New Sage Books, 1997), 1–24.

1 Nephi 16:12–13 — Lehi Knows How to Travel in the Wilderness We do not know exactly what sort of caravanning Lehi might have done. He seems to have known how to get around in the wilderness. When he packed up his tents, it does not say that he had to first go and obtain tents, so he apparently had tents. Why would he own tents if he was not somehow involved in the caravan trade? He understands Egyptian too. Probably, at least some of the time, he went back and forth between Egypt and Judea. What might he have taken back and forth? Usually merchants took whatever was produced in one area to another location to sell it. They would then bring back something that was not available at home and sell it there

There is good reason to believe, as we have seen recent scholarship information about the mines of Timna, that Lehi might have picked up metal ore, and then carried it up to 100 John W. Welch Notes

blacksmiths who would have used it for making things like tools, weapons, or cooking tripods. He might have even been in the blacksmith’s business himself. There was a very close connection in the ancient world between caravanners and blacksmiths because not only would someone have to travell to places where ore was available, but that person would have to have known which ore would have been most useful to him. Was that how Nephi knew how to make the plates? He had to be shown by the Lord how to build a ship, but he did not have to be told how to make tools, suggesting he already had some knowledge of blacksmithing.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Did Ancient Israelites Write in Egyptian? (1 Nephi 1:2),” KnoWhy 4 (January 5, 2016).

Neal Rappleye, “Lehi the Smelter: New Light on Lehi’s Profession,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scripture 14 (2015): 223–225.

John A. Tvedtnes, “Was Lehi a Caravaneer?” in The Most Correct Book: Insights from a Book of Mormon Scholar, 1st ed. (Salt Lake City, UT: Cornerstone Publishing, 1999), 76–98.

1 Nephi 16:23 — Nephi Asks His Father Where to Hunt At the end of verse 20, Nephi mentioned how his father—even his father!—began to “murmur against the Lord his God,” and shortly afterwards Nephi made a new bow. Nephi did not sit and complain; he just went to work. However, he first went to his father, even though his father had murmured against the Lord. Nephi asked Lehi—it being the proper order of things in families then for children to honor their parents— where he should go to obtain food (v. 23). Nephi could have sought for such a revelation himself, and he may have known perfectly well where to go. But he showed respect to his father, giving him a chance to lead again in righteousness. What a great lesson this is for all of us of all ages.

There is always some subtext involved in Nephi’s selection of subject matter in 1 Nephi, as he consistently strove to establish that he was the proper successor to his father’s priesthood, prophetic stature, and paternal authority over the family. Nephi always succeeded where his brothers failed, and of course, his brothers liked to rub that in any time Nephi appeared to be falling short. It should be remembered that Nephi was writing all of this after his people had separated from Laman and Lemuel and their followers. The Nephites had fled up into the land where they built the city of Nephi. Nephi’s people had made him their king. They had built a temple. They had the brass plates, the Liahona, and the sword of Laban. When telling his story, Nephi wanted his people to know that he was the legitimate leader, and that he knew the will of the Lord.

1 Nephi 16–22 101

He was not trying to be boastful. He just wanted to instill confidence in his people so that they would follow him as their appointed ruler.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Nephi Include the Story of the Broken Bow? (1 Nephi 16:23),” KnoWhy 421 (April 3, 2018).

1 Nephi 16:23 — Nephi Uses Sonship Names for Christ In his writings, Nephi uses ten names for Christ that no one else uses. This list provides an interesting reflection of his religious sensitivities. For example, Nephi calls Jesus “the Son of the Most High God,” “the Son of the Everlasting Father,” “the Son of Righteousness,” “the Beloved Son,” “the Very God of Israel” and “the Mighty One of Israel.” Here is a whole cluster of son names that only Nephi uses, in all the Book of Mormon. I have wondered if this use of son names is because Nephi had a unique understanding of what it means to be an obedient son, to show ultimate respect to his father. He has been there and done that, and so he would have appreciated, of all things, the son-ship of Jesus Christ. Even though Jesus was a God and had descended from heaven, He still was an obedient son.

In contrast, when Benjamin talked about the Messiah, he refers to the “Heavenly King.” He calls him “the Lord God Omnipotent.” Well, who was Benjamin? He saw himself predominantly as a king. So naturally, he would see attributes of kingship much more readily because they were personally meaningful to him. While Nephi also was a king, he was a reluctant king. He was prepared to do what he could to help his people, but he was not eager to extend himself into the mold of ancient demi-god kings. Instead, I see the element of son-ship going deep into the heart of Nephi, into his spirit, his soul, and his very being.

I wonder what it would be like to have some of these Nephite prophets come and speak at a BYU Devotional? How would you describe some of these men if you were asked to introduce them to an audience of 20,000? More than that, how might they introduce themselves? I thought in particular of how Nephi might introduce himself. “I Nephi, having been born of goodly parents,” he would have said, “I am the son of Lehi.” That was who he was. I think we see this coming through in the story of the broken bow, even when his father was in a weakened position and his faith was pushed to the limit. Nephi was still there, the faithful son.
