3NEPHI 17–19

John W. Welch Notes



3 Nephi 17 — Study Questions

In this chapter, we may ask ourselves the following questions:

• Why did Jesus teach people things that he says they would not be able to understand?

• What can a person do to understand such things better?

• What does it mean to “ponder upon the things” that one hears in Church settings?

• What do you find especially tender and impressive about the hour of healings here?

• Above all, what would you want the Lord to ask for, if he were to pray for you?

• What gives the Lord his greatest joy?

• What can we learn from the example of love that Jesus has for each child?

3 Nephi 17:6–10 — Jesus, Filled with Compassion, Healed the Nephites 3 Nephi cannot be read or understood outside of a family context. The Nephites came to the temple early in the morning. Men, women, and children were there, and may have come fasting; there would not have been much time for breakfast. For what reason were they there? It may have been some type of sacred gathering called, perhaps by Nephi himself, to determine what was going to happen next. They may have been there to give thanks to the Lord that they had survived. Regardless, they were all there. Everything which the Savior says in 3 Nephi is to men, to women, to grandparents, and to children. It is a message that applies to the entire human family.

When Jesus was about to leave at the end of that first day and cast his eyes about to the people, he saw that their eyes were steadfast on him, and that their eyes were filled with tears and his bowels, his soft inner being, was filled, not just with mercy but with 966 John W. Welch Notes

compassion, or as the German would say, with Mitleid, “with suffering together.” Jesus’s words in this tender moment are elegant, personal, and inviting:

3 Nephi 17:6–7

A Behold, my bowels are filled

B with compassion towards you.

C Have ye any sick among you?

D Bring them hither.

E Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or

leprous, or withered, or deaf, or afflicted in any manner?

D’ Bring them hither

C’ and I will heal them,

B’ for I have compassion upon you;

A’ my bowels are filled with mercy.

Jesus then drew himself close to the people through a series of intimate “I/you” statements. Here we find five such interpersonal elements, the symbolic number of mercy and compassion. These lines emotively and intimately affirm God’s personal relationship to mankind:

3 Nephi 17:8

I perceive that ye desire

that I should show unto you

what I have done unto your brethren at Jerusalem,

for I see that your faith is sufficient

that I should heal you.

The Savior was filled with compassion, so he blessed them—those who had been injured or were ill or were blind, lame, or deaf. As they had come before to touch the Lord “one by one” (3 Nephi 11:15), they now came again one by one. The word “one” at the beginning of verse 9 is echoed again in the throng coming forward with “one accord,” and at the end it is found in the individual acts of love as Jesus healed them, “every one”:

3 Nephi 17–19 967

3 Nephi 17:9

All the multitude, with one accord, did go forth

with their sick, and their afflicted, and their lame, and

with their blind, their dumb, and their afflicted in any manner;

and he did heal them every one as they were brought forth.

After they had been healed, those people came—the eyes, here again, are an important factor—and bathed his feet with their tears. I can only imagine that this was everyone— men, women and children—wanting and trying to reciprocate the love that he had shown to them.

If we are going to follow the example of Jesus, we too need to minister one by one. It is not enough to have an impersonal food bank say, “Go and get it.” There is more to it than that. We need to care for the individual needs of others, look at what their circumstances are, and love and serve them.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Jesus Minister to the People One by One? (3

Nephi 17:21), KnoWhy 209 (October 14, 2016).

For a discussion of the linguistic and literary elements in the translation of this

text, see John W. Welch, Illuminating the Sermon at the Temple and Sermon on the Mount (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1999), 179–198.

3 Nephi 17:11–15, 19–20 — Jesus Blessed the Parents Jesus then wanted to give the people a great blessing. He placed himself in the middle of the crowd, with the children roundabout him, and the parents roundabout them. Before turning to the children, Jesus blessed their parents. He prayed for them, and the text says, “the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him” (17:15). The record of the incident says, “No one can imagine the joy that filled our hearts when we heard him pray for us unto the Father” (17:17). Jesus appreciated the sacrifices and devotion of parents. He may have been praying that they would be good parents, to have the strength and wisdom to be able to do what these little children needed to have done for them. He may also have been opening to their view the promises and blessings of the eternal nature of family relationships. As Jesus looked around after blessing them, he said to those parents, “Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full” (17:20).

968 John W. Welch Notes

3 Nephi 17:17–18 — There Is Joy Especially in Temple Work Psalm 16—which has been called “a prayer for admission to the temple”—declares that “in [God’s] presence is fullness of joy” (Psalm 16:11; cf. 21:6). The “presence” of the Lord was experienced in his holy temple (Psalm 11:4; 2 Chronicles 20:9), and the psalmist equated that presence with a feeling of joy. King David spoke of the joy that he felt at merely witnessing his people’s willingness to help build God’s temple (1 Chronicles 29:17; cf. Ezra 6:16) and the psalmist exclaimed, “a day in thy courts is better than a thousand [anywhere else]. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness” (Psalm 84:10). In other words, any type of service in the temple, no matter how lowly the position, will bring a joy that is preferable to being out in the world, amongst the wicked.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why is Joy Associated with Temple Work in the

Scriptures? (3 Nephi 17:17–18), KnoWhy 372 (October 12, 2017).

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of Mormon,” Journal of the Book of Mormon and Other Restoration Scripture 19, no. 1 (2010): 36–55;

Michael D. Coogan, Marc Z. Brettler, Carol Newsom, eds., The New Oxford Annotated Bible, College Edition (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001), 786–787.

3 Nephi 17:21–23 — The Savior Then Blessed the Children The Holy of Holies was said by the ancients to be a place of supreme joy. It was characterized by the joy of the Lord, and in this case, here was Jesus and all of these people celebrating with eternal joy. He turned to the children and blessed them one by one, and after that, he turned to the parents and he said, “Behold your little ones.” I do not think he was saying, “Look at your kids. Aren’t they cute?” He was saying in effect, “Behold, your little ones; they are now yours in a way that they were not before.” This blessing was confirmed in the presence of God, of Jesus himself, of witnesses, and of angels who then came down and ministered unto the children. It is an amazing thing to imagine the Lord Himself administering such a blessing to the parents and these children whom he loved so completely.

If we look at this afternoon of healing “every one” and at the blessing of the parents and their children “one by one” (17:9, 21) through a temple lens, one can appreciate even deeper why everyone can and must go through the temple one by one and personally do, step by step, the whole sequence of ordinances. And likewise, why we do proxy work for the dead, each of them one by one.

3 Nephi 17–19 969

Such ordinances and blessings are individual matters, and covenants are made individually and personally with the Lord. Richard Holzapfel has explained, “According to the Book of Mormon model, ministering often occurs ‘one by one’ as disciples come in contact with the Savior and with one another. In many cases a personal ‘touch’ is a symbolic means of transmitting God’s love and power to an individual.” Elder Holzapfel also said,

Third Nephi, sometimes referred to as the fifth Gospel in Latter-day Saint circles,

describes Christ's post-Resurrection ministry to the Nephites in terms similar to

those used in the four New Testament Gospels. It emphasizes the individual

experiences of the Nephite people with the resurrected Messiah, noting their direct

physical contact with as well as His laying on of hands as the symbolic act of

transmitting authority and power (Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, “One by One: The

Fifth Gospel's Model of Service,” in A Book of Mormon Treasury: Gospel Insights from

General Authorities and Religious Educators (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center,

2003), 378–388).

Elder Ronald A. Rasband likewise recalled in a Conference talk, ““Certainly, there is a very profound and tender personal message here. Jesus Christ ministers to, and loves us

all, one by one” (Ronald A. Rasband, “One by One,” Ensign, November 2000).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Jesus Minister to the People One by One? (3

Nephi 17:21), KnoWhy 209 (October 14, 2016).

3 Nephi 17:24–-25 — Angels Appeared and Ministered to the Children 3 Nephi affirms the reality that angels are in the presence of God and that they serve as messengers who can minister to us. We certainly need and could use that ministering assistance in our world today. Modern theology tends to abstract God, to make him rather impersonal but also to make him lonely. The biblical view of God is not a lonely, impersonal being. God is always surrounded by the hosts of heaven. God works with the archangels, Michael and others. Jesus himself is sometimes even called the angel of the Lord. Being an angel carries connotations of purity, of power, of righteousness, and of doing the will of the Lord. In 3 Nephi, the angels must have been rejoicing on this occasion just as they did when they sang at the birth of the Savior, “Glory to God in the Highest.”

In the ancient Israelite temple, in the view of the High Priest, the seraphim surrounded the cubicle of the Holy of Holies. The seraphim were burning, bright beings. We do not know what they were except that they were clothed in white robes and their brightness exceeded all description.

970 John W. Welch Notes

Angels come as messengers. The angel Moroni came with an important message, as did the angel Gabriel. The Lord needs other people, just as we need one another. The gospel of Jesus Christ is a testimony that heaven is made up of people working in unity and harmony. In Jesus’ own intercessory prayers in John 17 and later here in 3 Nephi 19, he prays that we can be one with each other, one with him, and one with the Father, as he is. The purpose of that is to tell us the reality and the eternal nature of relationships one with another.

Angels come in the Book of Mormon to serve many purposes. In 3 Nephi, they were not so much to deliver the word of the Lord, because he—the Word of God—was there himself to do that, but angels were there to assist, minister, and to witness. These blessings were given in the presence of God, angels, and all these witnesses.

3 Nephi 18

Here are some study questions for you to consider as you turn now to the next chapter:

• How can a person better appreciate the administration of the sacrament today by

noticing the details involved in administering the sacrament in 3 Nephi 18?

• How closely does our administration of the sacrament today compare with the

administration of the sacrament here in 3 Nephi 18? See Moroni 4–5.

• What do you learn about prayer from verses 17–25 in this chapter? What do these

verses teach people about when and how to pray?

• What should a person do if he or she feels unworthy to partake of the sacrament?

• When and how did these twelve disciples receive what we and they would

probably call the Melchizedek priesthood?

• Where does Mormon show us “hereafter that this record is true” (18:37)?

• What did Jesus say to the disciples at this time? See Moroni 2:1–3.

• At the end of his first day with the people in Bountiful in 3 Nephi 18, Jesus

instituted the sacrament and gave other instructions to the people. What

connections can you find between his words of instruction in that chapter

and the teachings in 3 Nephi 12–14?

3 Nephi 18–19 Introduction

3 Nephi has been referred to as the Holy of Holies of the Book of Mormon, and in important ways chapters 18 and 19 are the heart of 3 Nephi, for in these two chapters, the Nephites entered into a new covenantal relationship personally with the Lord. In a way, chapters 18 and 19 can be thought of as the Ark of the Covenant at the very center of the Holy of Holies. There the people enter into a covenant with the Father. And then they

3 Nephi 17–19 971

pray to the Father, and they see Jesus Christ as the Great High Priest offering prayers of intercession and blessing.

In ancient Israel, the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies in the Temple in Jerusalem only on the most sacred of days, bringing about purity and eternal blessings for all who would obey and be faithful. That was the peak of Hebrew worship, and a similar, more literal experience stands here at the zenith of the Book of Mormon.

3 Nephi, as a spiritual gem and model of purifying preparation, “contains those matters that the Savior himself felt were and are most important to the functioning of his church and absolutely essential for sons and daughters of God to internalize if they want to be exalted.” As I see it, “The book of 3 Nephi lays forth a holy template for how one may dwell forever in the house of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God and the great and eternal High Priest of all mankind.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Has 3 Nephi Been Called the Crown Jewel of the

Book of Mormon? (3 Nephi 17:17), KnoWhy 210 (October 17, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of Mormon,” Journal of the Book of Mormon and Other Restoration Scripture 19, no. 1 (2010): 36–55.

Andrew C. Skinner, Third Nephi: The Fifth Gospel (Springville, UT: Cedar Fort, 2012).

3 Nephi 18:1–9 — Jesus Instituted the Sacrament

As Jesus next administered the sacrament of the bread and the wine to these people, I think some of them would have noted that, previously in their old temples, twelve loaves of what were called shew-bread were placed daily on a table in the “Holy Place,” the room called the Hekal. Only the High Priest could eat of that holy bread.

Here, instead of twelve loaves, we have twelve disciples who carry the bread to all 2,500 people who are allowed to enter into this special holy relationship, as they enter into a covenant with the Lord. The bread now represents not just the broken body as it did at the Last Supper and does in the New Testament, but as Jesus says, “Partake of this in remembrance of my body which I have shown unto you” (3 Nephi 18:7). For 3 Nephi, the bread of the sacrament represented the substance of the body of Christ—the tangible, physical, resurrected body—that these people only a few hours earlier that day had touched, felt, and worshipped. They had testified that they had witnessed the resurrected Lord, with the signs of his suffering in his hands and feet. The tangible, physical nature of that bread reminded them, and reminds us, of the reality of the Resurrection that will be all of ours through the power of the victorious subduing of death and hell by Jesus Christ. 972 John W. Welch Notes

When I partake of the sacrament and contemplate not only the death and suffering of the Lord, but especially his consequential resurrection, I am transported spiritually into the book of 3 Nephi. That text gives me and all of us the opportunity to go to the Temple in Bountiful, where we, too, can touch the bread of eternal life.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the Savior Emphasize His Risen Body in the

Nephite Sacrament? (3 Nephi 18:7), KnoWhy 211 (October 18, 2016).

3 Nephi 18:2 — Jesus Invited the People “to Sit”

In 3 Nephi 18:2, Jesus commanded the people that they “should sit.” Why did the Book of Mormon scribes bother to record and tell us that these people were all asked to sit? Is every word in the Book of Mormon there for a purpose? Presumptively, yes, and perhaps even for multiple purposes.

First, Jesus was concerned for their comfort. The multitude had probably been standing for a long time. In chapter 17, the children had been blessed, and the multitude had stood, then knelt, then stood again. The nature of the Savior is such that when people had been kneeling for a prayer for some time, he asked them to rise; when they were tired, he asked them to sit; and when they were hungry, he and his ministering angels provided spiritual and physical food. He was very aware of the needs of the people.

Second, Jesus asked them to sit to put themselves in a position to truly receive the sacrament. Latter-day Saints sit as the sacrament is blessed and passed to the congregation. Some churches have the congregation stand to take the sacrament, and some kneel, often at an altar. One may ask what difference any of that makes. Is there symbolism in being asked to “sit”? When people stand in a group, they are either waiting to be told what to do or watching something happening. People are invited to sit when they are about to be taught, and indeed partaking of the sacrament is a time to be taught. The Nephite multitude needed to be in a situation not only to be taught what they needed to know, but also to learn by the spirit of what they needed to repent.

Third, it was polite for them to wait upon the Lord. In many cultures and literatures, one must be invited to sit. Until then, humble servants stand ready and at attention. Isaiah saw that in the messianic day, Jerusalem would be invited to arise, come forth, and “sit down” (Isaiah 52:2; 2 Nephi 8:25). Alma promised the righteous that they would “sit down in the kingdom of God” (Alma 5:24; 29:17; see also Alma 34:36; 28:15; 3 Nephi 28:10). But kings were seated, and the exalted will “sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob” (Alma 7:25; Helaman 3:30). Seats were designated for chief judges and priests (Alma 50:40;

3 Nephi 17–19 973

Mosiah 11:11). Jesus Christ himself “sitteth on the right hand” of God the Father in his power (Moroni 9:26). Sitting, especially in the presence of God, is not something casual.

Fourth, in this connection, the sacrament is also connected to the Passover meal, as it was for the Last Supper in Jerusalem. Not only are certain honors involved in being seated, but also having passed successfully through a certain degree of vulnerability. The Israelites had been through a series of terrible events in Egypt. Being seated at the Passover, protected by the blood of the Lamb, was an indication of now being safe and connected as a family and people. It signified that life was now more stable. Being seated for the Nephites may have been reminiscent of being seated at their Passover Seder and now with the Savior Himself.

3 Nephi 18:3–7— Jesus’ Original Words in Blessing the Sacrament Prayers On this occasion, Jesus gave the sacramental instructions and injunctions himself. Naturally, he spoke personally and in the first person. So, he told people they did this “in remembrance of my body,” and told them to “always remember me.” Of course, when we read in Moroni 4, the prayer on the blessing of the bread has been recast into the third person. It says, “remember him.” These words of blessing and sanctifying have been switched from the first and second person in 3 Nephi 18 to the third person in Moroni 4–5.

I presume that this change probably happened very early after Jesus’s visit. Jesus administered the sacrament immediately a second time on the next day (3 Nephi 20:3–5), and again on the third day (3 Nephi 26:13). Having seen this done regularly, the disciples soon would have standardized this formality as the elders and priests continued to administer “the flesh and blood of Christ unto the church, … according to the commandments of Christ,” and wherefore, they said, “we know the manner to be true” (Moroni 4:1). As they then did this, they would have retained the main words and expressions that Jesus himself had used. It would make sense that Nephi, as the chief disciple, decided which of Jesus’ words they were going to use, and how they were going to repeat what Jesus had done in administering the sacrament.

Indeed, most of the important words in our sacrament prayers are already to be found in the words of Jesus recorded in 3 Nephi 18:5–11. We can see how those sacred words have been adjusted grammatically to make clear sense when spoken, as an ordinance, by a representative of Christ in a congregational setting. After these prayers were formalized, they were then faithfully preserved, handed down, and included by Moroni among the treasured priesthood documents and along with three personal letters from his father that Moroni included at the end of the record, in Moroni 2–9, before sealing the plates and burying the record.

974 John W. Welch Notes

As you read the following words in 3 Nephi 18, take note of the bolded words in particular. They are the direct antecedents of our precious sacrament prayers:

5Behold there shall one be ordained among you, and to him will I give power that

he shall break bread and bless it and give it unto the people of my church, unto

all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name. 6And this shall ye always

observe to do, even as I have done, even as I have broken bread and blessed it and

given it unto you. 7And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have

shown unto you. And it shall be a testimony [witness] unto the Father that ye do

always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit

to be with you.

8And it came to pass that when he said these words, he commanded his disciples

that they should take of the wine of the cup and drink of it, and that they should

also give unto the multitude that they might drink of it. … 10And when the

disciples had done this, Jesus said unto them: Blessed are ye for this thing which

ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto

the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you. 11And this

shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall

do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may

witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always

remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you.

Here is a chart that helps trace the words in the sacrament prayers precisely back into the words of Jesus at the ending of his first day among the people of Bountiful:

Moroni 4

3 Nephi 18

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the ask the Father in my name (3 Nephi 18:20)

name of thy Son, Jesus Christ,

to bless and sanctify this bread

he took of the bread and break and blessed it (3

Nephi 18:3)

to the souls of all those who partake of it; that unto all those who shall believe (3 Nephi 18:5)

they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son this shall ye do in remembrance ofmy body which

I have shown unto you (3 Nephi 18:7)

3 Nephi 17–19 975

and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father it shall be a testimony unto the Father (3 Nephi 18:7)

that they are willing to take upon them that ye are willing to do (3 Nephi 18:10)

the name of thy Son, and always rememberhim, that ye do always rememberme (3 Nephi 18:7)

and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that which I have commandedyou (3 Nephi 18:10)

that they may always have his Spirit to be with ye shallhave my Spirit to be with you (3 Nephi 18:7)

them, Amen.

Moroni 5

3 Nephi 18

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the ask the Father in my name (3 Nephi 18:20)

name of thy Son, Jesus Christ,

to bless and sanc-tify this wine to the souls of take of the wine (3 Nephi 18:8)

all those who

all those who (3 Nephi 18:5)

drink of it, that they

they did drink (3 Nephi 18:9)

may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, do it in remembrance of myblood (3 Nephi 18:11)

which was shed for them;

which I have shed for you (3 Nephi 18:11)

that they may witness unto thee, O God, the that ye may witness unto the Father (3 Nephi

Eternal Father,

18:11)

that they do always rememberhim, that ye do always rememberme (3 Nephi 18:11)

that they do always rememberhim, that ye do always rememberme (3 Nephi 18:11)

that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen ye shall have my Spirit to be withyou (3 Nephi 18:11).
