976 John W. Welch Notes

The next time you attend a sacrament service, I hope you will hear Jesus’s words in these prayers. As one holding the designated priesthood office pronounces these holy words in Jesus’s behalf, we get extraordinarily close to hearing, not only the ritual encasement of the traditionally received sayings of Jesus, but also what one might call the vox ipsa, the very voice and the very words as they originated with Jesus.

Further Reading

Welch, John W., “Our Nephite Sacrament Prayers,” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon, ed. John W. Welch (Provo and Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS and Deseret Book, 1992), 286–289.

For a fascinating and more detailed study of the words which Jesus used in 3 Nephi 18 in blessing the emblems of the sacrament, comparing them with the words we use today in blessing the sacrament, which were revealed first in this dispensation with

the translation of Moroni 4–5, see John W. Welch, “From Presence to Practice: Jesus, the

Sacrament Prayers, the Priesthood, and Church Discipline in 3 Nephi 18 and Moroni 2-6,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 5, no. 1 (1996): 119–139.

3 Nephi 18:1–11 — Passing the Sacrament in the Church Today The manner and order in which the Savior administered the sacrament among these people sets the pattern for how we prepare, bless, and pass the sacrament. In all respects, we strive to honor and follow him in detail. We show this by remembering and reverencing his will in this holy observance, if for no other reason than that this was how he did it.

First, he “commanded” his twelve disciples “that they should bring forth some bread and wine” (18:1). While they no doubt turned to their wives to see if they might have any bread at home that would do, this assignment was given as a priesthood function, to see that the proper two items were brought which themselves would become the emblems of his holy presence and atoning power.

After the congregation was seated, Jesus “took of the bread and brake and blessed it” (18:3). Jesus did this himself on that occasion. At the end of his instructions, Jesus would ordain “one” and give him “power” that “he shall break bread and bless it and give it unto the people … who shall believe and be baptized in my name” (18:5). Under this instruction, one man in the congregation was given priesthood authority to see that this ordinance is properly carried out. In Latter-day Saint wards today, this may be why the bishop is responsible for this ministration. In that role, he symbolizes the One Lord Jesus.

The resurrected Savior then gave the bread “unto the [twelve] disciples” and commanded them to eat first (18:3). When they had eaten, he “commanded that they should give unto

3 Nephi 17–19 977

the multitude” (18:5). In Latter-day Saint sacrament services today, as a mark of respect and for other reasons, the presiding officer partakes of the bread and water first, before the rest of the congregation. This is done in that way, basically, because the Lord did it that way. The Savior himself offered the sacrament to Nephi and the other disciples and they took it to the general congregation.

When a congregation sees the Bishop or other presiding leader take the sacrament, they can be assured that their leader is worthy to partake. How would a group of Saints react if the leader did not take the Sacrament? One may ask if that should matter, but it surely would. When a bishop has properly prepared himself and is seen partaking of the sacrament, his flock can have greater confidence to follow his guidance and counsel.

When the presiding person partakes of the sacrament, members are also reassured that proper procedures have been followed and the sacrament emblems have been blessed and dedicated properly. In most services today, a priest holding the Aaronic priesthood, looks to the bishop after saying a sacrament prayer to be sure that the prayer was correctly delivered.

Sometimes, the deacons who pass the sacrament emblems to the congregation wonder to whom should they take it after the bishop has received the sacrament. In fact, once the bishop has received the bread or the water, it does not matter who receives it next. Jesus gave one emblem to the disciples, and then they passed it to the multitude in no specific order. It then goes forward to all equally: to children, women, and men.

The Church normally has a policy that does not allow families to have the sacrament on vacations away from an organized unit. However, during the recent pandemic in which gathering in groups was officially forbidden, Church members are given authorization, under direction from their bishop, for a worthy priesthood holder within the home to administer the sacrament to the family.

As the details in this chapter are reviewed, it becomes clear that the providing of the sacrament to the Nephites was far more than just a nice story. It generated the order of the Church for carrying out the sacrament in the Restored Gospel. As we partake of the sacrament, we reenact not only what the first Apostles experienced with Jesus in Jerusalem at the Last Supper, but also what the Nephites were blessed to experience with the Savior during his visit in Bountiful.

3 Nephi 18:3–16 — When Did These People Accept the Covenant? There was clearly a covenantal relationship between the Savior and the Nephites, but we might ask where the people themselves accepted to do His will by way of covenant? It is not the same as King Benjamin’s speech in which, when he got to the end, all the people at his temple cried with one voice, saying,

978 John W. Welch Notes

Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know

of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has

wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition

to do evil, but to do good continually (Mosiah 5:2).

These covenants happen at baptism and at the temple, but where in the text of 3 Nephi do we see covenant-making occur? It is during the sacrament. And here they covenant to remember Jesus and the body which he has shown them.

I love to point out that in Bountiful they were not told to partake of the sacrament in remembrance of the broken body alone—they knew that the bread, and the body, had been broken, and they knew what had happened—but more than that, in 18:7 it says, “This shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you.” The resurrected Lord was offering the sacrament right then, in person. That sacrament was a token of the resurrected reality of the tangible body of Jesus with which he had risen from the dead and ascended to heaven.

When we pick up the bread to partake of the sacrament, we often think of how painful it must have been for his body to have been broken, but the substance of the bread also is tangible material that symbolizes the physical nature of the resurrected body. As people partake of the bread, they are symbolically touching the Lord’s body, just as the people at Bountiful did as they came forward one by one to ascertain the truthfulness of the resurrection and to know the literalness of Jesus’ being there with a body containing the marks of his death. They could testify with certainty that He had overcome suffering and death.

It is indeed a blessing to have access to both the sacrament of the Last Supper, which was the sacrament of the suffering and death of the Lord, and the sacrament in 3 Nephi, which is the sacrament of the Lord’s resurrected body. Just as the Bible and Book of Mormon go hand in hand, the Latter-day sacrament symbolizes both the broken body of the Last Supper and the risen body that the Savior revealed to the Nephites.

3 Nephi 18:4, 5, 9 — What Does “They Were Filled” Mean? A frequently-asked question about 3 Nephi 18:4–5, 9 is, “What does ‘they were filled’ mean when the disciples and the multitude had partaken of the emblems of the sacrament? Does it mean literally, physically satisfied, spiritually fulfilled, or something else?” Although the exact meaning of the word “filled” is not given here, in 3 Nephi 20:9, during the second day of the visit and the second administration of the sacrament, the record makes this clearer:
