3 Nephi 17–19 979

Now, when the multitude had all eaten and drunk, behold, they were filled with

the Spirit; and they did cry out with one voice, and gave glory to Jesus, whom they

both saw and heard.

The Nephites were filled with the spirit and with testimony through partaking of the emblems of the sacrament. The participants cried out with one voice and gave glory to Jesus. The Savior had predicted that very effect, in 20:8:

And he said unto them: He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul;

and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul

shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled.

The intended meaning is that they were spiritually fed. However, when a person is filled with the spirit, they may also be satisfied physically and their emotional yearnings and material concerns can be reduced. For example, during a fast, pangs of hunger may not weigh one down because there is a sense of different fullness and greater satisfaction. In John 6:35, Jesus taught that he is “the bread of life”: “And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.” Although the text refers to the spiritual nutrition, then, it can be understood and applied in reference to being fully satisfied in other ways too.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Alma Bless and Thank God After Eating? (Alma 8:22),” KnoWhy 115 (June 16, 2016).

3 Nephi 18:15-–21 — Instructions on Prayer

In these verses, the Savior taught the disciples and the multitude when and how to pray. He makes several important points.

In 3 Nephi 18:15, Jesus began by teaching the twelve disciples to pray always to avoid temptation. Under the old Jewish law, the faithful prayed three times a day. As long as they recited the morning, mid-day, and night prayer, that was enough. That they should pray always was a new rule, in which prayer became a continual course, not just a three-times-a-day event. Then in 3 Nephi 18:18, he turned to the multitude and reiterated that same guidance, “Ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation.”

Both statements, to the disciples (verse 15) and to the multitude (verse 18), begin with the words “Verily, verily I say unto you.” This introductory expression indicates the importance of the succeeding words, drawing attention and alerting the audience to the meaning. Here, the words “verily, verily” are repeated, and the emphasis, to “pray always lest ye enter into temptation,” is thereby doubled.

980 John W. Welch Notes

The admonition recalls the section in the Lord’s Prayer in 3 Nephi 13, “Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” Specifically asking to avoid temptation probably should be a part of every prayer. Whereas it is important to thank the Father and ask for blessings, Jesus advised his followers to pray constantly in order to defeat Satan, which is only possible with the Lord’s help.

In 3 Nephi 18:18, Jesus next taught that they should always pray to the Father in his name. Approaching the Father in prayer throughout the day would keep them aligned, so to speak, with the North Star. Jesus was offering here to unite them with the Father through His name. That would have been something new for them. Had they been praying in the name of Jesus that way before? I do not think so. We do not have much indication of the way they prayed, but when you see Alma or Nephi praying, they are mostly praying to God and to the Lord, but not mentioning the name of Jesus.

In 3 Nephi 18:20, we are also taught that in prayer, the asker must believe that he will receive, and what is asked must be right. “Ask and ye shall receive,” is frequently quoted in its simplest form, but “whatsoever ye shall ask … if it be right, believing that ye shall receive it” is somewhat more precise. One example of this is found in 3 Nephi 19:9, in which the people prayed for what they most desired, and their righteous desire, the gift of the Holy Ghost, was given after they were baptized. Also, in 3 Nephi 19:24, the Nephites prayed “without ceasing, and they were filled with desire.” As they continued to pray to receive guidance, their hearts were transformed and they desired only what was right.

The more intently one prays “without ceasing,” the more one’s will becomes conformed to the will of God. When one desires what the Father desires, prayers will be answered. However, this will not happen without continuous heartfelt prayer.

In 3 Nephi 18:21, the people were next instructed to pray in their families. They should not just pray at church, and of course not on a Rameumptom. Jesus commanded them— and us—to pray in our families; we must pray at home, and Jesus added, “unto the Father, always in my name”—again that direction. To this, Jesus added, “that your wives and children may be blessed.”

Should asking, “Heavenly Father, please bless my wife and my children” be a part of prayer, or does it mean, “Have family prayer so that they will all be blessed”? Probably both. Our Heavenly Father is waiting to give blessings that are conditional upon our asking, and Jesus taught that blessings await the families who pray together.

There is nowhere in the Bible that talks about praying in the family. Nor is family prayer taught anywhere in the Doctrine and Covenants. So why do we have family prayer? Precisely because Jesus tells us to pray at home, to pray in our families. This is an

3 Nephi 17–19 981

important instruction. Latter-day Saints strive to follow this scripture and have family prayer at least once daily. This text is so easy to glide over, but this is an essential part of the foundational order of the Church. The family is the basic and most fundamental unit of mortal life and of celestial glory.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does Jesus Say that ‘Ye Must Watch and Pray

Always’? (3 Nephi 18:15, 20-21),” KnoWhy 344 (July 26, 2017).

3 Nephi 18:28–33 — Not Allowing People to Unworthily Partake of the Sacrament The Twelve are next told that they need to watch for people who are partaking of the sacrament unworthily. The Savior is talking to those who have keys to make that determination. For the ordinary members of the church, that is not our business to worry about this concern. That is for the leaders of the church or of the ward to take care of.

In verse 30, we are told not to cast such people out. Why is it that we do not cast them out? What are we hoping for? We want them to repent and continue to build faith, so, the next thing we do is continue to minister to that person. If they persist, there is instructions for that too. In verse 31, Jesus said, “If he repent not, he shall not be numbered among my people, that he may not destroy my people ...” But we are, even then, to hold out the opportunity for repentance as long as someone is willing to cooperate and try to come through with the process.

Previously in verse 22, Jesus had said, “Ye shall not forbid any man from coming unto you,” except under these guidelines. He pointed out also, in verse 25, “Ye see that I have commanded that none of you should go away, but rather have commanded that ye should come unto me, that ye might feel and see; even so shall ye do unto the world.” Jesus went out of his way to have 2,500 people do that, so he could make a point that, if at all possible, he does not want to lose or exclude anyone.

Brigham Young was once asked how long the Saints would do vicarious ordinances for the dead. His answer was, “The work will go on until every soul that can be saved has been saved.” It is not over when you die. It is not over until it is over, and that may be a long, long time. We will always continue to minister. I think that is the message here.

3 Nephi 18:37 — Authority to Give the Gift of the Holy Ghost Later, in Moroni 2, Moroni recorded onto the permanent record the actual words which Jesus spoke on that occasion to his Twelve Disciples. There in a very holy moment, they were given the power to bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost. The sequence and timing in which the twelve disciples received these two powers offers an amazing insight. At the beginning of the first day, Jesus ordained them and gave them the power to baptize, the 982 John W. Welch Notes

power to cleanse with water. At the end of that day he gave them a second power—the power to cleanse by fire and with the Holy Ghost.

The words of Christ, which he spake unto his disciples, the twelve whom he had

chosen, as he laid his hands upon them— And he called them by name, saying: Ye

shall call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this

ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give

the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give it, for thus do mine apostles. Now

Christ spake these words unto them at the time of his first appearing; and the

multitude heard it not, but the disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid their

hands, fell the Holy Ghost (Moroni 2:1–3).

This was not just ordination to the priesthood in general; this was being given the power to give the gift of the Holy Ghost. These men had already been given the power and authority to baptize. That happened back in 3 Nephi 11. We learn something there too, if you are given the priesthood, it does not mean that you have authority to perform all of the ordinances of the priesthood. How do we know that? The example in the Book of Mormon answers that question.

I once explained to a Catholic priest in Germany that we have the Aaronic Priesthood or the Levitical, which is one order, and we have a second order called the Melchizedek Priesthood. To which he said, “Oh that is interesting. How do you get that idea?” I said, “In Hebrews chapter 7, it talks about the two priesthoods, but it does not make it clear that those two priesthoods are still important today, and that they are separate, and so you do not get them both all at once.” He thought that sounded reasonable. But more than that, I mentioned that we have authority for that teaching in the Book of Mormon. He did not find that binding on him, but he nodded with understanding how we utilized both the Bible and the Book of Mormon in reaching that significant doctrine.

While reading and translating 3 Nephi, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery became aware that they did not have priesthood power. Right after they had translated 3 Nephi 11, they went to the banks of the Susquehanna River and there received the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood under the hands of John the Baptist. I am sure that they were thinking much the same thing when they came to the end of chapter 18. There too they would have realized that they had not yet received that additional, higher authority and that there was thus more yet to come. In fulfillment of the words that John the Baptist himself had given them, Peter, James and John soon would restore through Joseph and Oliver that power— the Melchizedek Priesthood.

3 Nephi 17–19 983

Jesus’s first day in Bountiful ended with this one last event. It was a private event for just the Twelve. The multitude did not even hear the words that Jesus spoke in verse 37. In verse 36, he touched all of the Twelve. I think this means that he put his hands upon them. Then the cloud came over them, and he ascended into heaven. Later, in Moroni 2, we learn what he said as he gave them on that occasion the power to bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost.

3 Nephi 18:38–39 — Jesus Ascended into Heaven

In this holy envelopment, the twelve disciples were able to see and testify that Jesus ascended back into heaven. They had seen him come down, and they testified that he had returned to that holy place. It would have been very assuring to know that he had not just vanished, but that he had gone deliberately. He had not abandoned his people, but promised that he would come again. The following day, the disciples were able to bring those people and many more back together at the temple to begin carrying out the instructions that Jesus had given them—to baptize them and to bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost. They then had the blessing of seeing his presence again and more fully as he appeared on the second day.

3 Nephi 19

These study questions pertaining to this chapter are in reference to the second day of Jesus’s extended visit. Select two or three of these that resonate with you. How would you answer them:

• Why do you think we are told that they all returned to their homes?

• How did the Nephites know that Jesus would come back the next day?

• How did they know where he would appear to them?

• Do you notice any interesting things about the names of these twelve men?

• What is significant about the people dividing into twelve bodies? (19:5)

• Why is it important that they prayed (as we pray) “in the name of Jesus”? (19:6–7)

• How could all the twelve speak the same words that Jesus had spoken? (19:8)

• What did the twelve want most of all? (19:9) and how did they receive it? (19:10–14)

• What did the multitude see when the twelve were filled with the Holy Ghost?

• Who was commanded to kneel down on the earth? (19:16)

• What recognitions are embedded in calling Jesus “Lord” and “God”? (19:20)

• Why did Jesus “need” to pray to the Father? (19:19)

• What can one learn in 3 Nephi 19 about the Godhead? (19:19–23)

• For what was Jesus thankful in this prayer?

• What did Jesus ask for in this first prayer?

984 John W. Welch Notes

• How do the words “and they were filled with desire” strike you? (19:24)

• How does 19:25 compare with the Priestly Blessing in Numbers 6:24–26?

• What do the words “white” and “whiteness” say to you? (19:25)

• What did Jesus pray for in this second prayer?

• How many times does the word “purified” and “faith” appear in this prayer?

• Who heard this prayer of Jesus? (19:33)

• What might Jesus have prayed for in this third prayer?

• How often did ancient people pray? How often should we pray?

• Why were such great things seen and heard by the Nephites?

3 Nephi 19:1–3 — The People Spread the Word of Christ’s Ministry After that first tremendous day was over, I imagine that the Twelve went home, attended to their families, and then met together again. They may have conferred together all that night and recorded the words which Jesus had spoken, so that they could deliver them again the next day. They would have learned the difficulty of being a servant, that it takes work through the lonely midnight hours to be able to render that kind of service to the people which the Lord wanted them to do.

What is unmistakable in 3 Nephi is that the Savior calls on everyone. It does not matter who they are, he wants them to “repent and come unto me” and to be one with him. The disciples are told to go out and bring as many as they can the next day. I imagine there were plenty who said, “I cannot come, I am not worthy,” or maybe “I am too skeptical.” But the crowd that assembled the second day was even larger than that on the first day, and those were people who responded to the call. They came when someone invited them and said, “Please come; you will not be disappointed.”

The Twelve were directing this; probably sending people out in various directions, “You go here, you go there.” We can suppose that anybody who was close by the temple could not have missed what was going on, so when it says “abroad,” it was probably referring people out in the outlying areas, maybe in the farmlands, who would not have been aware of what was going on. They wanted to bring in as many as possible.

3 Nephi 19: 4–35 — Who Was the Recordkeeper on This Great Occasion? Who was the recordkeeper in 3 Nephi? Probably Nephi, the high priest, I would say. When his father left, he handed over to Nephi all the sacred records. He had been trained as a recordkeeper. On a later visit, Jesus asked Nephi to bring the record that had been made of Samuel the Lamanite’s prophecy. Can you imagine the Savior proof-reading your work and saying, “You know, you are pretty good at this, but you missed something”? Of course, Nephi fixed it right away. He was the recordkeeper. While we do not know whether the words of Jesus were recorded in real time, they were kept diligently and promptly.

3 Nephi 17–19 985

Even if his words were not written as they were spoken, the disciples no doubt remembered it soon enough that night. The ancient people had very good memories because their minds were not as cluttered as our minds are today. They were in the habit of memorizing, and it was not uncommon in ancient pedagogy for a teacher to simply talk and then the students would recite what the teacher had said. Today, we have recording devices, and because of that, we are lazy. Without that technology, people actually listened and remembered, but they would write it down as soon as possible so that it would be available accurately. That is probably why we have exactly the words that Jesus spoke here in 3 Nephi.

3 Nephi 19:9 — The Disciples Desired and Prayed for the Holy Ghost In discussing the section for 3 Nephi 18:15–21, we mentioned this verse as an example of when the people prayed for what they most desired, and their righteous desire, the Holy Ghost, was given after they were baptized. How does that strike you?

We pray often for many things, but why do we not pray for this gift a little more often? Why would we not count that as the thing which we desire most of all in our prayers? Are we complacent because we have been given the gift of the Holy Ghost? Do we sometimes just take it for granted, or do we need to consciously seek it?

What caused them to pray for this very thing so quickly? Since they could pray for whatever they wanted, they could have prayed that the Savior would return to them. They could have prayed for peace with the Lamanites, or any number of things. However, they prayed for that which they desired the most, the Holy Ghost. It is the key to knowledge, goodness, and joy.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is 3 Nephi Important for Understanding the

Godhead? (3 Nephi 19:23), KnoWhy 213 (October 20, 2016).

3 Nephi 19:11–14 — The Twelve Disciples Were Baptized in the New Dispensation When they took upon them the name of Christ, they became like the high priests in the old temple, for the high priest wore on his forehead, literally, the name of Jehovah, and there was a promise in Numbers 6:27 that the Lord’s countenance would smile upon his people and that he would put his name upon them. This was an important step in the progress of these disciples, as they took the name of God upon themselves and enter into a covenant to keep these promises.

This meant that they had entered into a covenant to serve only one God, and especially not Mammon. This promise caused them, at the end of 3 Nephi, to put all their property together, and to have all their things in common. They did this because they had made a 986 John W. Welch Notes

covenant that they would consecrate whatever the Lord had given to them. They had made a promise that their eyes would be single to his glory. They had covenanted that they would lay up treasures in heaven.

At the end of 3 Nephi, Jesus asked what the disciples would like: “What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father?” Three of them said that they would like to stay on this earth and teach more people. They were willing to offer all that they had to have a fullness of joy with Heavenly Father. The other nine wanted to stay with the Lord, and we understand that. However, the three who stayed behind, postponing their own spiritual progress in that way in order to be servants, were also keeping the covenant that they made to serve, to minister, and to continue to enjoy the blessings of seeing people helped as they come unto Christ.

3 Nephi 19:19–23, 27–29 — Jesus Offered an Intercessory Prayer David Paulson has written beautifully and compellingly on the topic of Jesus’ special prayer which was given as Jesus interceded in our behalf by pleading with the Father. We learn much about the nature of the Godhead by watching Jesus interact with his Father and how he prays to God and what he prays for. It gives us the earliest Latter-day Saint document pertinent to the Godhead. To us it is not so mysterious.

Here you have a fully represented concept about God and Jesus, in a beautiful text that we are perfectly comfortable with. We understand this; it seems so obvious. But there are many historians who think that Joseph Smith did not understand the nature of the Godhead until much later, and that it was not even really until Nauvoo that he began to really articulate things which we understand as being essential to the doctrine of the Godhead. People who wonder about that have perhaps not read 3 Nephi carefully enough. David Paulson argues that there are several features of the relationship between the Father and the Son that are represented here as separate but united beings. This text presents a very powerful statement of the understanding of the Godhead as three separate beings perfectly united in purpose.

Theologians David L. Paulsen and Ari D. Bruening, in fact, have identified five different ways 3 Nephi depicts the Father and the Son as separate, individual beings.
