3 Nephi 17–19 987

Ways Father and Son are Differentiated in 3 Nephi

Godhead Differences

3 Nephi

Distinguished

While several passages in 3 Nephi speak of the oneness of the Father and the Son (3 Nephi

11:27, 36; 20:35; 28:10), Jesus clarified that the nature of this oneness especially when he prayed with His disciples, where He prayed that His disciples may be one with Him in

the same ways “as” He and the Father are one (3 Nephi 19:23, 29). Paulsen and Bruening thus conclude that “3 Nephi contains extensive and persuasive evidence that Jesus Christ and his Father are distinct persons” with an exalted “oneness” that functions most vividly in terms of their uncompromising state “of purification, alignment, and divine in dwelling within a community.”

Taking this another step in this direction, Robert L. Millett once asked this provoking question: If God and Jesus are existentially one being, “why did Jesus need to pray?” His answers are helpful, as we stretch to conceive the matchless harmony that exists between the members of the Godhead:

To begin with, during his mortal ministry he set aside much of the power and

glory he had enjoyed before he came into the world (John 17:5). Paul wrote that

Jesus “made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,

and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he

humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross”

(Philippians 2:7–8). Other translations render the above passage as “emptied

himself, taking the form of a slave” (New American Bible; see also New Revised

Standard Version; emphasis added). By choice Jesus did not turn the stones to 988 John W. Welch Notes

bread, although he certainly possessed the power to do so (Luke 4:3–4). By choice

Jesus did not cast himself down from the pinnacle of the temple and anticipate

divine deliverance, although he had the power to do so (Luke 4:9–12). By choice

our Lord did not call down legions of angels to deliver him and his in the Garden

of Gethsemane, although he indeed possessed the power to do so (Matthew 26:51–

54). And by choice the Master of ocean and earth and skies did not come down

from the cross and bring an end to the pain and suffering, the ignominy and irony

of his crucifixion and death, although the power to do just that was within his

grasp (Matthew 27:39–40; Luke 23:39).

By setting aside power and glory, he was able to know mortality in its fulness, to

know by experience what it felt like to be hungry, thirsty, tired, snubbed, ridiculed,

excluded; in short, he chose to endure the throes and toils of this estate so that he

might then be in a position to succor his people (Alma 7:11–13; DC 62:1). Thus

when he felt the need for reassurance, he prayed to his Father in Heaven. When

he needed answers or perspective, he prayed. When he needed the sacred

sustaining influence of the Father in his darkest hours, he prayed, prayed

earnestly. Because of the Spirit, which conveys the mind of God (1 Corinthians

2:16),16 he was in the Father, as the Father was in him. They were one...

Jesus prayed to the Father because he loved the Father. Jesus prayed to the Father

because it was a reverential way of speaking to his Father, who is forever worthy

of the reverence of his children. Jesus prayed to the Father because they enjoyed

communion. That word communion is an especially meaningful word, one that is

worth much reflection. President David O. McKay observed that spirituality is

“the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the Infinite.” Jesus

possessed perfect spirituality because he had overcome the world (John 16:33;

DC 101:36) and because he enjoyed perfect communion with the Father. This

pattern is a call to you and me, is it not, to live our lives in such a manner that we

cultivate the cleansing and revelatory benefits of the Spirit more and more; that

we yield our hearts unto God (Helaman 3:35) and have an eye single to his glory

(DC 88:67); that we allow our consciences to be strengthened, our judgment to

be refined, and our desires to be educated.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is 3 Nephi Important for Understanding the

Godhead? (3 Nephi 19:23), KnoWhy 213 (October 20, 2016).
