3 Nephi 17–19 989

David L. Paulsen and Ari D. Bruening, “The Social Model ofthe Trinity in 3 Nephi,” in Third Nephi: An Incomparable Scripture, ed. Andrew C. Skinner and Gaye Strathearn (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book, 2012), 191–233, see pages 193, 204, 214.

Ari B. Bruening and David L. Paulsen, “The Development of the Mormon

Understanding of God: Early Mormon Modalism and Early Myths,” FARMS Review of Books 13, no. 2 (2001): 109–169.

Robert L Millet, “The Praying Savior: Insights from the Gospel of 3 Nephi,” in Third Nephi: An Incomparable Scripture, ed. Andrew C. Skinner and Gaye Strathearn (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book, 2012), 142–144.

3 Nephi 19:25 — The Disciples Appeared as Holy as the Savior Here In 3 Nephi 19, the twelve disciples who are ordained by Jesus have their garments shining even as brightly as angels. That is not a trivial point. That shing glory is a foreshadowing, a guarantee, a down-payment of the great eternal glory that they and we all can eventually have in the Celestial Kingdom. These angels become not just messengers in word, but physical messengers, embodiments of the promise of glory that all the righteous who come unto Christ and obey his words and keep his commandments and enter eternally into his presence by doing His will can have.

3 Nephi 19:25 – The Priestly Blessing

What does 3 Nephi 19:25 have to do with the priestly blessing in Numbers 6:24–27? Not too long ago, a little silver scroll was found in Jerusalem in a tomb that was excavated. A road crew was digging a highway and excavating a road and uncovered a burial chamber. In the excavation, a small silver scroll was discovered, which had been worn as an amulet around the neck of a young woman who had been buried. The date of the tomb and the script on this scroll was from the 7th Century BC, and on it, written in tiny letters, were the words of the Aaronic Priesthood blessing in Numbers 6:24–27.

This discovery becomes the earliest biblical text that we have. It is verbatim; it is exactly the same as this Hebrew text that has come down to us. This would have been the same text that was on the Brass Plates. And this makes people now rethink much about the dating of that priestly text in particular, but other texts like it as well.

This text, this blessing, was spoken twice every day in the temple in Jerusalem at the time of the daily offering. Morning and night after the offering was given, the high priest would bless all the people. This is a good reason to think that this second-day gathering is again happening at the temple. We do not know what the Savior said. The text does not give us the words, but in 3 Nephi 19:24–25, it says “and it came to pass that Jesus blessed them.” What kind of words would he have used? Here is the traditional high priestly blessing: 990 John W. Welch Notes

Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the

children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord

make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his

countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put my name upon

the children of Israel; and I will bless them. (Numbers 6:23–27)

There are important echoes in the text of 3 Nephi 19 with these words. The Nephite record says: “His countenance did smile upon them and the light of his countenance did shine upon them.” The face of God is emphasized three times in this text. The face, the countenance, is what the ancient blessing was all about: That you may see his face, that he will smile upon you with his face of approval, that you will know that he loves you, that he accepts you. That is the effect of the blessings of the priesthood and of these ordinances, that when they are effective in your life, you will know that the Lord smiles upon you, that he loves you, and that he can and will be gracious and good to you. What greater blessing could there be?

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Jesus Allude to the Priestly Blessing in

Numbers 6? (3 Nephi 19:25), KnoWhy 212 (October 19, 2016).

3 Nephi 19:31–34 — Jesus Prays in Language That Can’t Be Written or Spoken Are you glad that there are things left out of this record? A little later it will even get to the point where the record says that there are things that cannot even be uttered. When we go to the temple, holy things are usually things that we cannot fully communicate to other people, even if we wanted to and were allowed to. Partly, it just that it is impossible to communicate them, but also because they are so sacred that we are under an obligation not to communicate them further.

I am glad that everything is not spilled out here in the open. When it comes to sacred things, there are things that you should only learn through sacred instruction and by personal revelation in an interwoven context that circumscribes and interrelates all truths into a harmonious whole. As we get a glimpse of what is here in 3 Nephi 19, this is what is available to us in the temple, being taught there by sacred experiences, by the Holy Ghost, and through revelation. Then you can truly appreciate the eternal doctrines and everlasting principles of the Father. If these were simply told to us, we would not appreciate them. We must know in an abundance of ways the source from which they spring.
