3 Nephi 20–26 995

The Chiastic Structure of 3 Nephi 20:10–22:17 Helps Readers Follow This Text The following chiastic structure of 3 Nephi 20–22, which is still open to minor adjustments, has been detected by Professor Victor Ludlow. It helps us to focus on the step-by-step development of this discourse and especially on its main point, the focal center of this passage.

In this structure, notice especially that, in line F, words from Micah 4–5 are used to show that the Gentiles will repent and obtain blessings. Farther down, in the counterpoint line labeled F’, some of the same words from Micah are quoted again, dealing with what will happen to the unrepentant Gentiles. In parts H and I, Isaiah 52:11–15 is quoted; and then in parts H’ and I’, Isaiah is quoted again but this time Isaiah 52:15 is quoted first (in 3 Nephi 21:8), followed then (in 3 Nephi 21:10) by a quote from Isaiah 52:14, that is, in reverse order.

This extended ring-composition is like a large picture frame which, if understood, helps readers to see the order and organization of this text and thereby follow and better understand what Jesus is saying.

A The Father and Son work together (3 Nephi 20:10)

BIsaiah’s words are written, therefore search them (v. 11)

CIsaiah’s words and the Father’s covenant with Israel will be fulfilled (v. 12)

D Scattered Israel to be gathered (v. 13)

E The promised land is an inheritance for the Nephites/Lamanites (v. 14)

FMicah quoted: Gentiles to repent receive blessings (v. 15–20; Micah 5:8-9; 4:12–13)

GThe Lord’s covenant with Moses, the Gentiles, and Israel concerning the New

Jerusalem. (v. 21–29)

HIsaiah quoted (Isa 52:1–14): Gospel preached, Zion established, servant marred (v.

30–44)

I Isaiah quoted: Kings shall shut their mouths, speechless (v. 45; Isaiah 52:15)

J Covenant fulfillment and the work of the Father (v. 46)

KA key “sign” given, when these things are “about to take place” (3 Nephi

21:1)

L This is “the sign:” Gentiles will learn of “scattered” Israel (v. 2)

M“These things” in the Book of Mormon to come forth “from them

[the Gentiles] unto you (to the Lamanites/Nephites) (v. 3)

N In the “wisdom in the Father” and the “power of the Father,” “the covenant of the Father” will make it possible for these things

996 John W. Welch Notes

to come forth “unto a remnant of your seed,” O house of Israel (v.

4)

M’“These works” in the Book of Mormon will come “forth from the

Gentiles to your seed” (to the Lamanites/Nephites) (v.5)

L’ Some Gentiles to “be numbered among” the house of Israel (v. 6)

K’ And “it shall be a sign” as Lamanites begin to know that “these things

come to pass” (v. 7)

J’ Work and covenant of the Father have already commenced (v. 7)

I’ Isaiah quoted: Kings shall shut their mouths, speechless (v. 8; Isaiah 52:15)

H’Isaiah quoted: A great and marvelous work; the marred servant (v. 9–10; Isaiah

52:14)

G’ Moses, the Gentiles, and covenant Israel (v. 11)

F’Micah quoted: Unrepentant Gentiles will be cut down (v. 12–21; Micah 5:8–15)

E’ The promised land is an inheritance for the righteous (v. 22–23)

D’ Gentiles to help in the gathering of Israel and a New Jerusalem (v. 24–25)

C’ Father’s work with his people (v. 26–27)

A’* The Father and Son work together (v. 28–29)

B’* Isaiah’s portrayal of Zion (Isaiah 54, 3 Nephi 22); search his words. (3 Nephi 23:1–3)

*Note: The A-B, A’-B’ order of the first two and last two element in this structure may be allowable as a minor deviation within this overall pattern, or alternatively these opening and closing elements may be seen as AB, A’B’ compounds. In either case, this impressive chiastic organizing structure is quite helpful in tracking the meaning of Jesus’s words here.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Jesus Mix Together Micah and Isaiah? (3 Nephi 20:25),” KnoWhy 214 (October 21, 2016).

Victor L. Ludlow, “The Father’s Covenant People Sermon: 3 Nephi 20:10–23:5,” in Third Nephi: An Incomparable Scripture, ed. Andrew C. Skinner and Gaye Strathearn (Salt Lake City and Provo. UT: Deseret Book and Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship, 2012), 147–174. As Professor Ludlow modestly notes, “In spite of many, many hours involved in studying and analyzing this profound sermon, the outline is still a work in progress” (page 167).

3 Nephi 20–26 997

Victor L. Ludlow, “Jesus’ Covenant Teachings in Third Nephi,” in Rediscovering the Book of Mormon: Insights You May Have Missed Before, ed. John L. Sorenson and Melvin J. Thorne (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1991), 177–185.

Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1997), 284–299.

3 Nephi 20–25 — The “Prophetic Worldview” of the Nephites To understand what Jesus is communicating in these dense chapters, it is also helpful for readers to remember the broader context of the Nephite prophetic worldview which would have been familiar to Jesus’s audience here in Bountiful. In the book Isaiah and the Book of Mormon, an opening chapter entitled “Getting through Isaiah with the Help of the Nephite Prophetic View” focuses on the prophetic foreknowledge that is found in earlier sections of the Book of Mormon. That “prophetic worldview,” as understood and articulated by the prophets Nephi, Jacob, Zenos, and Abinadi, foreshadowed the unfolding of the covenant over the course of world history after the time of Lehi. That worldview anticipated four main stages:

judgment of the world.

In sum, in stage 1, there would be an apostasy in Israel, and the Israelites would be scattered. However, in stage 2, the Lord would be merciful; at least some of the Jews would be brought back. The Messiah would come to earth only to be rejected by his people. In stage 3, the “day of the Gentile” would rise, and the Book of Mormon would be brought forth through the Gentiles to the posterity of Lehi. But wickedness would still prevail. Some of the Gentiles would forget the Jews, and there would be transgressions and serious problems. Eventually there would be a division into only two churches, the church of the Lord or the good people, on the one hand, and the great and abominable composed of all others, on the other hand. Finally, stage 4 would bring forth the victory of God as Israel is gathered. In this overall view, there would be converts, righteousness would begin to be established again, a fullness of the truth and the Lord would prevail over all who fight against him and lift up their hand against him.

Notice that in 3 Nephi 15–16, on Day 1, Jesus added details, confirmations, and fulfillments to this same overall prophetic expectation that these righteous people in Bountiful already knew quite a bit about. By the time of 3 Nephi, the first two of these 998 John W. Welch Notes

four stages had already been fulfilled. So, in 3 Nephi 15–16, as Jesus spoke to His disciples, He began by focusing on elements that pertain to stage 3, when he discussed what can be called the “day of the Gentiles.” Once the Gentiles had become ripe in iniquity, however, they would eventually reject the fullness of the gospel, and there would arise “all manner of lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, and of secret abominations” (3 Nephi 16:10). All the elements belonging to stage 3 of the Nephite prophetic worldview can be found in chapters 15 and 16.

And then, in 3 Nephi 20–25, on Day 2, speaking to a more spiritually prepared people, Jesus emphasized stage 4. Twice he quoted Isaiah 52:7–8, about the “watchmen” who shall lift up their voices in a day of fullness and how Jesus will be the primary messenger who will announce deliverance to the Israelites, and they will know how beautiful his feet are (see below). He also quoted all of Isaiah 54 about the end of times when the barren or childless woman (symbolizing the church during the Great Apostasy) will be comforted, will become fruitful, and will enlarge and richly adorn her tent (or tabernacle) with seed (children) who will eternally inherit. Other themes of glory and the building of Zion are introduced that pertain especially to the converted Nephites (see further below). And he concluded by quoting Malachi 3–4 about the earth not being wasted at his final coming.

It is clear here that Jesus taught those who needed to know only after they were spiritually prepared to understand these sublime materials. He taught them within the traditional framework of the four stages of the Nephite prophetic worldview. He drew on scriptures that they had and then added Malachi 3–4 to them. He stressed the value of keeping their records so that they could fulfill a crucial role in the complete fulfillment of the Father’s covenant with his people throughout the world.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Vision Guides Nephi's Choice of Isaiah

Chapters? (2 Nephi 11:2),” KnoWhy 38 (February 22, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Getting through Isaiah with the Help of the Nephite Prophetic

View,” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1998), 19–45.
