3 Nephi 20–26 999

3 Nephi 20–21

3 Nephi 20:16–25 — The Lord’s People Make, Keep, and Renew Covenants with Him 3 Nephi 20:16–19 quotes from Micah 5:8–9 and 4:12–13, especially to show that all “gain” would be consecrated unto the Lord (20:19). What Micah (and Isaiah) meant by “the remnant of Jacob” (Micah 5:8; 3 Nephi 20:16 see also Isaiah 10:21–22) remains obscure, but Jesus quotes Micah here after saying that there will be many “remnants” scattered abroad (20:13–14). One remnant of Israel (or Jacob) in particular “will return” unto the Lord and it will be a great sign when “these things” will come forth “unto them” (21:4).

Then, in 3 Nephi 20:22–25, Jesus went on to teach about the covenant that had been made with Jacob regarding the land (20:22) and also the covenant made with Abraham (20:25, 27) regarding the blessing of all the kindreds of the earth through his seed. It is interesting that he lists these two patriarchs in the reverse order from our normal expectations. We often talk about the covenant of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but here it is first the covenant of Jacob, and then Abraham. In Leviticus 26:42, the Holy of Holies of the book of Leviticus, the Lord likewise promises, in reserve order, “Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember.” I think we have here in the Book of Mormon a credible and appropriate reference here back to the holiest spot of the book of Leviticus, which is the holiest of all places in the Old Testament.

Both there and here, God promises many things, but above all he promises that he will fulfill all his promises and will never forget his people, so long as they will “confess their iniquity” and “accept of the punishment of their iniquity” so that “I might be their God,” and I will never forget them (Leviticus 26:40–42, 45) and that “the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel” (3 Nephi 21:1).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Makes 3 Nephi the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon? (3 Nephi 14:13–14),” KnoWhy 206 (October 11, 2016).

3 Nephi 20:29–30 — The Lord Will Gather Israel

In this covenant speech, Jesus began by explaining in these verses how all of Israel will be scattered and lost, but that there would be a day of the Gentiles when they would be the nursing fathers to help bring the gospel back to the people who had been scattered. The key point is that the coming forth of the Book of Mormon will be the sign (21:5, 7) that will let everyone know that the word of God is coming forth again to the scattered Israelites, and that the Gentiles, if they will believe, can then become members of the House of Israel. 1000 John W. Welch Notes

The people there in Bountiful had a crucial role to fulfill in the covenant of God with the children of Abraham, providing a visible sign that God had set His hand again to fulfill that covenant.

Jesus explained how this will happen, how people will rejoice, how people will be gathered in, how a New Jerusalem will be formed, and how the victory of God over the forces of evil and separation will eventually be complete. This promise would have been especially meaningful to these people who had recently witnessed such massive destruction and tragedy.

Nephi, as recorder, and Mormon, as compiler, structurally retained this culminating climax of Jesus’ covenant speech. Mormon sacrificed his life to preserve these records, especially because he knew that Jesus had taught that the coming forth of this record would be a sign that God’s covenant is being fulfilled. This covenant speech is a Nephite document emphasizing the Nephites’ role in the Father’s plan of salvation and of the fulfillment of God’s covenant.

This is also part of our role today among God’s people, to take the Book of Mormon to the world in order to bring to pass the fulfillment of the great covenants and promises of God. We as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are the inheritors of this record, and thanks to publishing and technology, we are able to take it to all the world as an ensign (a banner) to the nations. The Lord has promised that people from all the nations of the earth will flow unto the House of the Lord and unto the covenant of the Lord, so that they may be blessed eternally. As we become members of this covenant, we become children of God in receiving the blessings of all that the Father has and all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, through all the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 Nephi 20:35–36 — What Is the Meaning of the Word “Holy” in Jesus’ Sermons? It is revealing to look where the word “holy” appears in this text and what it means. The word “holiness” in both Greek and Hebrew has no particular synonym, and so it is hard to define. If you want to understand holiness, you have to look at how this word is used contextually.

In 3 Nephi, you have references to holy ones (people within the church; 5:14), to God’s holy arm (20:35), a holy city (the New Jerusalem; 20:36), holy prophets (1:13, 26; 29:2), and holy angels (27:30), along with the “Holy Ghost” (mentioned 30x in 3 Nephi). Alma 13 had also spoken dominantly, 18x, about “holy” things: holy works, God’s holy order, a holy calling, a holy ordinance, the holy order of the high priesthood, holy men, God’s holy name, holy scriptures, holy angels, holy commandments, and holy fathers. In these texts, we can identify many of these things that one would have found associated with the Holy of Holies of the biblical times. In 3 Nephi we now encounter even the holy presence of

3 Nephi 20–26 1001

God and the very words of the Lord, as previously only the High Priest was allowed to do in the ancient Holy of Holies.

The Holy of Holies is described in Jewish literature as a place of the fullness of joy. Above all, holiness is a state of joy and rejoicing. “Joy” is mentioned, being another dominant term, 16x in 3 Nephi, especially in 3 Nephi chapters 16, 17, 27, 28. This was certainly a time of immense joy and happiness for those people. The tablets of the Ten Commandments were stored inside the Ark of the Covenant, but now Jesus preached openly new commandments in his Sermon at the Temple. The rod of Aaron, also inside the Ark of the Covenant, represented his holy Aaronic priesthood authority, and Jesus now gave the higher priesthood authority to his disciples at the end of 3 Nephi 18. The shewbread of the Temple, which could only be eaten by the one High Priest, anticipated Jesus’ miraculous administration of the sacrament, now given to all the covenant people.

Being “holy” refers to and defines all that we are striving to be as Latter-day Saints. The word “saint” (from sanctos in Latin) means “sanctified.” It means one who has been made holy. We are striving to be true and faithful Latter-day Saints, or holy ones. Holiness should define our relationships with God, our relationships within our families, our conduct within church circles, and our dealings with all other people. Everyone who has been to the temple is an anointed one and are all anointed beings, to become holy people, made holy by the Anointed One, in every way possible.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Makes 3 Nephi the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon? (3 Nephi 14:13–14),” KnoWhy 206 (October 11, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Seeing Third Nephi as the Holy of Holies of the Book of

Mormon,” Journal of the Book of Mormon and Other Restoration Scripture 19, no. 1 (2010): 36– 55; also published in Third Nephi: An Incomparable Scripture, ed. Andrew C. Skinner and Gaye Strathearn (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship, 2012), 1–33.

3 Nephi 22

As mentioned above, in this concluding chapter, the Lord quotes what is now known as Isaiah 54. Here, and in 3 Nephi 23–25, watch for temple themes and temple elements. Imagine yourself hearing these words at the temple and in an immediate temple context. How does that help you understand why the Savior concluded his second day of teaching with these particular passages? As I suggest further below, the presence of the children 1002 John W. Welch Notes

amidst this assembly provides a meaningful context for why Jesus quoted Isaiah 54, which focuses to a large extent on childbearing and the importance to the Lord of bringing children into this glorious world and earthly existence.

Read 3 Nephi 22 (Isaiah 54) with special sensitivity, as if you were hearing it recited by the Savior. This is a beautiful and powerful scripture. Pause to think about such words as:

• “Sing barren” (22:1)

• “cords” and “stakes,” “enlarge thy tent” (22:2)

• “break forth,” which can mean “give birth” (22:3)

• “inherit the Gentiles” (22:3)

• “fear not” (22:4)

• “forget the shame of thy youth” and the “reproach of thy widowhood” (22:4)

• God as a “husband” (22:5)

• “called to grief … as a woman forsaken” (22:6)

• “for a small moment” (22:7, remembering DC 122:4)

• “waters of Noah” (22:9, even the flood did not last forever)

• “everlasting kindness,” “my kindness shall not depart” (22:8, 10)

• “foundations of sapphires” (22:11), as part of beautiful temples

• “great shall be the peace of thy children” (22:13), the heritage of the Lord

• “no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper” (22:17)

What do the words and assurances in this chapter mean to you personally? How do you see yourself in latter-day circumstances described in these chapters? What are your roles in God’s covenant plan? As these prophecies are fulfilled in our day, how do we move ourselves from being spectators to being witnesses and agents of their fulfillment? On all of these words and phrases, I highly recommend the research from Cynthia Hallen, a retired professor from the BYU Department of Linguistics. She has written beautifully about the meanings of many of these exquisite words and phrases.

3 Nephi 22:7–12 — The Lord’s Kindness Shall Not Depart from His Children Concerning the word “kindness” in English and even in other languages, Professor Cynthia Hallen offers a key to understanding the Lord’s relation to his covenant people. As she explains, “the earliest etymological meaning of kindness is the reconstructed Indo-European root gen-, meaning to give birth, beget; with derivatives referring to ... procreation and to familial and tribal groups.” Several other terms in this chapter of Isaiah come from that same semantic root of kindness. They are deeply related to the gospel in the Book of Mormon and to the writings of Isaiah, including words such as gentiles, genteel, gentile, gentle, generation, genealogy, genesis, progenitor, nation, nativity, kindred, even the word king. All these words are linguistically related to the word

3 Nephi 20–26 1003

“kindness,” and all those things have to do with the Lord’s covenant “kind,” “kinship,” and “kingly” relationships with His people. His “everlasting kindness” (22:8) is a truly merciful, binding, and eternally sealing.

Further Reading

Cynthia L. Hallen, “The Lord’s Covenant of Kindness: Isaiah 54 and 3 Nephi 22,” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch, eds. (Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1998), 313–349.

3 Nephi 22:13 — The Covenant Is a Family Covenant The covenant of God with Abraham and Sarah has application to families and posterity. Towards the end of the first day of the Savior’s visit to the Nephites, the little children were given a special blessing. In 3 Nephi 17:23, he said, “Behold your little ones,” and the multitude saw their children in a sacred environment: “And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them.” Before Jesus left on Day 1, He drew attention to the family again, speaking of family prayer: “Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed” (3 Nephi 18:21).

When Jesus returned for Day 2 and on Day 3, the people apparently brought their children with them. After all, who would have been taking care of them? And think what would their parents have been worrying about? We know that Jesus continued to minister to them, for the children spoke “unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than [Jesus] had revealed unto the people” (26:14), and the people “both saw and heard these children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things” (26:16).

Thus, when Jesus quotes passages that mention “children,” we should realize that they too were actually there in attendance. For example, in quoting Isaiah 54, Jesus emphasizes the importance of childbearing and childrearing. Isaiah prophesies that in the days of glory, “All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children” (3 Nephi 22:13), and 22:17 ends with “and this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,” echoing Psalm 127:3 which refers to children as the heritage of the Lord. And the quotation from Malachi 3–4 ends with turning “the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers” (25:6). Just as Jesus had ended Day 1 by focusing on the family, he ends Day 2 and Day 3 similarly (26:14–16).

The covenant is not just a national promise; the covenant is a family promise too. It is all about gathering. Israel will be gathered from north, south, east, and west; and people also 1004 John W. Welch Notes

will gather in families. That final gathering is what family reunions represent. In those reunions, families recognize their children as their greatest blessings. The Lord, as he sees his children being gathered, likewise recognizes them as his greatest inheritance.

3 Nephi 23:6–25:6

Up to this point, Jesus has quoted and expounded scriptures that were known in writing among the Nephites. For example, the priests of Noah had quoted Alma 52 when they challenged Abinadi, and he quoted Isaiah 53 in his reply to them. And since they had Isaiah 53, they probably already had Isaiah 54 too; and Micah was a very early Israelite prophet whose writings also could have been known to the Nephites as well, although we don’t know for sure about that.

But 3 Nephi 23:6 says that after Jesus “had expounded all the scriptures unto them which they had [previously] received,” he discussed “other scriptures … that ye have not.” Accordingly, in these chapters, Jesus added one missing point to the Nephite record of the prophecy of Samuel the Lamanite, and then he quoted to them Malachi 3–4, in 3 Nephi 24–25, which they apparently did not already have.

3 Nephi 23:7–14 — Jesus Corrects the Nephite Record As a first matter of business, the Lord asks Nephi to “bring forth the record which ye have kept,” and Nephi presented to the Lord the records that his people had kept. The Lord “cast his eyes upon them” and accepted them (23:8), with one needed correction: Samuel’s prophecy had been omitted, about “many saints who should arise from the dead, and should appear unto many” at the time that “the father should glorify his name” in Jesus (23:9). That point was then added and now appears as inserted into Helaman 14:25. Jesus then ratified all the rest by expounding these records “all in one” and commanding the people to use those records in teaching the things “which he had expounded unto them” (23:14).

What personal lessons can we learn from this brief exchange? Why do you suppose that the Nephites had failed to record this detail? Have you had some experiences in which recordkeeping proved especially crucial? Why would Nephi and then Mormon have included this little event in the record? Either of them could have felt embarrassed by it. As recordkeepers, they were doing their best, but they knew they were not perfect. Moroni, too, worried about any possible imperfections in the record (Ether 12:23–24). But they did not hide their failings.

Remember that writing records in the ancient world was no simple task. You couldn’t just go down to the bookstore and buy paper or fig bark sheets or tumbaga plates. You had to

3 Nephi 20–26 1005

make the materials on which you would write. You had to record by hand the characters or letters of the words very carefully. It was difficult. It was also one of the most sacred responsibilities of ancient priests to keep the holy books of any temple, and it is out of the books that people will be judged. These written words need to be preserved and handed down from one generation to another.

In this text we find a wonderful depiction of the earnestness of this Nephi—the High Priest presenting his records to the Lord—how devoted he must have been to have created those records in the first place. I imagine Nephi would have been crestfallen when the Lord pointed out that something important had been left out of the record. Perhaps he even wondered, “Am I worthy to continue to serve having made such an obvious mistake?” He and his people also would have known the kindness of Jesus in his response. His interest was not in chastising but in emphasizing the importance of record-keeping. And think how many other things Nephi had gotten right!

Earlier that day, Jesus had gone off by himself to pray for the people, asking for the Lord’s infinite blessings to come upon them. Nephi would have had the confidence to know that even though he had made a mistake in recordkeeping, the record was being given with earnestness and fullness. It was the best he could do, and the Lord would take what he had done and perfect it.

This also, of course, gives us yet another meaningful lesson about how important it is when we deal with the scriptures: every word is important. Sometimes, we read the scriptures too quickly. I think the slower we read them, the more we will look at each particular word and wonder: Why did the Lord or his prophets want these particular words in this text? The answers will speak to our hearts and souls, speaking volumes of meaning far beyond what just the ink on the printed pages might represent.

Sometimes when we talk about the auditing of the Nephite records, we think of what Samuel prophesied. However, Jesus specifically asked not just what Samuel had said but if Samuel’s prophecies were fulfilled. He was concerned that the Nephites noted the fulfillment of Samuel’s prophecies. Think of all the times in the New Testament Gospels, when the author says, “because it was written,” “as it was written,” or “to fulfill that which was written.” It is important to the Lord that we take note of when prophecy is fulfilled. He sees that every word shall be fulfilled.
