1006 John W. Welch Notes

3 Nephi 24

2 Nephi 24–25 — Jesus Quotes Malachi 3–4

Jesus then quotes the last two chapters of Malachi. Why didn’t he give them chapters 1–2 as well? At least for purposes of discussion, I assume that they had those chapters already. But even if they didn’t, we cannot fully understand chapters 3 and 4 without also reading Malachi 1–2.

We should also note that when Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823, he quoted a version of Malachi 4:5–6 (see DC 2:1–3). So, it is interesting that Moroni begins the opening of the Restoration exactly where Jesus left off at the end of his Covenant Sermon and scripture additions on Day 2, about the final stage in the sacred history of the world.

What reasons might Jesus have had for quoting these two chapters in particular? Remember that he met again with these people, on Day 2, near their temple and with their children. So, as you read these two chapters from the book of Malachi, see how many correspondences you can spot between the words in the book of Malachi and the words or themes of the temple. Here is a list of possible temple elements in the chapters and verses of Malachi:

Possible Temple Elements Reflected in Malachi 1–2

Scripture

Temple Reference

1:6 the law of obedience

1:6–7 evil speaking of, despising with contempt, desecrating the Lord’s name

1:7 not polluting the bread on the altar or table of the Lord

1:8, 10, 14 making an acceptable sacrifice and sacred vows to God

1:8, 9 praying for God’s graciousness and asking him to give regard

1:11 the Lord’s name, that it will be great in all nations

1:11 incense and pure offerings, with prayers, shall go up in all places

2:1–3 priesthood authority, curses for not glorifying God’s name

3 Nephi 20–26 1007

2:4–5 keeping the covenant of life and peace

2:6 the law of truth

2:10–11 not dealing treacherously with a brother; not profaning the holy

2:12 cutting off any man who profanes the covenant

2:14–16 keeping the law of chastity; fidelity to spouse and God

2:16 hating divorce; covering violence with a garment

2:17 preparing for the coming judgment of God

Possible Temple Elements Reflected in Malachi 3–4 (3 Nephi 24–25)

Scripture

Temple Reference

3:1 (24:1) the coming of a messenger of the covenant “suddenly to his temple”

3:3–10 making pure consecration of tithes and offerings

3:11 rebuking Satan, the devourer

3:12 being called “blessed” in a delightsome land

3:14 abiding the day of his coming judgment

3:16 those who fear the Lord speaking often one to another

3:16 keeping a book of remembrance of the names of the righteous

3:17 treasuring people as jewels, as a man spareth his own son

3:18 being able to discern between the good and the evil

4:2 (25:2) The Sun (Son) of Righteousness shall heal the sick

4:4 remembering the Ten Commandments given at Mount Sinai

1008 John W. Welch Notes

4:5 sending the prophet Elijah

4:5–6 bringing parents and children, ancestors and posterity, together

2:16 hating divorce; covering violence with a garment

2:17 preparing for the coming judgment of God

I am happy to thank the late Marshall Goodrich of Portland, Oregon, one of my missionary companions and scripture class members, for expanding and sharing this list of temple elements and covenantal connections in the book of Malachi. All of them, and several others as well, are well worth pondering, not only in the context of the temple in Bountiful but also, especially, in relation to our own experiences, with and for our own posterity and progenitors, in the Lord’s holy temples that now dot the earth.

3 Nephi 24:2 — The Lord Will Refine Us and Cleanse Us My friend Rita grew up in the textile industry in England. She related to our scripture study class how, in order to soften and whiten wool from sheep, they have to soak it in fuller’s earth for a period of time. The fuller, the man who cleaned the wool and then presented it, smelled horrible, and so did the whole neighborhood of the mill. Nothing smells worse than wet sheep’s wool with lanolin in it. The fuller had to become dirty to clean the wool. She rightly sees this as a great metaphor for the Atonement of Jesus Christ. In order to have our garments cleansed and purified, they must be made white by the fuller. On the Mount of Transfiguration, Mark described how the Lord’s “raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so, as no fuller on earth can white them” (Mark 9:3). The cleansing power of the Atonement transcends all, and Malachi in 3 Nephi 24:2 was certainly aware of this.

3 Nephi 26

3 Nephi 26:1–16 — Jesus Expounds Things “Both Great and Small” Preparing to Ascend Again

What is significant about expounding things “both great and small”? (3 Nephi 26:1). God is in the microscopic details. God is also in the macrospheres of cosmic and spiritual order.

How does seeing “all things even from the beginning until the time [Jesus] should come in his glory” help people to live righteously and happily? (3 Nephi 26:3). It is faith-

3 Nephi 20–26 1009

promoting to know that God knows the end from the beginning. He has a plan. He rules and reigns with justice, mercy and equity, for time and for all eternity.

Why does Mormon not write any more about what Jesus taught to the Nephites? (3 Nephi 26:9). Are we patient enough in receiving small things before hoping to have greater things made manifest to us?

3 Nephi 26:13–21 — The Tongues of Children are Loosed There are several things that are very reassuring about Jesus’ final departure from these people and the end of this astonishingly magnificent day. Can we really fathom what has happened here? What significance do you find in the fact that Jesus ended his second appearance to the Nephites, first, with the renewal of covenants again with the sacrament, ministering again unto the children, healing again all the sick, letting the children speak, baptizing those who came forth, seeing that they shared all things in common and that they did all things as they had been commanded (3 Nephi 26:13–20).

We don’t know when he finally left these people, but we know that he didn’t leave until

he had walked and talked many days with his disciples, and didn’t go until he was sure that they were fully trained and able to carry on with the building of Zion in their community. He did not leave until he knew that those little children who had been blessed were being properly taught and the order of the Church had been properly instituted.

Just as the children are of supreme importance to Jesus’s ministry here on Day 2, I believe those little children who were present on this occasion will become the key to understanding 4 Nephi. There were four generations of wonderful righteousness, peace, and happiness following the appearance of Jesus among these people, partly because those little children would have lived long enough to testify of their experiences to the future generations. In an era of peace and prosperity, life expectancy increases. So, their grandchildren would likely have known them, which means four generations of people would have been taught by those little children who grew up, married, had children and grandchildren. Many years later, those people could say, my grandmother told me what it was like “when I was there with the Savior.” This kind of testimony no doubt fueled the amazing Zion community that 4 Nephi reports. I do not think Jesus would have departed until he was sure that that all this was securely in place.

Brothers and sisters, I realize that this block of text (3 Nephi 19–26) is as deep as it is dense. I plead with you to take extra time and make a sincere effort as you ponder these precious words, praying that the Holy Ghost will open your eyes of understanding. In these words, Jesus gives to us, as well as to those Nephites who were in attendance, the very essence of the Father’s prophetic covenant with his people. The events of Day 1 moved us as the 1010 John W. Welch Notes

Savior received each individual, compassionately healed their sick, and ministered unto the children. On this Day 2, the teachings are deeper, intentionally veiled, and more abstract, and yet, even more importantly, Jesus here gives us the heart of the Father’s promised covenant to all of mankind. Working through these supernal words this time, line upon line, was more spiritually moving and more revealing to me than ever before. I am grateful—as I am sure you will be too—for the guidance of the Holy Ghost in bringing all this together in one great whole.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the Peace Last So Long in 4 Nephi? (4

Nephi 1:16),” KnoWhy 225 (November 7, 2016).

3 Nephi 26:15 — The Elusiveness of Time during Jesus’ Visit I think it is very telling that we do not have an exact date for the departure of Jesus at the end of 3 Nephi. It is almost as if there is no temporal end to his presence. He is still with these people in spirit and maybe even in close proximity physically. The book of 3 Nephi begins with a day, month, and year. We know exactly when the sign of his birth was given, but we do not know of any of the other such precise dates after the coming of Christ. It is almost as if time becomes irrelevant as 3 Nephi unfolds.

This is very uncharacteristic of most historical books, and also of the rest of the Book of Mormon. But something happens in the Holy of Holies. Anciently, it was seen as a timeless place and as a place of eternal perfection. The Holy of Holies was 10 cubits by 10 cubits by 10 cubits, a perfect cube, in which all things stood still, symbolizing the unity, the oneness, the eternal harmony of being in the presence of God. There, time becomes immaterial. From there emanates constantly the beginning and the renewal of creation. When the sacred order moves out into the next room in the temple, we find the days of the creation being represented. But in the Holy of Holies, in the presence of God, we are brought into a timeless context. Perhaps that is why we are not given the time or the day of the departure of Jesus. For indeed, he is still with us.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is So Little Said about the Timing of Christ’s

Temple Ministry? (3 Nephi 10:18),” KnoWhy 481 (November 1, 2018).
