MORMON 1–6

John W. Welch Notes



Who Was Mormon?

Up until this point in the Book of Mormon, Mormon has been largely in the shadows, but now it is time for him to tell his own story. The more we can know about Mormon’s life and times, his callings and motivations, the more we can appreciate why he included the things he did in this work of scripture and history.

In Mormon 2:2, we learn that he was sixteen years old in AD 326, putting his birth at AD 311. From that we can deduce that he lived to be 74 years old, since the final battle, from which he died, was in AD 385.

In 4 Nephi, the setting had deteriorated from one of faith and light into a century of slow decline that began around AD 200. Enormous cultural change occurred over the course of only a few generations. This inexorable decline continued downhill, one rung at a time. In Mormon’s mind, those changes appeared linked, as things had worsened step by step over that period. Approximately 30 downward-spiraling steps can be extracted from the relatively few verses in 4 Nephi.

Mormon knew this history, and it influenced his choices as he selected which records to transcribe or to abridge onto his plates. For example, he personally knew of, and made special mention in Mormon 1:19 of the fulfillment of, “all the words of Abinadi, and also Samuel the Lamanite.” This explains why Mormon included six chapters in the middle of the book of Mosiah about Abinadi’s prophecies and his fate, and also four chapters at the end of the book of Helaman about Samuel’s prophetic warnings and their aftermaths. It also explains why he covered in so many places throughout the Book of Mormon of the 1038 John W. Welch Notes

fulfillment of inspired forecasts about the coming of Jesus Christ, the Messiah, Redeemer, and Son of God.

Mormon remained stalwart in the midst of unthinkable hardships and tragic disappointments, one after another. He introduced himself, first and foremost, as “a disciple of Jesus Christ, the Son of God” (3 Nephi 5:13), and, accordingly, throughout his composition of his abridgment, Mormon features Jesus Christ as the focus of Nephite doctrine, worship, religion, and civic and social order. Personally, Mormon wrote the ten chapters found in Mormon 1–7 and Moroni 7–9. In those chapters Mormon included the name of “Jesus” 19 times (at least once in every chapter except Mormon 4) and the title “Christ” a total of 52 times (with the highest density appearing 38 times Moroni 7 alone). Obviously, Mormon was much more than just a nominal Christian.

Having an overall chronology of Mormon’s life is helpful in guiding readers through these ten chapters that move quickly through his 75 years of life from AD 311 to AD 385. In the chronology below, the bold dates and ages are actually stated in Mormon’s text; the other dates and ages are derived or estimated and thus are only suggested and are not to be taken as absolutes.

Chronology of Mormon’s Life

Year

Event

311 Mormon is born

321 Ammaron commissions Mormon to retrieve sacred records when 24 years old (1:2–4)

322 Mormon, at age 11, goes with his father to the land southward and Zarahemla (1:6)

322 War breaks out between Nephites and Lamanites (1:8)

323–326 Four years of peace (1:12)

326 Mormon, age 15, is visited by the Lord and knows the goodness of Jesus (1:15)

327 Mormon, age 16, is appointed to lead the army (2:2)

328 Lamanites attack (2:3)

330 Mormon defeats Aaron (2:9)

Mormon 1–6 1039

331? Mormon marries at age 20?

331 Outbreak of hostilities

333? Moroni is born?

335 Mormon remembers Ammaron telling him to go to Antum at age 24 (1:3)

335 Mormon goes and obtains the records

344 People curse God and wish to die; day of grace was passed (2:14–15)

345 Nephites flee to Jashon, where the records were (2:16–17)

345 Mormon finishes the large plates of Nephi by adding information up to his

time (2:18)

345 Nephites fortify city of Shem (2:21)

346 Lamanites attack Shem (2:22)

348–349 Mormon describes the feelings and conditions of this time (2:19–27)

349 Mormon, age 38, has not yet made a complete record on the Plates of Mormon (2:18)

350 Nephites and Lamanites enter into ten-year peace treaty (2:28)

350–360 Ten years of peace; Mormon and Moroni work on the Plates of Mormon (2:28)

359? Mormon preaches repentance and baptism (3:2); was Moroni 7 spoken about then?

360 The king of the Lamanites sends a letter that they will attack (3:4)

360 Nephites move to Desolation, by “the narrow pass into land southward” (3:5, 8)

361 Lamanites attack and are defeated (3:7)

362 Lamanites attack again and are defeated, dead thrown into the sea, Nephite

boasting (3:8)

362 Mormon, age 51, refuses to lead the Nephite army any longer (3:11, 16)

1040 John W. Welch Notes

362? Moroni, age 29, called to the ministry (Moroni 8:1), given copy of Moroni 7?

362 Conditions are described in Mormon 3:11–15

362? Mormon writes to Moroni (Moroni 8?); this letter’s conditions match Mormon

3:3–15

363 Nephites go on the offensive (4:1)

364 Lamanites attack Teancum and are driven back (4:7–8)

366 Blood on both sides, Teancum taken, idols, women and children sacrifice (4:10–

13)

367 Nephites attack back in great anger, drive Lamanites out (4:15)

367? Mormon writes Moroni 9 to Moroni; its words and conditions match Mormon 4

368–374 Hiatus in warfare, little information given, Mormon may have worked further

on the records

375 Lamanites attack, great slaughter, women and children sacrificed (4:17–22)

378? Mormon (age 67) repents of his oath and was given again command of the

army (5:1)

379 Lamanites attack the city of Jordan and other strongholds and were driven

back; Nephites who would not gather in were destroyed (5:3, 5)

380 Lamanites attack again in great numbers, and the Nephites are defeated; only

the swift could outrun the Lamanites (5:6, 7)

384 Mormon writes to the Lamanite king to set a final battle at Cumorah (6:2)

385 Mormon, age 74, dies (killed in last battle)

Further Reading

For two other largely compatible chronological overviews of Mormon’s life, see

Alan C. Miner, “A Chronological Setting for the Epistles of Mormon to Moroni,” Journal of

Book of Mormon Studies 3, no 2. (1994): 94–113; Joseph M. Spencer, “On the Dating of Moroni

8–9,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship 22 (2016): 131–148.

Mormon 1–6 1041

Mormon 1 — Mormon as a Teenager: Some Questions to Keep in Mind

• How did the events and concerns of Mormon’s formative youth and during his

mid-life challenges influence his composition of the entire Book of Mormon?

• Mormon tells us that he grew up in a very difficult time. The cultural environment

was already bad when he was born. Yet he grew up to be extraordinarily faithful,

righteous, and dutiful. How might that have happened? Are there lessons that we as

his readers can apply to strengthen the current rising generation (Mormon 1:1–14)?

What happened to Mormon when he was 15 and 16 years old, and then as a very

young adult?

• Is it implausible to think of a person so young being put in charge of thousands of

soldiers at a very critical moment (Mormon 1:15–2:7)?

Main events covered in this chapter:

Year

Event

311 Mormon is born

321 Ammaron commissions Mormon to retrieve sacred records when 24 years old (1:2–4)

322 Mormon, at age 11, goes with his father to the land southward and Zarahemla (1:6)

322 War breaks out between Nephites and Lamanites (1:8)

323–326 Four years of peace (1:12)

326 Mormon, age 15, is visited by the Lord and knows the goodness of Jesus (1:15)

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Do We Know About Mormon’s Upbringing?” KnoWhy 226 (November 8, 2016).

Mormon 1:2–3 — Mormon’s Character

What Did Ammaron Mean by “Sober?”

Mormon was trusted by Ammaron. There is no information on the age of Ammaron or on his immediate kinship relations to the young Mormon, though they both descended from Nephi. However, this older man knew that this 10-year-old boy was very precocious, and he trusted him. Being trusted with some major assignment can be very influential in the development of confidence in the formation of the character of a young person, and 1042 John W. Welch Notes

indeed Mormon remembered that description. Being told that he was trustworthy likely made Mormon even more so. He was, even at that age, a very responsible person.

In Mormon 1:2, Ammaron said plainly to Mormon that he was a “sober” child. Likewise, Alma, when speaking to his sons Helaman and Shiblon, had ended his blessings and instructions by encouraging them to “be sober” (Alma 37:47; 38:15), and Nephi, Jacob, Benjamin, and Alma spoke words with “soberness” (1 Nephi 18:10; Jacob 2:2; 6:5) or with “truth and soberness” (Mosiah 4:15; Alma 42:31; 53:21). So, this word, in Nephite vocabulary, carried high praise and honor.

Today the word “sober” is used almost always to mean not influenced by drugs or alcohol, but according to Noah Webster’s 1828 Dictionary, the word “sober” described much more, including the following:

A person who is sober is calm, not under the influence of passion, without

intemperate passion. He is cool, calm, moderate, freedom from inordinate

passions, freedom from the heat of passion, calmness, coolness, habitual freedom

from enthusiasm, inordinate passion or over-heated imagination. Gravity without

sadness or melancholy.

The word “sober” comes from the Latin “sobrius” which also meant much more than simply “not intoxicated.” It also meant being “moderate, frugal, continent, reasonable, and sensible.” Mormon was by nature all of these things. His disposition was calm and level-headed in the worst of situations. See Mormon 3:16–22 in which he calmly steps down and becomes an “idle witness.” As readers, we can see these qualities coming through in Mormon’s statements and descriptions throughout the Book of Mormon, which are characteristically thoughtful, restrained, sensible, and wise. It reinforces my confidence in Mormon as an accurate and appropriate transmitter of the records of his people to know that his character, from a young age, disposed him toward leaving us with an accurate, perceptive, and carefully stated documentary.

Mormon Was Quick to Observe

Ammaron also referred to Mormon as being “quick to observe” (1:2), implying perhaps that he was good at accurately perceiving his surroundings, and maybe also quick to learn and obey. In Mormon 1:3, Ammaron counseled him to remember the things that “ye have observed concerning this people” in order to prepare to “take [particularly] the plates of Nephi unto yourself,” at the age of 24 (1:3–4).

The Nephites were not living their religion very well at this time, and they were making poor choices. An observant person sees his surroundings, considers them, and decides to

Mormon 1–6 1043

do something better. Mormon continued in this vein, even stepping down as the commander when the behavior of the Nephites fell below his standard.

Mormon Demonstrated Patience and Obedience

Mormon was also patient and obedient, and remembered his duty, all of which he attributed to his being a descendant of Nephi. At the age of ten years, he was asked to take stewardship of the records when he reached the age of twenty-four, in AD 334. More patient than many young people, he waited until the appropriate time to obtain the records. In recent years, research has shown that a knowledge of family history and origins have a beneficial effect on the choices that young people make.

Mormon Was Learned and Trained

Speaking about himself, Mormon commented that at the age of ten, he was “learned somewhat after the manner of the learning of my people,” using a phrase that is similar to the words Nephi used to describe himself (1 Nephi 1:1–2). One may suppose that Mormon was a diligent young student, considering the high quality of his later writing and editing. However, there had to be a time of preparation.

In Mormon 1:6, Mormon recorded that when he was eleven years old, his father took him south to Zarahemla. In AD 322, a war began by the borders of Zarahemla about the time that Mormon’s father took him to Zarahemla. They traveled southward, so they probably came from near Bountiful or the narrow neck of land where Mormon ended up at the end of his life. He found that the land was very over-populated: “The whole face of the land had become covered with buildings, and the people were as numerous almost, as it were the sand of the sea” (Mormon 1:7). As a young boy likely from a smaller, rural area, he seems to have been astounded by the big city.

Mormon’s father was probably involved in some way as a military leader, and the young Mormon went along to be exposed to military operations. This seems apparent because Mormon began at that time observing military details. He described the composition of the two sides, the numbers of soldiers, and the fact that there were several battles before the Lamanites capitulated and peace reigned for about four years.

Mormon’s calling as a prophet and religious leader occurred when he was fifteen years old, in AD 325–326. In Mormon 1:15, he described, “And I, being fifteen years of age and being somewhat of a sober mind, therefore I was visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus.” The similarity here to Joseph Smith’s life is obvious and worth noting. Joseph was visited by the Father and the Son around that same time in his life.

Mormon then went through a period of growth and preparation for the fulfillment of his calling. Having been visited by Jesus Christ, he immediately desired to begin teaching 1044 John W. Welch Notes

what he had learned, but was forbidden for a time because of the unrighteousness of the people. And, instead, the next year, at the age of sixteen, Mormon was acclaimed the military leader of the Nephite forces.

Mormon marked that date by stating both his age and the date in Mormon 2:2, which reads, “in my sixteenth year I did go forth at the head of an army of the Nephites, against the Lamanites; therefore three hundred and twenty and six years had passed away.” This one link allows us to say that Mormon was 15 years old (in his 16th year), and that 326 years from the birth of Christ then ended. This means that he was born either in 310 or 311, depending on the month in which he was born. For convenience, we can say he was born in 311.

Based on Mormon’s evident precociousness, spirituality, lineage, and physical stature, Ammaron was thus certainly inspired five years earlier as he confidently selected Mormon at such a young age as the next record-keeper. Ammaron himself was no doubt quite old. He received the plates from his brother Amos, and they were both sons and grandsons of another Amos, who was a son or a grandson of leaders named Nephi in 4 Nephi. Although the chronological record is not explicit here, one can well imagine that Ammaron had searched and waited long, during the deteriorating years between AD 250– 321 when Ammaron spoke to Mormon when he was “about ten years of age” (Mormon 1:2). Ammaron needed someone reliable and able to make and edit records. It is likely that his positive statements about Mormon’s strengths encouraged Mormon to develop those strengths further. An adult’s trust often proves to be invaluable to the development of young people. It is worthwhile to consider how and when we may want to provide positive reinforcement to young people.

Further Reading

Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, “Mormon, the Man and the Message,” in The Book of Mormon: Fourth Nephi Through Moroni, From Zion to Destruction, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, 1995), 117–131.

Book of Mormon Central, “What Do We Know about Mormon’s

Upbringing? (Mormon 1:2),” KnoWhy 226 (November 8, 2016).

Mormon 2

Mormon 2:1–2 — At Age 16, Mormon Leads the Nephites in Battle When Mormon was selected to lead the military system at the age of sixteen, he had certainly been prepared and positioned by several means to assume this position. Looking

Mormon 1–6 1045

mature and being responsible were good foundations, but he had to be groomed and trained for the role.

As he explained in Mormon 1:5, Mormon was a direct descendant of Nephi, which, according to the book of Jacob, meant that he had the right to be a king or leader. That right belonged to the direct descendants of Nephi. This may explain how he could have been selected at such a young age to fulfill that role.

Likely, his father was a military leader, and he trained Mormon. John Tvedtnes has written a very persuasive argument that Mormon may well have come from a military caste or line of Nephites, and that he learned certain things naturally from his father. In that day, people typically took over the trade of their fathers. Mormon’s father may very well have been in that line of work, with great responsibility and political influence. For purposes of comparison, other great military leaders in history assumed leadership roles at young ages:

Alexander the Great (356–323 BC)

Alexander the Great, officially known as Alexander III, was the son of Philip II, King of Macedonia. He had been tutored by Aristotle, and had opportunity for the finest education. Aristotle gave Alexander, who was very interested in history, a copy of Homer’s Iliad, the great story of the Trojan War. As any good, young Greek would, he probably knew that whole text by memory, so he knew the great military history of the Greek people. Mormon, too, had an interest in history, especially as he was destined to edit the old records of his people. He was learning of the history of the Nephite armies and their wars.

Alexander the Great fought alongside his father for several years, and successfully led the military and defended the nation while his father was away on forays. Then he defeated the Persian Empire, a huge empire, when he was only 23 years old. He had been considered very precocious at the age of ten, when he tamed his own huge, white Macedonian horse. In his day, people assumed that only someone with divine blood could possibly have done that.

Julius Caesar (100–44 BC) and Augustus Caesar (63 BC–AD 14) Julius Caesar was born into an influential family, well educated, and entered military service at age 19. By age 26 his extraordinary career as a general and politician had begun. When Julius Caesar was assassinated, Augustus Caesar became his heir at the age of 19, inheriting two-thirds of the very large estate that Julius Caesar had amassed. Augustus led the battle at the age of 32, when he defeated Marc Anthony to become the sole ruler of the Mediterranean world and Roman Empire. He developed the state into an empire, in 1046 John W. Welch Notes

which, despite appearances, he was the sole ruler, and he extended and defended the outer borders with great success.

Louis XIV (1638–1715)

The young Louis became nominal king at the age of five. However, he did not rule personally until he was sixteen, at which time, he took over complete, singlehanded rule. He reformed much of the French political and military system with a strong and highly organized hand.

Thus, it is perfectly feasible for a precocious and serious-minded young man like Mormon, particularly one who had been both trained by his father and called of God, to become an important leader at a young age. There are several examples throughout history. In contrast to these historic rulers however, young leaders such as Mormon, David the shepherd boy/king, and Joseph Smith were not only very talented and precocious, but more than that they were called by God and led through the Holy Ghost.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Do We Know about Mormon’s

Upbringing? (Mormon 1:2),” KnoWhy 226 (November 8, 2016).

Mormon 2:2–18 — Life Events of Mormon during the War Main events covered in this section:

Year

Event

327 Mormon, age 16, is appointed to lead the army (2:2)

328 Lamanites attack (2:3)

330 Mormon defeats Aaron (2:9)

331? Mormon marries at age 20?

331 Outbreak of hostilities

333? Moroni is born?

335 Mormon remembers Ammaron telling him to go to Antum at age 24 (1:3)

335 Mormon goes and obtains the records

Mormon 1–6 1047

344 People curse God and wish to die; day of grace was passed (2:14–15)

345 Nephites flee to Jashon, where the records were (2:16–17)

345 Mormon finishes the large plates of Nephi by adding information up to his

time (2:18)

345 Nephites fortify city of Shem (2:21)

346 Lamanites attack Shem (2:22)

348–349 Mormon describes the feelings and conditions of this time (2:19–27)

349 Mormon, age 38, has not yet made a complete record on the Plates of Mormon (2:18)

350 Nephites and Lamanites enter into ten-year peace treaty (2:28)

350–360 Ten years of peace; Mormon and Moroni work on the Plates of Mormon (2:28)

AD 326–331

The series of skirmishes between AD 326–331 provided a great victory for Mormon, who did not win many battles during his lifetime. Several features preceded these events: robbers, over-population, intense militarism, and a lot of fear (Mormon 2:3). The Nephites had resorted to sorceries, witchcrafts and magic (Mormon 1:19); they were no longer relying on the Holy Ghost, and they turned to superstition to find a successful strategy. Divination, augury, and things of that nature are surrogates for the lack of the influence of the Holy Ghost. These factors came together to cause the Nephite crisis.

At this point, the Nephites had to retreat. Thus, when Mormon, at age sixteen, began to lead these people, they were already on the run and setting up refugee camps. They had lost their lands, and only had the things they could carry with them. Access to healthcare and food must have been very limited, especially when they were so afraid, as described in Mormon 2:3.

As recorded in Mormon 2:9, however, he regrouped the army and prevailed for a moment of victory against Aaron. Mormon reported, “He came against us with an army of forty and four thousand. And behold, I withstood him with forty and two thousand. And it came to pass that I beat him with my army that he fled before me.” The Nephites were slightly outnumbered, but Mormon wanted us to know that he won at least that once. 1048 John W. Welch Notes

When Did Mormon Marry?

By the end of that victory in about AD 331, Mormon was in his twentieth year. In Jewish tradition, if they were still following it or some similar life-expectations, the age of twenty was considered an ideal age to marry. Mormon still had another four years before he could obtain the records at the age of 24, and he would probably have wanted to first marry a woman who already understood his mission. We don’t know when Mormon married, but for several reasons, sometime during the early 330s would have made sense. Interestingly, Joseph Smith married Emma at about that age as well in January 1827. Joesph began translating the plates, bringing forth the 116 pages in May and June, 1828, when he was age 22.

Hypothetically, Mormon could have married around AD 331, about twenty years of age, during the break in the wars at that time. Moroni could have been born a couple years after that. Looking ahead, if Moroni was then called to the ministry around 30 years of age, that would have occurred around AD 360, around the end of the 10-year-treaty. Considering the conditions at such times in Mormon’s life helps us suggest possible dates for things such as Mormon’s preaching in his synagogue as found in Moroni 7, and also his letter to Moroni as recorded in Moroni 8. Moroni noted that that letter was written by his father shortly after Moroni’s call to the ministry, whenever that was (Moroni 8:1). The contexts behind those two documents as well as behind his letter found in Moroni 9 will be discussed later in the notes for Moroni 7–9.

AD 331–345

Very little of what Mormon did between AD 331–345 is recorded in Mormon 2:18, but the points that Mormon touches were the most crucial. The Nephites became worse and the day of grace was past; they were sorrowful, but not unto repentance. Rather theirs was the sorrowing of the damned. In particular, they did not come to Jesus with “broken hearts and contrite spirits,” but they “did curse God and wish to die” (Mormon 2:14). The phrase “broken heart and contrite spirit” was spoken by Jesus out of the darkness in 3 Nephi 19: “I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit” (3 Nephi 9:19–20). The phrase was also used in the Sermon at the Temple, when Jesus commanded all to repent and come unto Him (3 Nephi 12:19). Mormon’s diagnosis of the serious spiritual decline of his people thus identifies their strong rejection of the basic teachings of Jesus in 3 Nephi. In using words sparingly, Mormon is excellent at remembering and using significant key phrases that he obviously knew from his study of the records and teachings of his people.

In the year AD 344, the Nephites fled again, and Mormon led them up to the land of Jashon, where a deposit of the Nephite records were. In Mormon 2:17 he recorded,

Mormon 1–6 1049

“Behold I had gone, according to the word of Ammaron and taken the plates of Nephi and did make a record according to the words of Ammaron.” By the time he returned in AD 344, Mormon had already obtained access to the plates, at the age of 24.

It is likely that, between AD 334–344, Mormon worked somewhat on the records. He was apparently finishing the record of what he called the Large Plates when, in Mormon 2:18, he wrote: “and upon the plates of Nephi, I did make a full account.” That is, he wrote on what for centuries had been called the Large Plates, recording “all the wickedness and abomination” of his own people. But upon these plates (the plates of Mormon), as he also wrote, he “did forbear to make a full account.” We do not know when he actually made the plates of Mormon, but it would seem likely that he at least began working on them during this period.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Mormon Write So Little About His Own Time

Period? (Mormon 2:18),” KnoWhy 227 (November 9, 2016).

Mormon 2:19–29 — The Ten-Year Peace Treaty

Only a few words and phrases are used by Mormon to describe the feelings and spiritual conditions of the Nephites before they entered into the Ten-Year peace treaty (AD 350–360) with the Lamanites and Gadianton robbers (Mormon 2:19–29). According to Mormon 2:28, in the year AD 350, the Nephites (led by Mormon) made a ten-year peace treaty with the Lamanites and even with the Gadianton robbers. They bought those ten years of peace at a very high price, by promising to give up the entire land south of the narrow neck of land.

As numbers often do, this date and these ten years probably mean something. The year 350 was the seventh occurrence of the fifty-year cycle—the seventh Jubilee year—from the birth of Jesus. They negotiated a ten-year treaty in accordance with Hebrew custom in observance of this special sabbatical-jubilee.

In Mormon 3:1 we learn that during that decade Mormon had made sure that his people were employed in preparing for the inevitable resumption of battle. Nevertheless, that decade was the only time in Mormon’s life that he had a peaceful period long enough to work on a major project, such as the Book of Mormon. Mormon was forty years old in AD 350, and he was sixty years old when the ten-year peace expired. It would appear that it was during this Jubilee decade that he had time and the opportunity to work on the abridgment.

At the same time, if he had married in about AD 331, his son Moroni could have been born a year or two later, and he would have been about 18 or 19 years old in AD 350—old enough to have been taught and trained by Mormon in the languages of his people and 1050 John W. Welch Notes

in the skills required to abridge records and to make and inscribe plates. When Mormon died in AD 385, Moroni knew exactly how to pick up where Mormon had left off. It makes sense that Moroni would have grown up as his father’s research and writing assistant.

Promptly after those ten years, in Mormon 3:4, the king of the Lamanites wrote a letter warning that they would resume hostilities. Apparently, this king was willing to live exactly by this ten-year treaty. It must have been a very solemn and somewhat religiously or symbolically oriented treaty for people on both sides to be willing to take a ten-year break from the war. The Lamanites were no doubt tired and probably needed a little rest too, but that would not have required a full decade in order to regroup. The bigger problem must have been within the Nephite camp. And, indeed, it was not more than two years after this ten-year time-out that Mormon would utterly refuse to lead the Nephites any longer because of their vengefulness and hatred.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is The 10-Year Peace Treaty Important? (Mormon

3:1),” KnoWhy 228 (November 10, 2016).

Mormon 3

Mormon 3 — Questions Arising within This Chapter

• Around AD 360, at the age of 49, what did Mormon preach to his people at the

close of the ten-year time of treaty (see Mormon 3:2–3)?

• Why did Mormon refuse to lead his people after AD 362 (Mormon 3:10–16)?

• What might it mean to “stand as an idle witness” (Mormon 3:16)?

• How can a person become free from the natural urge to get revenge? Are we free

from this problem? In what ways do we get back at people in our society today

(Mormon 3:10–16)?

• What is Mormon’s purpose in writing his own book and also the entire Book of

Mormon (Mormon 3:17–22)? How does this statement of purpose compare with

Moroni’s statement of purpose in the Title Page of the Book of Mormon? Or with

Nephi’s statement of purpose in 1 Nephi 1:20?

• How much of the Book of Mormon had Mormon completed by this time? Had he

spent much of the time during the ten-years during the treaty of peace working on

that project? That may well have been the case. One might think that Mormon

could have continued writing and inscribing some things during the next 23 years

until his death in AD 385, but with a major population relocation to the land of

Desolation and with at least eight more military offensives occurring during those

Mormon 1–6 1051

remaining years, the circumstances under which Mormon could have worked on

the sacred record during that time would have been far less than ideal.

Mormon 3:1–4 — Mormon Cries Repentance

In Mormon 3:2, Mormon tells us that he was specifically asked by the Lord to “Cry unto this people—Repent ye and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and build up again my church, and ye shall be spared.” This was the last warning for his people.

Mormon recorded in Mormon 3:4 that he received this command from the Lord and began preaching in AD 360, at 50 years old. He recorded that the event occurred at the end of the ten-year peace treaty made with the Lamanites, maybe as long as ten years after his tabernacle speech recorded by his son in Moroni 7. The treaty came to an abrupt end when the King of the Lamanites wrote a letter of warning that the time for the period of peace was over.

Mormon began, as instructed, to teach about repentance. In his earlier sermon, recorded in Moroni 7, while speaking to a band of believers, he had taught the higher law from the Sermon in the Temple, but now, he focused on the first principle of the Gospel, faith, repentance, and baptism. The ten-year celebration would have been a great time for people to have regrouped and returned to Christ, but apparently, they had not done so. This was a season of repentance, and his teaching was a great deal more than just a nice topic in conference.

The Lord had said, “Repent ye!” The verb “repent” was used purposefully. They had been on the run for a while, followed by a long a season of jubilee and celebration. Now it was time to go back to work to re-establish the church. Mormon used the verb again in the expression of his inner desire, “And I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment–seat of Christ” (Mormon 3:22, emphasis added).

Mormon commented in Mormon 3:3 that he had done what he had been commanded to do. “I did cry unto the people,” but his efforts were in vain. His people did not recognize that the Lord had spared them and had granted them a time for repentance. However, “behold, they did harden their hearts against the Lord” (Mormon 3:3).

Mormon 3:9–16 — Mormon Refuses to Lead the Wicked Nephites At the end of the ten-year span of peace, the king of the Lamanites had sent a letter warning that the treaty was over, and that fighting would resume. Mormon led his people in two successful battles, one in the 361st year, in the Land of Desolation (Mormon 3:7), and another in the 362nd year (v. 8), in which they “did slay a great number of them.” However, it becomes clear in Mormon 3:9 that the Nephites became proud and boastful 1052 John W. Welch Notes

because of their success. Not only were they interested in revenge, but they even swore before the heavens that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren.

The war, to the Nephites, became an offensive action. It is quite possible that their choices were based partly on a desire to step into a position of advantage, and win, but their motivation and trust in themselves precluded the help of the Lord.

Primarily, they wrongly became avengers of blood. Avengers of blood were part of the Law of Moses. If one had a brother or first-level relative murdered, there was an obligation under the Law of Moses to act as what was called the redeemer of blood, or go-el hadam, and to even the score. They may have been using this old law to say that God would justify their thirst for revenge. Though this was 330 years after Christ appeared, there were lingering questions about which parts of the Law of Moses were supposed to have been discontinued and which were still applicable. Possibly, they were falling back into old customs. For example, in Moroni 8, which was an “epistle of my father Mormon, written to me, Moroni; and it was written unto me soon after my calling to the ministry,” it was noted that the law of circumcision was done away in Christ. This sort of confusion also happened in Jerusalem among a number of early Christian converts.

It was not always clear which parts of the Law of Moses were to be done away with and which were not. For example, the law of the Sabbath is still followed, but other parts of the Law of Moses are not. Prophetic instruction was required to differentiate between those parts to be retained and those parts to be discontinued. Thus, although one may understand where they might have acquired their idea, they were still incorrect.

They were warned that exacting revenge was sinful, but they ignored the prophet, Mormon. One may ask whether seeking revenge is a common part of life today. In what ways do even Latter-day Saints “get back” at people in our society? It happens at a national level; it happens in the lives of individuals. Road rage is a modern example of vengeful behavior. Holding grudges or considering getting even with someone are common failings.

Mormon retired at the age of 53 because he could no longer stand at the head of the vengeful and bitter Nephites who would neither hear his cry for repentance nor cease being avengers. In Mormon 3:11–16, he announced that he would stand down. For what it may or may not have been worth in Mormon’s day, the mandatory retirement age of priests under the Law of Moses was 50 (see Numbers 8:25). Mormon was called back into service and accepted the role of leader again at the very end of his life, 20 years later.
