ETHER 1–5

John W. Welch Notes



Study Questions for the Book of Ether

As you study the book of Ether, you may wish to observe its overall organization and its most salient points of emphasis, paying particular attention to the historical, personal, doctrinal, and religious importance of the experiences of the Brother of Jared and of the Jaredite people. Since it is proverbially said that a good question is half the answer, bear in mind the following constructive questions:

• Many instructive things can be (and have been) said about this book appended to

the main line of the Book of Mormon. What do you find most amazing, impressive,

and inspiring about the complex book of Ether given to us by Moroni?

• If you were writing a history of a fallen civilization, what sorts of details might

you include or not find important?

• What was going on in Moroni’s very lonely life and traumatized situation when

he was finally able to fulfill his father Mormon’s editorial promise that “this

account shall be written hereafter; for it is expedient that all people should know

the things which are written in this account” (Mosiah 28:19)? Note that about 15

years had passed since the final Nephite battle and Mormon’s death (Mormon 8:6).

• In addition to fulfilling his father’s plan to include something of the record of

Ether, why else did Moroni craft this book the way he did? Was it to solidify his

testimony of Jesus as the Lord God from the beginning of history (Ether 2–3) until

the end of time with “a New Jerusalem” (Ether 13:4)? Was it to overcome his fears

with faith? Was it to assuage his own disappointment over the total destruction of

his own people? Or was it to show that he, as a lone voice, could hope to make a

difference for future people, just as the lone survivor Ether had left a helpful record

that told of the demise of the Jaredite civilization?

1088 John W. Welch Notes

• Who was Ether? When and why was his account written? (See Ether 12:2–5; 13:2–12).

• What records did Ether rely on as he wrote his original multilayered account of

the destruction of his people, the Jaredites, on his 24 gold plates? Those records

included at least certain records “brought across the deep” (Ether 1:3; 8:9), a

Jaredite king list (1:6–33), records of the brother of Jared (1:33–3:16; 3:21–28); and

a Jaredite royal history (6:2–8:18; 9:1–12:1). Ether’s account was translated by King

Mosiah, the son of Benjamin about 92 BC (Mosiah 28). See Charting the Book of

Mormon, chart 15:

• What then motivated Moroni as he chose what to include in his abridgement of

Ether’s account, which Moroni describes as an “account of those ancient

inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north

country” (Ether 1:1)?

• What personal editorial comments and instructional impressions did Moroni

interject? See Ether 1:1–6; 3:17–20 (on the faith of the brother of Jared); in 4:1–6:1

(on sealed records coming to light); in 8:18–26 (on the damage caused by secret

combinations); in 12:6–37 (on the nature of faith, as well as of hope and charity);

and in 12:38–41 (to bid farewell to the Gentiles, testifying that he had talked with

Jesus “face to face”).

Ether 1–5 1089

• What do you think Moroni wanted his readers to learn from the devastating

Jaredite experiences, and also from the regrettable Nephite experiences?

• What are your three or four favorite verses in the book of Ether? You may wish to

memorize them.

Seeing the Underlying Record of Ether as an Epic

It appears that the Jaredite story was originally told and written in the manner of an epic. Epics, such as the Iliad and the Odyssey, were a very early style of poetic literature, singing “of gods and of men.” Richard D. Rust, in his book, Feasting on the Word: The Literary Testimony of the Book of Mormon, discusses the many types and styles of writing in the Book of Mormon, and categorizes the Jaredite story as a classic epic.

In A Glossary of Literary Terms, M. H. Abrams explains that most epics are in poetry; however, durable and persuasive epics may also be written in prose. He defines characteristics of literary epics as follows (the examples from Jaredite literature are added):

• The hero is a figure of great national or even cosmic importance. In The Iliad, he is

the Greek warrior Achilles, the son of the sea nymph Thetis. Sometimes there are

two brothers who stand in contrast with each other. In the story of the Jaredite

origins, there were two brothers, Jared and his brother, rather like Romulus and

Remus, or other such pairs.

• The setting is ample and even huge in scale, possibly even cosmic. With help from

the gods, Odysseus sails or wanders over the Mediterranean basin, the whole of

the known world. The Jaredites, with divine assistance, cross a huge ocean to an

unknown land.

• The action involves superhuman deeds either in battle, as in The Iliad, or long

arduous journeys, as in The Odyssey. The Jaredite journey was certainly arduous,

dangerous, and long.

• In these great actions, the gods or other supernatural beings take an interest or an

active part. The Olympian Gods are involved in Homer’s epics. Jehovah, the Son

of God who will come to Earth, provides guidance for the Jaredite journey.

• An epic is a ceremonial performance narrated in a ceremonial style, not given in

normal speech. The text of the brother of Jared, who goes up into a high mountain

where he sees not only the finger but also the face of God, is extraordinary, and it

beckons to its readers to also strive to find an opening through the heavenly veil.

This last point does not mean that epics are, of necessity, only fictional literature and not historical. For many years people believed all components of The Iliad, including the siege of Troy, were mythological. The Homeric epics were validated when in in 1868, Heinrich Schliemann discovered the city of Troy, now well excavated at the archaeological site of 1090 John W. Welch Notes

Hisarlik. The excavation demonstrated the existence of many levels of occupation, city gates, and city walls, many of the things that Homer described are there. Indeed, history and human experience fundamentally precede poetry and theology.

The purpose of an epic was not simply entertainment. Epics were crucial in the reflection of essential needs and in the formation of the particular culture. There are no extant Olmec epics, but there are Maya creation epics such as the Popol Vuh. Those stories tell of the origin of their civilization, as seven ships sail across the sea and arrive in Central America. In addition, the great Israelite epic is the exodus from Egypt. The liberation, the plagues, the wandering in the wilderness, crossing the Red Sea, and acquiring their land contribute to their becoming a people.

And coming right from Mesopotamia in the third millennium BC, about the same time as the Jaredite departure, were the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Epic of Nergal and Erishkegal, the Enuma Elish and other sagas, reflecting a twilight world of kings, mighty warriors, dispersions, migrations, boats, feasts, rebellions, underground oppositions, jails, chaos, violence and savage reprisals, with the involvement of gods and battles to the death of all involved, as Hugh Nibley thoroughly introduced to LDS readers back in the 1950s and as John Thompson developed further in the 1990s.

Seen against this background, the book of Ether adheres in style and content to the typical configuration of an ancient epic. Its conclusion had a tragic, but didactically valuable, ending. Rather than showing only the foundation of a great culture, or the success of one political group over another, the record of Ether demonstrates the crumbling of one, initially strong civilization, and provides sober warnings for future cultures to avoid the same fate.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is the Book of Ether an Epic? (Ether 7:9),”KnoWhy 241 (November 29, 2016).

Richard Dilworth Rust, Feasting on the Word: The Literary Testimony of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Co: 1997).

M. H. Abrams and Geoffrey Galt Harpham, A Glossary of Literary Terms–Edition 11 (Boston, MA: Cengage Learning, 2014).

Heinrich Schliemann, Troy and Its Remains: A Narrative of Researches and Discoveries Made on the Site of Ilium, and in the Trojan Plain, ed. Philip Smith., trans. Dora Schmitz (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010).

Ether 1–5 1091

Hugh W. Nibley, Lehi in the Desert; the World of the Jaredites; There Were Jaredites, CWHN 5, ed. John W. Welch, with Darrell L. Matthews and Stephen R. Callister (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988, esp. 172–263, 285–307, 350–379. This material is conveniently summarized in Hugh Nibley’s, “Some Test Cases from the Book of Ether,” in An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Provo and Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS and Deseret Book, 1988).

John S. Thompson, “The Jaredite Exodus: A Literary Perspective of a Historical

Narrative,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies, 3, no. 1 (1994): 104–112.

Ether 1

Ether 1:1–2—Moroni as Abridger, Editor, Commentator, or Author Moroni took that epic and abridged it and added his own comments to the record left by Ether. Moroni would have most likely relied on King Mosiah’s translation of Ether’s twenty-four plates. And as Moroni’s intent was for the record to teach future generations “from the dust,” he did not hold back in inserting his own editorial comments. Because this text is “layered,” it is interesting to notice, at the outset, that in any given verse, the following “voices” may be speaking to us or influencing the text’s wording and meaning. Those possible voices would include (1) Jared or the brother of Jared, (2) other ancient Jaredite recordkeepers or story-tellers, (3) the final Jaredite prophet Ether, (4) King Mosiah as translator, (5) Moroni as abridger or editor, (6) Moroni as commentator or as author adding his own thoughts and impressions, and finally (7) Joseph Smith as translator bringing it forth in English. Facing this complexity would normally be unsettling, but realizing that all of this was possible—at every important turn—because of the gift and power of God gives us as readers confidence going forward.

Considering these layers further: As is recorded in Mosiah 28, the messengers of Limhi had found Ether’s plates during their unsuccessful journey in search of Zarahemla, and then Mosiah translated them using the Urim and Thummim because his people were anxious to know about the former civilization. Mormon commented in Mosiah 28:19 that the contents would be written later because it was “expedient that all people should know the things which are written in this account.” Possibly, as Mormon lay dying, he reminded Moroni to be sure to let people know about the history of the Jaredites.

Mormon and Moroni may have been even more interested in ensuring that the history was available for later generations of readers after they knew that their own generation had suffered the same kind of fate as the Jaredites. The whole book of Ether becomes, 1092 John W. Welch Notes

then, a prophetic, allegorical warning to the Nephites and to us, of how these things happened. The historical content of the Jaredite history is not allegorical, but Moroni used it allegorically, making it into a series of valuable lessons.

Moroni’s abridgement most likely relied on King Mosiah’s translation. Although he says in Ether 1:2 that he is taking his account from the twenty-four gold plates, it is not likely that Moroni retranslated Ether’s plates; he would probably have said so if he had. It is not clear that he even had those plates with him, though he would have known of them. It is unlikely that Moroni would have keep many records with him during his wandering and travels, although he certainly had some, in addition to the plates of Mormon, which he was finishing.

Ether 5 contains an important disclosure by Moroni: “And now I, Moroni, have written the words which were commanded me according to my memory” (Ether 5:1). Apparently, he knew these Jaredite origin stories by heart, as was common in ancient cultures. Parts of Moroni’s book of Ether may be a retelling of the Jaredite history based on things that he learned from his father Mormon, who would have had particular access to these records. As they were engrossed in wars, both Mormon and Moroni would have studied the final chapters of the Jaredite history particularly to learn military strategies from them.

Moroni’s purpose was to demonstrate that what had become of the Jaredites had happened to his generation of Nephites and would happen to later generations of Gentiles. In Ether 2:11 Moroni added, “And this cometh unto you, oh, ye Gentiles.” Moroni wrote this about fifteen years after he had written his first farewell in Mormon 8 and 9, in which he had spoken directly to the Gentiles. In Ether 2 he continued that conversation about what they needed to know, “that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent.” The call to repentance is a persistent theme throughout Moroni’s writings.

Interestingly, Moroni was honest enough to tell readers when he was chiming in, when he was abridging, and even when he was quoting. For example, in Ether 2:13, Moroni did not say, “And now I proceed with Ether’s record,” but rather, “Now I proceed with my record of the Jaredites” (emphasis added). Moroni’s abridgment produced what one may thus call “Moroni’s Book of Ether.” In addition to his abridgement of existing material, Moroni took occasion to interject his own commentary, asides, and sometimes prophecies. Here are the main ones: Ether 1:1–6; 4:1–6:1; 12:6–41; and 15:33.

As mentioned above, the book of Ether has a very complex textual history, but one of the most interesting things about Moroni’s book of Ether in particular, and about the Book of Mormon in general, is the candor and the honesty of this text. Mormon and Moroni usually state clearly when they are interjecting their own commentary. Thus, there is not

Ether 1–5 1093

the same confusion here as in the Old Testament, where dissecting its layers of redaction and editing is often ambiguous and uncertain.

Another intriguing feature is the source text’s underlying continuity. If one were to mark everything spoken by Moroni in one color, and mark everything that is archaic Jaredite in a contrasting color, one can take the Moroni material out, and the underlying Jaredite text flows seamlessly together. This careful splicing of the text is incredibly difficult to do successfully without a word-processor. The result is, from a text-critical point of view, a powerful testimony of the antiquity and the editorial process by which this came.

On the original Jaredite record, presumably also in Mosiah’s translation, there was an account of the creation. This is one more feature that marks this record as a work of ancient prophecy. In Ether 1:3, Moroni stated that he was going to spare us the rehearsal of the creation account because he expected that it would be available from other sources, as it had been for him on the Plates of Brass.

Ether 1:3–5 — What Was Contained in the Jaredite Scriptures? The book of Ether originates in a very different time of human history than did Lehi and Nephi. One must shift gears to understand the world in which they lived. They seem to have left the Middle East shortly after the fall of the tower and the confusion of the languages at Babel, before Abraham and King Hammurabi, and long before Moses. Perhaps about 2300 BC, an arbitrary date that seems to work out based on the underlying royal genealogy. Beginning that long ago, the Jaredites did not know about the Abrahamic Covenant, the Law of Moses or circumcision, nor did they have brass plates to take as Lehi did. There was no national religion; everything was local. They may have known of the prophets Noah and Enoch. They must have had some knowledge of the ancient dealings of God in the history of mankind, because Moroni records that they had an account of the creation (see Ether 1: 4–5).

As far as their other literary sources, we know they kept their king list and probably some kind of oral history, if not a written one, up to the fall of the tower. The twenty-four plates were made after the migration to the promised land. We cannot measure the Jaredite culture against the Nephite culture, because we do not even know for sure that they were Semitic, though some of the names and the root of their creation story may indicate that they were. It is a blessing that they made a record at all.

Were any laws recorded on those plates of Ether? Hammurabi (ca. 1810–1750 BC) was the sixth king of the First Babylonian dynasty of the Amorite tribe, reigning from c. 1792 BC to c. 1750 BC, is best known for having issued the Code of Hammurabi, which he claimed to have received from Shamash, the Babylonian god of justice. Hammurabi was 1094 John W. Welch Notes

eventually able to establish a unified Kingdom in the area from which Jared and his brother had earlier originated, when he united Southern and Northern Mesopotamia— the Sumerian culture in the south, and the Akkadian culture in the north. He established a law code, though he was not the first one to do that. Starting a couple hundred years earlier, people began writing laws down and following them. But, before then, as far as we know, there was not much in the way of law. Lehi and his family took with them in 600 BC a whole set of laws, the Law of Moses on the brass plates and a whole culture with them; but which the Jaredites much earlier did not have.

Since they knew of the Creation, they probably knew of Noah. In terms of law, God had made a covenant with Noah that related especially to protecting life and avoiding murder—if a person killed another man, the perpetrator’s blood had to be shed (Genesis 9:6). These rules issued by Noah are thought to apply to all of Noah’s posterity as the minimal rules of basic civilization. These very fundamental things are what we ever see by way of legal regulation in the Book of Ether. We see other atrocious things that apparently were considered “legal” within their civilization.

Ether 1:6–32 — Ether’s Genealogy Is Listed Back to Jared In an early analysis of the source of material for the Book of Ether, we get the sense that this book is the product of a long history, including several stages of composition, beginning with Jared, after whom the Jaredites were named.

First, there would have existed among the Jaredites general oral traditions and some specific archaic writings. Anciently, the basic historical information found in the book of Ether was probably handed down in the form of a king list kept among the descendants of Jared, who were the Jaredite rulers for over one thousand years.

This king list could have been either written or oral. King lists similar to the one in Ether 1 appear among the earliest written records in ancient Mesopotamia, and many Mesoamerican monuments have now been shown to contain historical information about royal lines. Most of the short accounts of each king’s reign in Ether 6–11 are not dissimilar in scale. Yet some early peoples also orally transmitted memorized king lists and stories about their origins. While it is not clear whether Ether worked in this respect from a written royal record, an oral tradition, or a combination of both, the integrity of the Jaredite king list as a separate source is underscored by its apparent insertion as a unit in the midst of Moroni’s introductory materials (Ether 1:3–5, 33). The words in these verses follow very closely the words of Mosiah2 in Mosiah 28:17. The king list appears in the middle of this material, from Ether 1:5, which mentions that the account begins “from the tower,” to verse 33, which picks back up with the same language: “from the great tower.”

Ether 1–5 1095

The genealogy in the book of Ether (Ether 1:6–33) is a prime example of these ancient king lists. The list, which served as an identification and reference for the author, is listed from the author down to his earliest ancestor. Ether is named first, Aaron is tenth, Shiz is twentieth, and Jared is thirtieth. Whether or not the number thirty is important is not clear, but the Maori people can recite their lineage, and it was important to them to be able to recite their lineage back thirty generations.

Likewise, the Jaredite king list given to us by Ether contains thirty generations. Here is that list as it was given in Ether 1:6–32, from the perspective of Ether, the narrator and the final Jaredite prophet.

Notice that the names are first listed from Ether back to Jared, in genealogical order:

Order Passage Name

1 1:6 Ether, the son of

2 1:6 Coriantor, son of

3 1:7 Moron, the son of

4 1:8 Ethem

5 1:9 Ahah

6 1:10 Seth

7 1:11 Shiblom

8 1:12 Com

9 1:13 Coriantum

10 1:14 Amnigaddah

11 1:15 Aaron

12 1:16 Heth

13 1:16 Hearthom

14 1:17 Lib

15 1:18 Kish

16 1:19 Corom

17 1:20 Levi

18 1:21 Kim

1096 John W. Welch Notes

19 1:22 Morianton

20 1:23 Riplakish

21 1:24 Shez

22 1:25 Heth

23 1:26 Com

24 1:27 Coriantum

25 1:28 Emer

26 1:29 Omer

27 1:30 Shule

28 1:31 Kib

29 1:32 Orihah, the son of

30 1:32 Jared

Then, as the story of the Jaredites unfolds, the same names are given in exactly the opposite order, in their historical order from Jared down to Ether. Here are all of those same names in the order of their first mention in the scriptural narrative, with their chapter and verse numbers given:

Order Passage Name

1 1:33 Jared, begat

2 6:14 Orihah, begat

3 7:3 Kib, begat

4 7:7 Shule

5 8:1 Omer

6 9:14 Emer

7 9:21 Coriantum

8 9:25 Com

9 9:25 Heth

10 10:1 Shez

11 10:4 Riplakish

Ether 1–5 1097

12 10:9 Morianton

13 10:13 Kim

14 10:14 Levi

15 10:16 Corom

16 10:17 Kish

17 10:18 Lib

18 10:29 Hearthom

19 10:31 Heth

20 10:31 Aaron

21 10:31 Amnigaddah

22 10:31 Coriantum

23 10:31 Com

24 11:4 Shiblom

25 11:9 Seth

26 11:10 Ahah

27 11:11 Ethem

28 11:14 Moron

29 11:18 Coriantor

30 11:23 Ether

The following graphic combines these two sequences visually into a single graphic:

1098 John W. Welch Notes

Ether 1–5 1099

Two of the more uplifting features of the book of Ether are the accounts of the tremendous faith of Jared and, even more so, of the Brother of Jared, who were the first characters in what may be considered Ether’s family history. Note that Ether did not descend from the brother of Jared. Rather, he descended from Jared, and so the brother of Jared is not mentioned in the genealogical king list in Ether 1, though he was crucially important.

Culturally, king lists were especially important in ancient Mesopotamia, the place where the story of the Jaredites begins. In Mesopotamia, the number system was based, not on the number 10, but on the number 60. Throughout the ancient Near East, for commercial and legal purposes, there were 60 shekels in a mina, and 60 minas equaled 1 talent. The number 60 was conveniently divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 15, 20, and 30. And thus, the number 30, being the number of names in this king, list may well have had some cultural meaning or symbolic significance.

The written history that is then given in the book of Ether follows this list chronologically, but now in the opposite order, beginning with Ether’s oldest ancestor whose name shows up last on the list and working down to the time of Ether, whose name is first on the list. Other names appear in the history that are not listed in this royal lineage (the brother of Jared, for example), and sometimes the names of these kings appear in the narrative history more than once, but none of the names in the king list appear their first time in the narrative out of this order. Thus, the thirty names first given from Ether back to Jared are then introduced into the narrative from Jared down to Ether in exactly the opposite order, and not a single one of them is left out.

Needless to say, the precision of the reverse repetition of the Jaredite king list in the book of Ether is absolutely amazing. If you haven’t seen this before, join the crowd. I first saw this feature in the book of Ether in 2009.

Also, in this context, think of Joseph Smith dictating the translation of Ether 1–12 to Oliver Cowdery, presumptively over the four days from May 25–28, 1829. Imagine anyone telling a story, beginning with a list of 30 names, and then over the next four days elaborating the histories of those 30 leaders in exactly the opposite order, interspersing various side stories, interactions between parties, conflicts, and editorial asides, and yet never leaving out a single name in the original list or confusing their order. There is no evidence or reason to believe that Joseph had any notes or even access to Oliver’s manuscript page for Ether 1 as he revealed the text of Ether 6–12. In fact, reported interviews from Emma Smith and David Whitmer indicate that there were no such outlines or notes.

1100 John W. Welch Notes

Thus, in addition to Moroni’s divinely guided work in remembering, abridging, and writing the book of Ether, we benefit from the inspiration of Joseph Smith, who translated this record accurately and precisely “by the gift and power of God.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Book of Ether Begin with Such a Long

Genealogy? (Ether 1:18),” KnoWhy 235 (November 21, 2016). “It may be easy to think of the authors of the Book of Mormon as distant from readers today. They're people from the remote past, who may seem difficult to relate to in modern times. Yet, on occasion, the curtain gets pulled back and the modern reader can almost sit with the authors and compilers and observe their manners and methods as they work. The book of Ether is one of those occasions. One can almost see Ether referring to the king list as he crafted his 24-gold-plate record of the Jaredites. One can also observe Moroni as he interspersed his own editorial commentaries (Ether 1:1–6; 3:17–20; 4:1–6:1; 8:18–26; 12:6–41) into the Jaredite

story as it unfolded.” See also, John W. Welch, “Preliminary Comments on the Sources

behind the Book of Ether,” Preliminary Reports (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1986). On the timing

of the translation, see John W. Welch, “Timing the Translation of the Book of Mormon:

‘Days [and Hours] Never to Be Forgotten’,” BYU Studies Quarterly 57, no. 4 (2018): 10–50.

John L. Sorenson, “The Years of the Jaredites,” Preliminary Reports (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1969).

Thorkild Jacobsen, “The Sumerian King List,” Oriental Institute Assyriological Studies 11 (Chicago, IL: Oriental Institute, 1939); S. N. Kramer, The Sumerians (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1963), 328–331; A. Malamat, “King Lists of the Old Babylonian Period and Biblical Genealogies,” JAOS 88 (1968): 163–173.

Lyle Campbell and Terrence Kaufman, “Mayan Linguistics: Where are We Now?” Annual Review of Anthropology 14 (1985): 193.

M. D. Johnson, The Purpose of the Biblical Genealogies, with Special Reference to the Setting of the Genealogies of Jesus (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1969), 101, 115.

Ether 1:33 — Who Was the Brother of Jared?

Even though the brother of Jared plays a crucial role in this narrative, the focus is on Jared’s lineage because Ether was a direct descendant of Jared. There is no mention of the brother of Jared’s name in the Book of Mormon text. Joseph Smith later revealed that it was Mahonri Moriancumer.
