Ether 1–5 1101

Ether knew, as a prophet himself, how important the faith of the brother of Jared was. Without that faith, the Jaredites would never have arrived at their new land or known of the promises of the Lord.

One may ask why Jared, who clearly had faith too, did not seek the guidance himself. Jared sent his brother repeatedly to consult with the Lord on behalf of himself and their families. It appears that there may have been a priesthood function involved. In the ancient world, families would dedicate some of their children to serve in the temple. We also know that temple building and seeking heaven was a big part of this culture, though the people of Babel went about it in the wrong way.

Temple priests served an important role in Mesopotamian society. In the ancient Mesopotamian world, they even sold temple franchises. The temples were an economy that had to be managed. Priests would have stewardships over crops, land, and animal. They had to be able to hold the proper festivals. They needed to support themselves so that they could attend to the functions of the temple and the religion. It was a great honor for a family to dedicate a child or two to this service. The priests probably did not make a lot of money, but they certainly garnered great prestige.

Perhaps Jared and his family had a connection of that nature through the brother of Jared. He may have been involved in the religious worship and he had faith necessary to be able to get the answers and blessing from the Lord that he needed.

The brother of Jared received some truly great revelations about the wonderful mysteries of things from the beginning to the end, and they were clearly new to him. Without his brother’s faith and savoir-faire, Jared would not have had the critical information needed to conduct the expedition.

Ether 1:33 — Josephus’s Account of the Tower of Babel At the time of Jesus’ life in Jerusalem, Flavius Josephus, a Jewish historian, wrote the Antiquities of the Jews. In it he wrote of the effects of the fall of the tower of Babel:

After this they were dispersed abroad, on account of their languages, and went

out by colonies everywhere; and each colony took possession of that land which

they light upon, and unto which God led them; so that the whole continent was

filled with them, both the inland and the maritime countries. There were some also

who passed over the sea in ships, and inhabited the islands. And some of those nations

do still retain the denominations which were given them by their first founders:

but some have lost them also. (Book 1, Chapter 5).

At least this point made in antiquity is consistent with the story of the Jaredite journey. 1102 John W. Welch Notes

Ether 1:41–43 — The Lord Led Jared and His Brother to a Promised Land The central river valley of Mesopotamia has few natural boundaries such as mountains to separate peoples and polities. The geographical problems of the Middle East today are endemic. Alexander the Great could not hold the area together for long. The Romans conquered northern Mesopotamia for a short time and could only hold it for 30 or 40 years. And the Ottomans tried too, but they also had to struggle for success. It was, and still is, an area of migration and movement, and so, to the people of Jared, the idea of migrating to a new land would likely not have been a foreign concept.

Ether 2

Ether 2 — Study Questions and Items of Interest

• On Ether 2:3 — After what did Brigham Young name the territory of Deseret?

Hugh Nibley wrote, “The founders of the Second Civilization of Egypt [ca. 1550–

1070 BC] had the bee as the symbol of their land, their king, and their empire, to

all of which they applied the designation deseret, or something [dsrt] very close to

it.” How could the Egyptians and the people of Jared have had the same word?

Maybe ancient peoples got around a lot more than modern people have typically

thought they could have or would have. Does the honeybee symbol provide

inspiration to you? It has been a symbol of industry and unity in many cultures

around the world.

• On Ether 2:7–12 — How did the Lord describe the land of promise? He provided

conditions for prospering in the new Western Hemisphere land. What were they?

How would the inhabitants be able to avoid bondage and captivity? Why did

Moroni record the reasons for the downfall of the Jaredite civilization?

• Ether 2:14 — When the people of Jared got to the shore, they were busy for four

years, and the brother of Jared had neglected to “call upon the Lord” in all that

time. How serious was that sin? How did the Lord respond? Would it be better for

you to go on forgetting, or for the Lord to chastise you for three hours?

• Ether 2:23, 25 — When the brother of Jared prayed for help in the preparation of

the barges, the Lord encouraged him to propose a solution to the lighting problem.

Why did the Lord do that? Does he still do that sometimes with us? Why did

Moroni incorporate this in his text? What can we learn from these experiences?
