Ether 1–5 1103

Ether 2:1 — The Valley Northward

The “valley which was northward,” that the people of Jared went “down” to was named the valley of Nimrod (See Genesis 10:8–10). In another interesting statement, Josephus, in his Antiquities of the Jews, said,

Now it was Nimrod who excited them to such an affront and contempt of God. He

was the grandson of Ham, the son of Noah: a bold man, and of great strength of

hand. He persuaded them not to ascribe it to God, as if it was through his means

that they were happy; but to believe that it was their own courage which procured

that happiness. He also gradually changed the government into tyranny; seeing

no other way of turning men from the fear of God, but to bring them into a constant

dependence on his own power. He also said, “He would be revenged on God, if

he should have a mind to drown the world again: for that he would build a Tower

too high for the waters to be able to reach; and that he would avenge himself on

God for destroying their fore-fathers.”

[About An. 2520] Now the multitude were very ready to follow the determination

of Nimrod, and to esteem it a piece of cowardice to submit to God: and they built

a Tower; neither sparing any pains, nor being in any degree negligent about the

work. And, by reason of the multitude of hands employed in it, it grew very high,

sooner than anyone could expect. But the thickness of it was so great, and it was

so strongly built, that thereby its great height seemed, upon the view, to be less

than it really was. It was built of burnt brick, cemented together with mortar, made

of bitumen; that it might not be liable to admit water. When God saw that they

acted so madly, he did not resolve to destroy them utterly; since they were not

grown wiser by the destruction of the former sinners: but he caused a tumult

among them, by producing in them diverse languages; and causing, that through

the multitude of those languages, they should not be able to understand one

another. The place wherein they built the Tower is now called Babylon: because of

the confusion of that language which they readily understood before: for the

Hebrews mean by the word Babel, Confusion (Book 1, chapter 4).

According to this account, what was Nimrod’s motive for building the Tower? How did the righteous Jaredites fare during the catastrophe? Why and how did God make good from the retribution? What can we do as individuals to try to avoid reaping similar retribution from God?

Ether 2:1–3 — Possible Geographical Influences

Mesopotamia at this time was composed of many small, competitive, and vulnerable cities. Mesopotamia’s lack of natural boundaries made it difficult to defend. Egypt, on the 1104 John W. Welch Notes

other hand, was easily defensible because its territory surrounded one large river (the Nile), with limited access from other places. Its geographic advantages also made Egypt more unified. There was only one language and one pharaoh who ruled the whole Nile River by controlling the boats and the commerce.

However, in the Mesopotamian area, there are two rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates. There is an upper and lower area, with different altitudes, climates, cultures, and languages. There were nomadic people, who could travel in and out of the desert. There were people that came down from the hills from what is now Iran. There were waves of immigrants, tired of being hunters up in the mountains, coming down into the lush, fertile land. Thus, there were many competing cultures.

When the ancestors of Ether left and moved to the Valley of Nimrod, they were temporarily reversing the usual process. They reverted from an agricultural culture to one of hunter-gatherers. They even named the valley after Nimrod, the great hunter.

Ether 2:4–5, 14 — The Lord Spoke Through a Cloud (or Veil) At one point, the brother of Jared had neglected to consult with the Lord for four years. The text explains in Ether 2:14 that the Lord came to him, and “stood in a cloud and talked with him.” The Lord spoke to and chastened the brother for three hours.

For the Israelites going through the desert, the Lord was in a cloud at the tabernacle, protected from their vision. They could only speak with the Lord though the appropriate authority of the high priest, in this case Moses. Their cloud appeared as a pillar of fire at night, leading them both physically and spiritually. This calls to mind the burning bush from which the Lord addressed Moses. How do you see the veil and the cloud described in the book of Ether as being in harmony with similar events in Hebrew history and related Latter-day doctrine?

ETHER 3

Ether 3 — Questions to Ponder and Principles to Apply

• In Ether 3:1–5 — To solve the lighting problem, the brother of Jared melted clear

rocks out of the mountain and then bravely asked the Lord for a miracle to make

them glow. How do you think he came up promptly with that idea? What can we

learn about self-help and help from the Lord? What can we begin with when we

need light in our own lives? How can we apply this metaphorically to ourselves?

Ether 1–5 1105

• In Ether 3:6–16 — What caused the veil to be “taken from off the eyes of the brother

of Jared?” Why did he fall to the ground? What does the nature of his fear tell you

about the character of the man? What did the Lord ask of him before he could be

admitted into the presence of the Lord? Why would the Lord ask that? Did he not

know the heart of the brother of Jared? How much does the principle of expressed

commitment matter to the Lord?

• In Ether 3:21–28 — What is the nature of the visions that this prophet had? What

did he see? Who else saw this information? Where are the contents of the vision

recorded, and how shall they be seen?

Ether 3:6–28 — The Brother of Jared Is Admitted to the Divine Council In Ether 3:6, when the veil was taken from the eyes of the Brother of Jared and he saw the finger of the Lord, he fell to the ground in fear. In Ether 3:6–8, the record says, “I feared lest he should smite me.” He had asked the Lord to touch the stones in verse 4 but had apparently not expected to see the finger perform the action.

Subsequently, the Lord showed himself fully to the brother of Jared in person, presented in what biblical scholars call a “prophetic call” narrative: “He showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth.” David Paulsen published an interesting article in the Harvard Theological Review about the logic of divine embodiment. Latter-day Christology has always held that the Lord Jesus Christ had a spiritual body before he had an earthly one, and that he was the one who communicated with the ancients.

Further Reading

David L. Paulsen, “Early Christian Belief in a Corporeal Deity: Origen and Augustine as Reluctant Witnesses,” The Harvard Theological Review 83, no. 2 (1990): 105–116.

Ether 3:6–13, 19–20 — The Brother of Jared Is Admitted into the Presence of the Lord In Latter-day doctrine, we speak of a symbolic veil that has two applications. In one case, the veil is a mechanism that shades the memory as we transition to Earth from our pre-Earth life. In a second, but related, application, the veil provides a protective barrier to protect us from unauthorized interaction with the Lord in the present. In each instance, the veil is penetrable under circumstances such as the brother of Jared’s great faith that allowed him to see beyond it.

In Ether 3:6, Moroni commented that the veil was taken from the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord. In Ether 3:19 he says, “Because of the knowledge of this man, he could not be kept from within the veil….” Clearly, the veil is a symbol for 1106 John W. Welch Notes

the sacred cloud, a holy protection that shields people on the Earth from interacting with the Lord inappropriately.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central “Why Did Moroni Use Temple Imagery While Telling

the Brother of Jared Story? (Ether 3:20),” KnoWhy 237 (November 23, 2016).

Ether 3:14–18 — The Premortal Jesus Ministered to the Brother of Jared The Lord told the brother of Jared that he was witnessing the “body of my spirit, as I will appear unto my people in the flesh.” He did not touch the Lord’s body; it was a body of spirit, a pre-Earth body. This man spoke for three hours with the Lord the first time. The Lord then explained his role in the Plan of Redemption to the brother of Jared. In verse 14, it is recorded that the Lord said, “I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all mankind have life, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters.” This is the earliest instance on record when Jesus introduced himself in this way, giving his name and setting forth the basic elements of Christology and salvation history.

Ether 3:15 — Was the Savior’s Appearance to the Brother of Jared Unique? In Ether 3:15, the statement by the Lord, “Never have I showed myself unto man that I created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast,” raises a question as to what the Lord meant by this. He had shown himself to certain of the patriarchs such as Adam and Eve. Enoch and Noah had preceded the brother of Jared and spoken with God.

A BYU Studies article by Kent Jackson presented several different views for how this may be understood. Bruce R. McConkie interpreted the verse as, “Never have I showed myself in the manner and form now involved …. Never before has the veil been lifted completely so that a mortal man has been able to see my spirit body in the full and complete sense of the word.”

As another interpretation, Sidney Sperry thought that the word “man” might mean “an unbelieving man,” but “to the faithful, he had indeed shown Himself.”

Daniel Ludlow included Ether 3:19–20 in pointing out that the brother of Jared had gained a perfect “knowledge” so great that he “could not be kept from beholding from within the veil,” and thus, as verse 26 says, that the Lord could not withhold anything from him. Perhaps that was what distinguished the brother of Jared from others to whom the Lord (such as Adam) to whom the Lord had appeared.

Ether 1–5 1107

Kent Jackson, rightly agreeing that these three views are not mutually exclusive, summarized by adding that this was the first recorded manifestation of Jehovah in which he particularly identified himself specifically in his roles as creator and redeemer. As the Savior said, in verse 14, “I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people.”

Further Reading

Kent P. Jackson, “‘Never Have I Showed Myself Unto Man’: A Suggestion for

Understanding Ether 3:15a,” BYU Studies 30, no. 3 (1990): 71–76.

Ether 4

Ether 4 — Questions about the Sealed Record

• Ether 4:1 — Who translated the record from the Jaredite language into the Nephite

language? See Mosiah 28:11–17.

• Ether 4:1 — Why did King Mosiah not publish the record of the vision of the

brother of Jared?

• Ether 4:4–5 — Why did Moroni record the contents of the vision? What was he told

to do with that record? Do we know, then, at least part of what the sealed portion of

the plates of Mormon will contain? See also 2 Nephi 27:7–10 and Ether 3:25–26.

• Ether 4:5–6 — Why might the Lord not yet have given us the full the record of

this vision?

• Ether 4:7, 15 — When will we receive this information? How can we be preparing

for them to come forth?

• Ether 4:16–17 — What does the coming forth of the Book of Mormon have to do

with the revelations of John? How do we know that the revelations of John are

indeed revelations from God? See 1 Nephi 14:18–27. What “work of the Lord” has

“commenced upon all the face of the land”? What does all this have to do with the

fulfilling of the Covenant?

Ether 4:7 — When Will The Sealed Record be Revealed? The record and the revelations shown to the brother of Jared were sealed up and obscured until the Lord sees fit to share the information with mankind in general, “even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ.” When will that be? Ether 4:7 indicates that it will be “In that day that they shall exercise faith in me … even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations.”

1108 John W. Welch Notes

Ether 4:19 — Why Do So Many of Mormon’s Teachings Appear in Ether 4 and 5? The following chart (see KnoWhy 239) illustrates several of the many interesting intertextual similarities between Moroni’s writings in Ether 4–5 and also Moroni 10 of distinctive words and doctrinal themes that had been previously written by Mormon in Moroni 7. Obviously, Moroni read, knew, and treasured the record he had of his father’s great sermon. Although, at the time that Moroni wrote Ether 4 and 5, he had not yet decided to include that record in his final book of Moroni, it is evident that Moroni draws on his father’s rhetoric and vocabulary here in Ether 4 and 5, as he will again in Moroni 10. It is clear that Moroni had taken seriously the training and instruction that he had received from his father, Mormon. And he hopes that we will as well.

Parallel Element Moroni 7 (Mormon) Ether 4–5 (Moroni) Moroni 10 (Moroni)

Addressed to To the church, the Addressed to specific To the church, the specific audience peaceable followers of audience peaceable followers of

Christ (7:3)

Christ (7:3)

Must have faith, … that have obtained … blessed is he that is And except ye have hope, and/or a sufficient hope by found faithful unto my charity ye can in nowise charity to be part which ye can enter name at the last day, be saved in the kingdom of

into the rest of the for he shall be lifted up of God; neither can ye

church/kingdom Lord … until ye shall to dwell in the kingdom be saved in the kingdom

rest with him in (4:19) of God if ye have not

heaven” (7:3)

faith; neither can ye if ye

“for if ye have not

have no hope (10:21)

faith in him then ye

are not fit to be

numbered among the

people of his church

(7:39)

Discerning good Wherefore, a man For because of my And whatsoever thing is from evil; all that being evil cannot do Spirit he shall know good is just and true; is good (every that which is good; that these things are wherefore, nothing that good gift) comes neither will he give a true; for it persuadeth is good denieth the from God; good gift. men to do good. Christ, but

anything that is Wherefore, all things And whatsoever thing acknowledgeth that he good invites to which are good cometh persuadeth men to do is. come to Christ of God; and that which good is of me; for good And I would exhort and not deny is evil cometh of the cometh of none save it you, my beloved Him; good people devil; be of me. I am the same brethren, that ye work by the For behold, the Spirit that leadeth men to all remember that every

“power and of Christ is given to good (4:11–12) good gift cometh of

every man, that he

Christ.

Ether 1–5 1109

gift(s)” of may know good from

And wo be unto the

Christ/God evil; wherefore, I

children of men if this

show unto you the

be the case; for there

way to judge; for

shall be none that doeth

every thing which

good among you, no not

inviteth to do good,

one. For if there be one

and to persuade to

among you that doeth

believe in Christ, is

good, he shall work by

sent forth by the

the power and gifts of

power and gift of

God.

Christ; wherefore ye

(10:6, 18, 25)

may know with a

perfect knowledge it is

of God.

But whatsoever thing

persuadeth men to do

evil, and believe not in

Christ, and deny him,

and serve not God,

then ye may know

with a perfect

knowledge it is of the

devil … Wherefore, I

beseech of you,

brethren, that ye

should search

diligently in the light

of Christ that ye may

know good from evil;

(7:5–19)

Pray unto Father … pray unto the … yea, when ye shall … ask God, the Eternal with “heart” Father with all the call upon the Father in Father, in the name of

energy of heart (7:48) my name, with a Christ … ye shall ask

broken heart and a with a sincere heart,

contrite spirit (4:15) with real intent … (10:4)

By the Spirit, one … the way to judge is For because of my … he will manifest the can know the as plain, that ye may Spirit he shall know truth of it unto you, by truth know with a perfect that these things are the power of the Holy

knowledge … true… (4:11) Ghost. And by the

For behold, the Spirit

power of the Holy

of Christ is given to

Ghost ye may know the

every man, that he

truth of all things (10:4–

5)

1110 John W. Welch Notes

may know good from

evil (7:15–16)

God will provide Wherefore, by the And unto three shall And I exhort you to witnesses ministering of angels, [the plates] be shown remember these things;

and by every word by the power of God; for the time speedily

which proceeded forth wherefore they shall cometh that ye shall out of the mouth of know of a surety that know that I lie not, for God, men began to these things are true. ye shall see me at the

exercise faith in And in the mouth of bar of God; and the Lord

Christ; three witnesses shall God will say unto you:

For behold, [the these things be Did I not declare my

angels] are subject established; and the words unto you, which unto [Christ], to testimony of three, and were written by this

minister according to this work, in the which man, like as one crying the word of his shall be shown forth from the dead, yea, even

command, showing the power of God and as one speaking out of themselves unto them also his word, of which the dust?

of strong faith and a the Father, and the And God shall show

firm mind in every Son, and the Holy unto you, that that

form of godliness. Ghost bear record—and which I have written is

And the office of their all this shall stand as a true. (10:28–29)

ministry is to call men testimony against the

unto repentance … to world at the last day.

prepare the way (5:3–4)

among the children of

men, by declaring the

word of Christ unto

the chosen vessels of

the Lord, that they

may bear testimony of

him. (7:25, 29–31)

The problem of But whatsoever thing And now, after that, … all these gifts of unbelief persuadeth men to do they have all dwindled which I have spoken,

evil, and believe not in in unbelief which are spiritual,

Christ, and deny him, … the knowledge never will be done

and serve not God, which is hid up away, even as long as

then ye may know because of unbelief. the world shall stand,

with a perfect … and it hath not come only according to the

knowledge it is of the unto you, because of unbelief of the children

devil (7:17) unbelief. of men.

Behold, when ye shall if the day cometh that

rend that veil of the power and gifts of

unbelief which doth God shall be done away

Ether 1–5 1111

cause you to remain in among you, it shall be

your awful state of because of unbelief.

wickedness, and (10:19, 24)

hardness of heart, and

blindness of mind …

(4:3, 13–15)

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do So Many of Mormon’s Teachings Appear in

Ether 4 and 5? (Ether 4:19),” KnoWhy 239 (November 25, 2016).

Ether 5

Ether 5 — Questions about Witnesses

• Whose voice do we hear throughout this chapter? Why is Moroni so adamant

about his instruction to whoever translates the Nephite record? How do we know

that we can equate the record to a “holy thing?”

• Ether 5:2–4 — Compare these verses with 2 Nephi 27:12–13. How many witnesses

were to see Mormon’s original record? Why so? See Deuteronomy 19:15 pertaining

to the Hebrew law of witnesses. Why would the Lord retain the ancient law of

witnesses for a sacred record? Who were the three people who saw the plates?

Who were the three sacred Heavenly witnesses of the work?

• Ether 5:6 — Moroni testifies that he will stand as a witness of his record at the

Judgment bar. How many reasons can you think of for why Moroni repeated this

very testimony in Moroni 10:27, 34?

Ether 5:1–4 — The Plates Will Be Shown to Three Witnesses In 2 Nephi 27:12–13, Nephi foresaw that the plates of the Book of Mormon would be “hid from the eyes of the world” and that “the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God” and “none other … shall view it, save it be a few according to the will of God.” Here in Ether 5:2–3, Moroni reaffirmed that the plates will be shown by the power of God to three of the people who had assisted in bringing forth the plates to verify the truth of the work. In Ether 5:4, Moroni is quoting, either of himself or through the Lord, the ancient Hebrew law of witnesses, in which two or three witnesses were required in establishing the truth of important testimonies in court. Deuteronomy 19:15 says: “One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the 1112 John W. Welch Notes

mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established.” Moroni said, “In the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established” (Ether 5:4).

This is followed by a statement that “the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record—and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day.” Moroni knows that he has no one else that he can call on to validate the truthfulness of the record he is giving here in the book of Ether. So, he calls these three Heavenly witnesses to corroborate that his record is true. Likewise, in Doctrine and Covenants 6:28, the Lord affirmed the validity of this law of witnesses, declaring in April, 1829, that “in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.” Witnesses, together with physical and written evidences, still play crucial roles in religious life, as well as in legal systems throughout the modern world, in coming to recognize and know the truth.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Were Three Key Witnesses Chosen to Testify of

the Book of Mormon? (Ether 5:4),” KnoWhy 267 (January 27, 2017).

Ether 5:5–6 — Ye Shall See Me, and We Shall Stand Before God at the Last Day. Ether 5 consists entirely of one of Moroni’s commentaries, in which he testified of the truthfulness of his record, and explained the need for witnesses, not only in this life, but also in the world to come. He reiterated his main point that “If it so be that they [we] repent and come unto the Father in the name of Jesus, they [we] shall be received into the kingdom of God.” Many people are looking forward to greeting him, “when ye shall see me, and we shall stand before God at the last day” (Ether 5:6). Here Moroni puts himself on the line as a witness on the day of God’s judgment. To quote 2 Nephi 33:15, “For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar.” Moroni later will likewise say, “Ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God” (Moroni 10:27).
