1 Nephi 16–22 105

Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert/The World of the Jaredites/There Were Jaredites, The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Volume 5 (Provo and Salt Lake City, UT: FARMS and Deseret Book, 1988), 64–67.

1 Nephi 17:3 — Echoes of Nephi’s Famous “I will go and do . . .” Most readers of the Book of Mormon can repeat Nephi’s familiar statement, “I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded.” It has a good rhythm to it. It’s beautifully memorable. In English it works wonderfully. It is a real gem of confession and profession of faith and faithfulness. But readers should not forget this verse’s almost-always-overlooked partner: 1 Nephi 17:3 is a structural counterpart and an echo of Nephi’s original statement in 1 Nephi 3:7.

Now out in the wilderness with his entire family, Nephi states, “And thus we see that the commandments of God must be filled. And if it be so that the children of men keep the commandments of God, he doth nourish and provide strength and strengthen them and provide a means [compare prepare a way] whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them” (1 Nephi 17:3). A similar expression also shows up in Sariah’s words as well: “I know of a surety that the Lord hath . . . hath given them power whereby they could accomplish the thing which the Lord hath commanded them” (see 1 Nephi 5:8). These strongly affirming words were a standard watchword for Nephi and his faithful family members throughout their arduous experiences in the desert.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Nephi Believe the Lord Would Prepare a Way? (1 Nephi 3:7),” KnoWhy 263 (January 18, 2017).

1 Nephi 17:5–6 — Has Nephi’s Land Bountiful Been Located? Good candidates for the location that Lehi’s party called “Bountiful” can be found in the Dhofar region of southern Oman. One such spot, called Khor Kharfot, complies with twelve requirements that can be derived from Nephi’s account. Such locations along the southern coast of Arabia are so tropical, especially in contrast to the barrenness of the surrounding desert, that I can imagine Laman and Lemuel saying something like, “Forget about going back to Jerusalem. Let us just stay right here.”

Interestingly, the very first account of this verdant region written by Westerners comes from 1850 when a British ship got caught in the monsoons and was blown into the coastland. They skirted along the southern coast of Oman and when they got to India, they wrote about what they had seen along the way. Their finding was newsworthy enough that it was then reported in a Calcutta newspaper. They were astonished at 106 John W. Welch Notes

these lush regions along the Arabian coast that did not look like they came out of Lawrence of Arabia’s backyard.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Has the Location of Nephi’s Bountiful Been Discovered? (1 Nephi 17:5),” KnoWhy 259 (January 9, 2017).

1 Nephi 17:7–10 — Nephi Is Commanded to Build a Ship Imagine that you are in a fertile place with delicious food, but no workshops and no factories. Then the Lord tells you to build a ship! When the Lord commanded Nephi to build a ship under such circumstances, what is the first thing out of Nephi’s mouth? He asked: “Where do I go to get the ore?” I can almost hear his mind going, “Okay, we’re going to need this, that, and this, but I don’t know where to get that, and where do I go to get this.” Then he was off and running to do the part he knew how to do. Nephi just seemed to have this great sense of what he can accomplish through his own abilities and when he had reached his limits and needed to ask the Lord for help. For example, back when his steel bow broke, Nephi made a new bow out of wood, and then said, “Where should I go to get food?”

Then we sense Nephi saying, “I am going to build the ship, but it won’t be after the manner of men.” It sounds like he had an idea of how he might approach the task. He was a smart guy. Maybe he was aware that the Lord was going to want it to be done differently than he would have done it, or perhaps even differently than anyone would have done it. And who knows? If Nephi had done it his way, it probably wouldn’t have worked so well.

1 Nephi 17:13 — The Lord Leads Them to the Promised Land The Lord never lets us down when we step into the unknown at His command. Notice how many times Nephi referred to the “land of promise” or the “promised land.” He mentions the “promised land” seven times and “land of promise” seventeen times. Except for Ether, every other reference in the entire Book of Mormon to the Promised Land or the Land of Promise, comes from Nephi. If it is not directly from Nephi himself, it is a quotation or reference back to something that he wrote.

I have such a testimony that the Lord is generous with prophecy. Because of His revelations, we know what will be found at the end of the road, and we know it is going to turn out okay if we keep our heart on the goal. We know that. As King Benjamin said, all that the Lord requires of you is to keep the commandments (Mosiah 2:22). He does not say, “Guess what is in my head.” He tells us. We have a living prophet, and we have scriptures. We have personal revelation, which, according to Nephi, are commandments (he uses these words in tandem). Whether the Lord tells you to do something through

1 Nephi 16–22 107

the prophet or the scriptures or the Holy Ghost, either way it is a commandment and will safely guide us through.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Do Commandments Bring Us Peace and Happiness? (2 Nephi 5:10),” KnoWhy 347 (August 2, 2017).

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does it Really Mean to be Blessed For Keeping the

Commandments? (Mosiah 2:41),” KnoWhy 367 (September 26, 2017).

1 Nephi 17:19–22 — Nephi’s Brothers Mock Him for Building a Ship How easy it would have been for Nephi to get angry at his brothers? Perhaps he did get angry, but we never hear about it. He wrote the book and therefore had control over his own portrayal, but I think Nephi probably kept his cool most if not all of the time. There would have been very little for him to have gained by getting mad. His brothers obviously were ridiculing and pushing him pretty hard, and they were older than he, yet Nephi’s longsuffering was incredible—his willingness to forgive his brothers and his willingness to say, in effect, “I don’t have a dog in this fight. We are going to pull together. If we are going to succeed, it is going to take all of us. The cause, the mission, the purpose is much bigger than any of our personal interests.” There are valuable lessons in Nephi’s attitude for all of us—for leaders in the church, for wards, for families, and for individuals. It is so easy to get offended or to want to assert yourself, but that is not Nephi’s way.
