1114 John W. Welch Notes

• How long did the ocean part of the Jaredite journey last? What source of power

drove the vessels? How did the people pass much of the time? How do those kinds

of activities help us during times of trial?

• What can we derive from this statement by President Brigham Young?

We are on the old ship Zion. … [God] is at the helm and will stay there. … All is right, sing Hallelujah, for the Lord is here. He dictates, guides and directs. If the people will have implicit confidence in their God, never forsake their covenants nor their God, He will guide us right (Brigham Young, “Remarks,” Deseret News, Nov. 18, 1857, 291).

• Were the Jaredites justified in singing praises and songs of gratitude to the

Lord? (See Elder Russell Ballard’s Talk, “Stay on the Boat and Hold On!”

Ensign, October 2014.)

Ether 6:2–3 — The Lord Provides Light for the Jaredite Barges The brother of Jared went to the Lord with his concern about the lack of light in the barges. The Lord did not provide an immediate solution to the problem, but asked, “What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels?” (Ether 2:23). In response, the brother of Jared “did molten out of rock sixteen small stones; and they were white and clear, even as transparent glass” (Ether 6:3). He then went back to the Lord and asked the Lord to touch each stone, which caused them to “shine in darkness, to give light unto men, women, and children, that they might not cross the great waters in darkness” (Ether6:3).

Referencing this account, Hugh Nibley asked, “[W]ho gave the brother of Jared the idea about stones in the first place? It was not the Lord, who left him entirely on his own; and yet the man went right to work as if he knew exactly what he was doing. Who put him on to it?”

Nibley acknowledged that the brother of Jared’s shining stones narrative “has been the subject of much mockery and fun among the critics of the Book of Mormon.” However, both Nibley and John A. Tvedtnes have found that there is a substantial body of ancient literature that contain legends and histories of stones that provided light. Tvedtnes noted, “The account of the stones used to provide light in the Jaredite barges fits rather well into a larger corpus of ancient and medieval literature.” These texts from antiquity were unknown in the world during Joseph Smith’s time or were unavailable to Smith.

One ancient account was of Alexander the Great, who was said to have a stone—a jewel that would glow. He carried it under his belt until he lost it in the Euphrates. Even Aristotle (Alexander’s tutor) mentioned Alexander’s stone.

Ether 6–11 1115

Of greater relevance to the Jaredite record, are the accounts linking shining stones to Noah’s ark. The story of Noah and the flood would have been relatively recent history for the Jaredites, who had departed from the “great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people” (Ether 1:33). An ancient glowing stone known as the “Pyrophilus” and other examples of luminous stones appear in various ancient texts, such as in the Epic of Gilgamesh. Nibley noted, “The Pyrophilus legend, wherever it is found, has accordingly been traced back ultimately in every case to the story of Noah.”

Lucian of Samosata related the story of a temple in Syria where throngs of pilgrims were shown a hole in the ground where they believed the waters of the flood receded. This Syrian temple had a stone, known as the “lynchnis,” that shone brightly at night, but not in the day. The lynchnis illuminated the whole sanctuary to simulate how Noah could tell how many days had passed during his voyage.

In the Babylonian Talmud, a Jewish commentator reported that the Lord instructed Noah to “set therein precious stones and jewels, so that they may give thee light, bright as the noon.” Another ancient Jewish rabbi explained, “During the whole twelve months that Noah was in the Ark he did not require the light of the sun by day or light of the moon by night, but he had a polished gem which he hung up.” Shaul Yosef Leiter, in a weekly Torah message, explained that the Torah description of the ark construction in Genesis 6:16 used the Hebrew word “tzohar,” meaning “something that shines.” In the Jerusalem Talmud, there are extensive debates about whether this “tzohar” was a window or a shining stone.

These various Jewish accounts of a shining stone being used in Noah’s ark are of particular interest, considering that Ether 6:7 made a direct comparison between the Jaredite vessels and Noah’s ark: “[T]here was no water that could hurt them, their vessels being tight like unto a dish, and also they were tight like unto the ark of Noah.”

Hugh Nibley gave the following summary:

Now whether the ark of Noah was actually lit by shining stones or not is beside

the point, which is that the idea of stones shining in the darkness of the ark was

not invented by Joseph Smith or anybody else in the nineteenth century, but [1]

was known to the ancient rabbis in an obscure and garbled version, [2] was clearly

indicated in the properties of a very ancient shrine dedicated to the Syrian Noah,

and [3] was mixed in among the legends of the very ancient Alexander cycle by

means of which scholars quickly and easily ran it down to its oldest visible source,

namely the old Sumerian Epic of the Babylonian Noah. However ridiculous the

story of the shining stones may sound to modern ears, there is no doubt that it is 1116 John W. Welch Notes

[genuinely ancient], going back to the proper sources as far as Ether is concerned.

(Numbering added for clarity.)

Far from being an amusing creation of Joseph Smith, the shining stones are features of ancient texts that were not known in Smith’s place and time.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Where did the Brother of Jared Get the Idea of Shining

Stones? (Ether 6:3),” KnoWhy 240 (November 28, 2016).

Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, 1st edition (Salt Lake City, UT:

Deseret Book, 1957), chapter 25, pp. 288–298. Nibley, Hugh W., “There Were Jaredites -

The Shining Stones – Continued.” Improvement Era 59, no. 9 (1956): 630–632, 672–675.

Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Volume 6 (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988), 285, 337–358.

John A. Tvedtnes, “Glowing Stones in Ancient and Medieval Lore,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 6, no. 2 (1997): 99–123.

Ether 6:4–11 — Comparing Lehi’s Journey with the Jaredite Journey The record of the Jaredites and the record of Lehi’s family were written centuries apart and yet, the two narratives are very similar. Perhaps Moroni was very deliberate in drawing the similarities so that contrasts between the two accounts would be more apparent. Below are a few of the many similarities found in both the Jaredite and Nephite narratives:

• There was a declaration by the people that they would be faithful before the

journey. The Lord promised to go before them and lead them into a choice land—

their Promised Land.

• They had a journey through the wilderness before they got to the shore.

• They dwelt in tents by the shore for a period of time.

• The Lord commanded them to build sea vessels according to his specifications.

• They faced a problem with the construction of the sea vessels, requiring them to

exert their own thought and effort before going to the Lord to ask for help.

• There was ongoing revelation from the Lord, as well as preparation of food and

the other provisions that they needed to take.

• They were promised a specific choice land that would be free from captivity if the

people living in the land would serve the Lord. There is parallel language used in

both accounts regarding this promise.
