Moroni 1–6 1151

Moroni 2

Moroni 2:1–3 — Authority to Bestow the Holy Ghost The first guidance that Moroni records is how the Nephite disciples were given the authority to give the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the manner in which that ordinance should be performed. These instructions were given by the resurrected Savior in his first appearing. In 3 Nephi 18:36–37, Jesus touched the twelve, but the multitude did not hear what he said. The disciples witnessed that he gave them the power to give the Holy Ghost.

Mormon, or whoever recorded the final version of that incident, added a note that said, “And I will show unto you hereafter that this record is true.” One wonders if Mormon reminded Moroni to be sure to add that actual information. We are not sure, for he could have received that information from the Three Nephites, who had visited him, and if so, they would have been first-hand witnesses. Nevertheless, Moroni’s report leaves us procedural guidance for administering that ordinance.

Joseph Smith was once asked by U.S. President Martin Van Buren, “wherein” Latter-day Saints “differed from other religions of the day.” His answer was that we have the gift of the Holy Ghost and that it is given by the laying-on of hands, and “all other considerations were contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost” (Joseph’s letter to Hyrum, December 5, 1839). That most important factor really does differentiate Zion people from other people.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Moroni Keep Writing? (Moroni 2:3),” KnoWhy 249 (December 9, 2016).

John W. Welch, “From Presence to Practice: Jesus, the Sacrament Prayers, the

Priesthood, and Church Discipline in 3 Nephi 18 and Moroni 2–6,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 5, no. 1 (1996): 119–139.

Moroni 3

Moroni 3:1–4 — Ordaining Priests and Teachers

In chapter 3, Moroni provides the instructions and words for ordination to the priesthood. Jesus told the disciples who were soon “called the elders of the church” (3:1) that they should first “call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer” (2:2) and then “after they had prayed unto the Father” (3:2), they should place their hands on the heads of the persons being ordained and ordain them. This manner of conducting ordinations can 1152 John W. Welch Notes

certainly remind us of the importance of preparing prayerfully before performing any priesthood ordinance or service unto the Lord.

The main charge that was then given to the priests and teachers was that they should ”preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end” (3:3).

Note that the giving of the authority to give the gift of the Holy Ghost, the actual giving of the Holy Ghost, and the ordination of priests and teachers, all required the laying on of hands. This is reminiscent of Moses laying hands upon Joshua: “And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation: And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses” (Numbers 27:23).

In Deuteronomy 34:9, we read of the effect that this had on Joshua; “And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him.” This was also the common practice of early Christians, especially in the New Testament. See Guide

to the Scriptures, “Hands, Laying on of.”

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “From Presence to Practice: Jesus, the Sacrament Prayers, the

Priesthood, and Church Discipline in 3 Nephi 18 and Moroni 2–6,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 5, no. 1 (1996): 119–139.

Moroni Chapters 4–5

Where did the Nephites get the words of the sacrament prayers? They were “according to the commandments of Christ; wherefore we know the manner to be true” (Moroni 4:1). The followers of Christ continued in righteousness to use the words the Savior taught in 3 Nephi 18, when the people were ready to enter into a covenant to remember him and obey his commandments that he had just given them. The following table compares the words that Moroni recorded with the words in 3 Nephi 18, on which the sacrament prayers were based. In 3 Nephi 18, Jesus of course spoke in the first and second person (“I, my” and “you, your”). Notice how, with necessary and appropriate adjustments, the words of Jesus have been carefully preserved and reformulated so that they can be spoken by the priests (“we ask,” etc.) with references to the people (“they,” “them”) and to Jesus (“he, his, him”) as follows:
