Moroni 1–6 1153

Moroni 4–5

3 Nephi 18

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the ask the Father in my name (3 Nephi 18:20)

name of thy Son, Jesus Christ,

to bless and sanctify this bread he took of the bread and break and blessed it

(3 Nephi 18:3)

to the souls of all those who partake of it; that unto all those who shall believe (3 Nephi

18:5)

they may eat in remembrance of the body of this shall ye do in remembrance of my body

thy Son

which I have shown unto you (3 Nephi 18:7)

and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal it shall be a testimony unto the Father

Father

(3 Nephi 18:7)

that they are willing to take upon them that ye are willing to do (3 Nephi 18:10)

the name of thy Son, and always remember that ye do always remember me (3 Nephi

him,

18:7)

and keep his commandments which he hath that which I have commanded you (3 Nephi

given them,

18:10)

that they may always have his Spirit to be ye shall have my Spirit to be with you

with them, Amen.

(3 Nephi 18:7)

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the ask the Father in my name (3 Nephi 18:20)

name of thy Son, Jesus Christ,

to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of take of the wine (3 Nephi 18:8)

all those who

all those who (3 Nephi 18:5)

drink of it, that they

they did drink (3 Nephi 18:9)

may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy do it in remembrance of my blood (3 Nephi

Son,

18:11)

which was shed for them; which I have shed for you (3 Nephi 18:11)

1154 John W. Welch Notes

that they may witness unto thee, O God, the that ye may witness unto the Father (3 Nephi

Eternal Father,

18:11)

that they do always remember him, that ye do always remember me (3 Nephi

18:11)

that they may have his Spirit to be with ye shall have my Spirit to be with you

them. Amen

(3 Nephi 18:11).

On the left-hand column, we have the words from Moroni 4 and 5—the bread and the wine prayers. On the right-hand column we have the words that Christ spoke when he administered the Sacrament as recorded in 3 Nephi 18. The difference arises from the fact that Jesus himself spoke the Sacrament prayers in 3 Nephi, while for the Nephites, and for us, ordained priesthood holders do it on his behalf. Thus, we get Jesus saying, “ask the Father in my name,” but in our prayer, the officiator says, “we ask thee in the name of thy Son.” Jesus’ words are all in 1st and 2nd person, “I—you” language, or more formally “I— thou.” In addition, as Jesus was no longer present, the prayers are directed to the Father.

We do not know when the sacrament prayer was taken from Jesus’ 1st and 2nd person pronoun formulation and recast into the 3rd person as we see it in Moroni. It probably happened very early, because the very next day in 3 Nephi 19, Jesus came back. Each of the twelve disciples presided over one large group and administered the sacrament to them. What prayer were they using there? Jesus was not speaking the words that he used in 3 Nephi 18, but the prayer must have been revoiced so that it made sense for a priest to say these words. But the content remained the same until Moroni’s day, and the Restoration brought these sacred words into our lives today.

One particularly noteworthy phrase appears in the prayers as found in Moroni 4–5 that was not included in the recorded words of Christ in 3 Nephi 18: “that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son” (Moroni 4:3) That phrase parallels King Benjamin’s words as he put his people under covenant to take upon themselves the name of Christ (Mosiah 5:8) about 150 years before the appearance of Christ at the temple in Bountiful. It seems that Nephite texts and traditions have combined and coalesced beautifully into the final sacrament prayers in Moroni 4–5. Elder Dallin H. Oaks emphasized the word willingness, pointing to a future consummation. Elder Oaks said: “[B]y partaking of the sacrament we witness our willingness to participate in the sacred ordinances of the temple and to receive the highest blessings available through the name and by the authority of

Moroni 1–6 1155

the Savior when he chooses to confer them upon us.” Dallin H. Oaks, “Taking upon Us

the Name of Jesus Christ,” Ensign (May 1985): 81.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Where did Moroni Get the Sacramental Prayers from? (Moroni 4:1), KnoWhy 250 (December 12, 2016).

John W. Welch, “Benjamin’s Covenant as a Precursor to the Sacrament Prayers,” chapter 10 in John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks, editors, King Benjamin’s Speech: That Ye May Learn Wisdom (Provo, UT, F.A.R.M.S., 1998), 295-314.

John W. Welch, “From Presence to Practice: Jesus, the Sacrament Prayers, the

Priesthood, and Church Discipline in 3 Nephi 18 and Moroni 2–6,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 5, no. 1 (1996): 119–139.

John W. Welch, “Our Nephite Sacrament Prayers,” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 286–289.

Moroni 6

Moroni 6:2–3 — Moroni Expounds the Requirements of Baptism The requirement for repentance and baptism are given in 4 Nephi 1:1: “As many as did come unto them, and did truly repent of their sins, were baptized in the name of Jesus; and they did also receive the Holy Ghost.” Moroni 6:2–3 clarifies the expectations: “Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repented of all their sins. And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end.” Moroni’s people also helped all Church members remain faithful to their baptismal covenant: “As oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven” (6:8).

Moroni 6:5–9 — Saints Meet Together Oft

4 Nephi 1:12 discussed how and why the saints met together: “[T]hey did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord.” Moroni 6:6, now mentions additionally that they did “meet together oft to brake of bread and wine in remembrance of the Lord Jesus Christ.” They were strict about how 1156 John W. Welch Notes

they behaved and who could participate (see verse 7). We are blessed in our own worship practices to know how to worship in a Zion manner the way they did.

When they met together, it says in verse 9 that their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the spirit and by the power of the Holy Ghost: “[F]or as the power of the Holy Ghost led them, whether to preach or to exhort or to pray or to supplicate or to sing, even so it was done.” Of course, it may not have been so open a meeting as to be a free-for-all. However, there are often changes in our meetings, and spontaneous speakers are occasionally asked to participate, and testimonies are borne. If one person presides and is influenced by the power of the Holy Ghost, and everyone else has that same gift, it is not a chaotic situation. There have been some spontaneous parts in Sacrament meetings that have been very effective. Sometimes spontaneity is even more effective because it occurs within a framework or structure in which people are not expecting it.

Singing and music was also a part of their worship services. This carried over the traditional uses of the Old Testament Psalms and other hymns of praise and joy that were long-standing parts of ancient Israelite family and temple worship. Singing and praising God (see 3 Nephi 4:31) was endorsed by Jesus as he quoted Isaiah in 3 Nephi 16:18–19; 20:32–34; and 22:1.

In addition, at the end of verse 5, it says that when they met, it was “to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls.” Is that a clear enough part of our pattern today? One may hope that in the study of scriptures, in priesthood and Relief Society classes, concentration is on the welfare of souls, and how well everyone is doing, and that the lessons are pulled together to focus on the real purpose of getting together. In that case, the Spirit can guide us more specifically.

That is how ministering contacts, training sessions, and Ward Council meetings are handled, by relying on the Spirit. For Family Home Evening, it is good to have a lesson planned, but if the lesson turns out to not be what the Spirit says needs to be said, the teacher needs to flexible enough to adjust for the welfare of the family.

Some years ago, President Boyd K. Packer was presiding at a regional training meeting that I attended. He asked the people to move closer to the front, and no one moved. After asking several times, he abruptly ended the meeting. When later asked by the stake presidents, as my stake president reported to us, about why he did that, President Packer replied, “Because revelation stopped.” He explained to them that the disobedience of the brethren in not moving down caused revelation to cease; therefore, he stopped the meeting, and that was the appropriate thing to do. This gave new meaning to me of the

Moroni 1–6 1157

passage in Doctrine and Covenants 42:14, “If you do not have the spirit, ye shall not teach.” That does not just mean you will not teach; it means that you cannot teach and should not teach.

Moroni and his predecessors maintained and provided the means for us to do as Jesus had commanded his twelve disciples: “Ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do” (3 Nephi 27:21, emphasis added). Using the methods given for ordinances and meetings, and applying the guidance in Moroni 1–6 will give us the means to become closer to being a Zion society, as it did the people in 4 Nephi.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Can an Ancient Christian Text Tell us About the

Book of Mormon? (Moroni 6:5), KnoWhy 450 (July 17, 2018).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Was Singing Hymns a Part of Nephite Worship

Services? (Moroni 6:9), KnoWhy251, (December 13, 2016). “Evidently, the Nephite church, as Moroni knew it, made singing a part of their worship services, as guided by the Holy Ghost. Although the text does not indicate when this practice was officially instituted, there is a long history of the use of music and hymns in Judeo-Christian worship. Nephite worship practices fit nicely into this tradition.”
