Moroni 7–9 1183

Moroni 8:10 — All Parents Must Become Like Children In his letter to his son in Moroni 8:10, Mormon also says that parents must humble themselves like their little children, which again is very reminiscent of King Benjamin’s Speech, specifically, Mosiah 3:18–19. One must put off the natural man by becoming a child, submissive, meek, and humble.

Mosiah 3:18–19

Moroni 8:10

For behold he judgeth, and his judgment is Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye

just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in teach—repentance and baptism unto those

his infancy; but men drink damnation to who are accountable and capable of

their own souls except they humble themselves committing sin; yea, teach parents that they

and become as little children, and believe that must repent and be baptized, and humble

salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and themselves as their little children, and they shall

through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord all be saved with their little children.

Omnipotent. For the natural man is an

enemy to God, and has been from the fall of

Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless

he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit,

and putteth off the natural man and

becometh a saint through the atonement of

Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child,

submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of

love, willing to submit to all things which the

Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a

child doth submit to his father.

Moroni 8:17 — How Did Mormon Perceive Children? In this letter, one may observe how Mormon felt about children. Mormon’s childhood was a rare one. He was a very observant, precocious child, and he probably had quite fond memories of his childhood. He was entrusted with important responsibilities. He liked childhood, and apparently liked children generally. He was certainly especially pained at seeing the children around him being killed. They were starving; they were deprived; they were maltreated in the war. He must have been enormously pained. In our modern day, people worry about what the economy is going to be like for their children and grandchildren. Mormon knew what the future was going to be like for his civilization’s children and grandchildren. It was likely to be very bleak at best.

In verse 17, he said that he loved little children, “I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation.” That statement says a great deal about 1184 John W. Welch Notes

a military commander-in-chief. They are alike to him because of their purity, their freedom from blame. A person who truly believes that, who has it embedded in their understanding of the gospel and humanity, will demonstrate that in the way they deal with little children who are all perfectly pure. Now, that is a great ideal for Latter-day Saints as they interact with children, grandchildren, children in the Primary, or any engagement with children.

Moroni 8:20–22 — All Children Are Clean and Need No Repentance Thanks to the Atonement

Mormon makes clear the status of little children, as does King Benjamin:

Mosiah 3:16

Moroni 8:20

And even if it were possible that little children And he that saith that little children need

could sin they could not be saved; but I say baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and

unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in setteth at naught the atonement of him and

Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the the power of his redemption.

blood of Christ atoneth for their sins.

Surely from these passages we can see that Mormon was familiar with King Benjamin’s speech when the topic of child baptism arose. Since it was so relevant, he rightly used it to address the current topic of concern. Besides being a prophet, King Benjamin had been a mighty warrior, even wielding the sword of Laban in successful battles. Mormon would clearly have admired and identified with Benjamin on many accounts. Mormon must also have lamented his own inability to bring his people to a mighty change of heart and covenant renewal, as Benjamin had done.

Notice the universality of Mormon’s repeated affirmation that all children are clean: “all children are alike unto me,” “they are all alike and partakers of salvation,” “for they are all alive in him because of his mercy,” and “all little children are alive in Christ” (8:17, 17, 19, 22). Mormon leaves no room for questions about the certitude and the scope of his conviction that infant baptism sets “at naught the atonement of [Christ] and the power of his redemption,” and “is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit” (8:20, 23).

Moroni 8:27 — Fighting Might Resume Soon

In Moroni 8:27, Mormon said that he would write again unless he had to go back out to battle soon. How would he have known that he might need to go back out to battle soon? In Mormon 3, he referred to a warning letter from the Lamanite king reminding him that

Moroni 7–9 1185

the ten years of peace was over. Thus, there may be a connection between Mormon’s epistle in Moroni 8 and that setting in Mormon 3. There are a few clues like this that potentially suggest a shared context.

Moroni 8:28–29 — The Nephites Were Rebellious in Nature Finally, we know from the ending of Moroni 8, in verse 28, that the people were rejecting all religious power and authority: “They are also seeking to put down all power and authority which cometh from God.” This condition was terminal, as is also clearly reflected in Mormon 3, when the people were reported as refusing to listen to Mormon’s leadership. In Mormon 3:3, Mormon had similarly written:

And I did cry unto this people, but it was in vain; and they did not realize that it

was the Lord that had spared them, and granted unto them a chance for

repentance. And behold they did harden their hearts against the Lord their God.

Moroni 9

Moroni 9 Thought Questions

• Moroni 9 begins with Mormon’s tender expression of love for his son Moroni,

but that sentiment is soon overwhelmed. How bad was their situation?

• What factors might have contributed to the complete collapse of military

order, martial law, and diplomatic communication at this time?

• The question of cannibalism is surely going to come up in Moroni 9:8–10. Is

there evidence that this type of behavior was practiced anciently? If so, why

would people do this? And why would Moroni include his father’s letter with

such gruesome details?

• Do genocides really happen? If so, why? And why does the Book of Mormon

tell us about this one?

Moroni 9:1 — Mormon’s Final Epistle to Moroni

The approximate timing of Mormon’s letter to Moroni (recorded in Moroni 9) may be identified through triangulation with other data from Mormon’s writings, comparing it with the description of the same events in Mormon chapters 4, 5, and 6. The historical accuracy of what we have here shines through quite magnificently.

Comparing the contents of Mormon 4–6 and Moroni 9 provides an opportunity to triangulate the events that Mormon described there with details that he covers in greater detail in this personal letter. Indeed, in his historical account, Mormon gave a general 1186 John W. Welch Notes

story about what was happening, and his letter elucidates those events and clarifies why the events in his narrative record were happening.

It is very unlikely that Joseph Smith, after he had encountered the narrative in Mormon 4–6, then continued to translate, finished Mormon 7–9, went on through the whole story of the Jaredites in Ether 1–15, and then finished most of the book of Moroni in chapters 1– 8, only at that point finally included this letter that fit right into a previous historical moment mentioned briefly much earlier. Those who witnessed his translating never even suggested that Joseph ever went back to consult previously translated passages or to check back on details.

Scholars generally, but not always, concur that Moroni 9 was probably written at the end of the hiatus between the years AD 367 to 375 (see Mormon 4:15–16), right before that last big invasion in 375, when the Nephites were on the run for ten years. For a chart comparing nine details found in Mormon 4 with specific statements found in Moroni 9, see my previous Notes on Mormon 1–6, pp. 1059–1060, and the discussions below. See also a similar chart by Robert F. Smith, “Epistolary Form,” pp. 131–132. As a rule, I favor the idea that Moroni 7, 8, and 9 were written in the same order in which Moroni gives them to us. Without giving some indication of a “flashback,” Mormon and Moroni use a strict chronological framework for their introduction of documents into the finished record. This would mean that Moroni 9 comes last of these three, and not in the earlier 345–350 AD time frame, which would be the only other possible time period. (Since it is not likely that Moroni 8 was written before 345–350 AD, when Moroni was too young to have been called to the ministry, and also since the speech in Moroni 7 would have to have been given even earlier, at a time before Mormon would have had worked extensively on abridging 3 Nephi, I would suggest that that earlier time frame for Moroni 9 seems improbable.)

There are several beautiful pearls among the descriptions of the horrendous sufferings and trials in Moroni 9. Perhaps they are things that one may want to remember, and maybe they are all the more memorable, because they come out of this crucible of intensity. If Mormon could say such poignant things when he was in the midst of horrific struggles, readers may gain great strength from them, especially during times of their own intense trials and disappointments. Below, are some of those pearls. As a reader, you may find many more!

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Mormon 1–6,” in John W. Welch Notes (Springville, UT: Book of Mormon Central, 2020), 1037–1068.

Moroni 7–9 1187

Book of Mormon Central, “When Did Mormon Write His Letter Recorded in

Moroni 9? (Mormon 9:1),” KnoWhy 477 (October 18, 2018).

Joseph M. Spencer, “On the Dating of Moroni 8–9,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship 22 (2016): 131–148.

Robert F. Smith, “Epistolary Form in the Book of Mormon,” FARMS Review 22, no. 2 (2010): 125–135, dates Moroni 9 to ca. AD 366 AD.

Alan C. Miner, “A Chronological Setting for the Epistles of Mormon to

Moroni,”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 3, no 2. (1994): 94–113.

Moroni 9:2 — Nephites Did Not Conquer in Battle (see Mormon 4:13) In Moroni 9:2, Mormon reported a battle in which the Nephites ultimately did not conquer. This may have been the result of several earlier skirmishes in which Mormon was personally involved, but this time it seems to have been a major turning point. In Mormon 2:19 the Nephites had been routed temporally, but in 2:25 they regrouped and stood their ground and in 2:27 they retook their lands of inheritance. In Mormon 4:13, for the first time, there will be no such recovery.

The fact that Mormon says here “I have had a sore battle with the Lamanites in which we did not conquer” is admittedly an important statement. It would mean that Moroni 9 was not written between AD 362 and 375, during the period when Mormon was not serving as the leader, unless it is possible that Mormon was involved in the battle mentioned in Moroni 9:2 in some way other than as the commander or leader. But, more likely, that battle in which the Nephites “did not conquer” occurred at the time when Mormon had just begun again as commander and the Nephites were forced to flee from the battlefield, taking refuge in the city of Jordan (Mormon 5:3, about AD 376).

Mentioning over a dozen specific points or words found in Mormon 4, the letter in Moroni 9 then goes on to describe the awful depths to which the Nephites had sunk during the decade from AD 366 to 375. Recapping that deterioration of Nephite faith, civility, and worthiness before God, Moroni 9 sets forth Mormon’s justifications for his despondent assessment of the hopeless condition of the Nephites around AD 375–376.

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Mormon 1–6,” in John W. Welch Notes (Springville, UT: Book of Mormon Central, 2020), 1059–1060.

Moroni 9:3–5 — The Nephites Fought to Sate Their Anger (see Mormon 4:15) Both documents convey intense emotion. In Mormon 4:15 the Nephites were overwhelmed with anger because the Lamanites had taken their women and children 1188 John W. Welch Notes

captive and offered them up unto idol gods. They wanted revenge for the atrocities inflicted upon their fellow Nephites. Similarly, in Moroni 9:5, Mormon records, “For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; … and they thirst after blood and revenge continually.”

Moroni 9:5 — The Nephites Lost Their Love One Towards Another Losing love towards one another eliminates the critical characteristic of Eternal Life, and prevents guidance by the Holy Ghost. Other motivations for action take precedence, and righteousness is not part of the equation.

Hate and anger, which become so prevalent in times of war, can take over the hearts of both sides. Hatred and anger are even used as a viable strategy for winning. According to our brother here in the Edgemont Stake, Dr. Demetrius Kepas (who was a teenager in Athens), intense hate and anger permeated the Greek Civil War with the communists; as he personally reported in class, he observed that hate, and how anger took over.

In a much earlier example, the Iliad is the great epic of the Greek war against Troy. The whole story is about Achilles throwing temper tantrums. For years, he was so angry and obsessed with the anger, that he drove out all feeling of love and concern, even for his dearest friend, Patroclus, who eventually was killed.

Moroni 9:6 — Mormon and Moroni Remain Faithful (see Mormon 5:1) Back in Mormon 5:1, after he had moved the records, Mormon said, “And it came to pass that I did go forth among the Nephites and I did repent of the oath which I had made.” He had previously sworn an oath that he would not lead the Nephites in battle anymore. He was planning to stand by as an idle witness. In order to break that oath, he had to retract or redeem his vow, and doing that in ancient times would have required him to seek the approval or forgiveness of the Lord. He had sworn to God that he would no longer lead them, and even if it was for what he now thought was a more righteous need, Mormon was still needing to rescind his previous oath.

Now, in a parallel text in Moroni 9:6, Mormon wrote, “…notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay.” Mormon was talking about his spiritual decision to repent of his oath. He was essentially saying, “Well, we are still here. God has spared our lives. As long as we are alive, he expects us to be working. We must carry on with the responsibilities that he has given us.” Again, the history and the letter carry parallel information. Plainly, Mormon’s letter here is describing the same conditions and events as are reported in the historical records in

Moroni 7–9 1189

Mormon 4 and 5. These details securely place the letter in Moroni 9 in the same context as Mormon’s previous historical writings.

Moroni 9:6 — Rest Our Souls in the Kingdom of God In Moroni 9:6, Mormon had retained a feeling of peace throughout the crises, retaining an eternal perspective in the midst of all the awful chaos. He pleaded, “that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness and rest our souls in the Kingdom of God.” This is how most readers would like to feel at a time like that.

Moroni 9:7 — Nephites Taken Prisoners (see also Mormon 4:2, 14) For the first time, many Nephites were taken prisoner by the Lamanites, and this is clearly recorded in both the history in Moron 4:2 and 14, and also here in Mormon’s letter.

Moroni 9:8, 16 — Human Sacrifice Performed (see also Mormon 4:11, 14–15, 21) Each record describes unspeakable suffering and even human sacrifice being inflicted extraordinarily upon the prisoners.

Further Reading

Evidence Central, “Book of Mormon Evidence: Human Sacrifice and Ritual

Cannibalism,” September 19, 2020, online at evidencecentral.org.

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the Lamanites Sacrifice Women and Children

to Idols? (Mormon 4:14),” KnoWhy 229 (November 11, 2016).

Moroni 9:9–10 — Nephite Wickedness Explained (compare Mormon 4:12, 15) In these verses, Mormon recounted the wickedness of the Nephites in carrying out their revenge. Their efforts failed miserably, and they lost again, as is likewise reported in Mormon 4:12, 15.

Moroni 9:11–15 — Mormon’s Lamentation

Here Mormon offers up another lamentation, not unlike his final lament over his fallen “fair ones” in Mormon 7. Foreshadowing his final extended elegy (see JWW Notes, 1063– 1068), here Mormon cries out: “O my beloved son, how can a people like this …, how can a people like this … , how can we expect … , Wo unto this people. Come out in judgment, O God.”

Here also, Mormon loves the repeated refrain of terms of affectionate address. As his speech in Moroni 7 had repeated “my beloved brethren,” here in Moroni 9 Mormon calls out “my son,” “my son,” even “my beloved son,” exactly ten times.
