MORONI 10

John W. Welch Notes



Questions to Ponder at the Outset

For many reasons, this chapter is one of the all-time favorites for Latter-day Saints. Almost every verse extends the desperate, if not exhausted, efforts of Moroni to draw his lifelong work and commission to a proper conclusion. After a total of 36 years of being, as far as we know, totally alone—with the exception of the personal visitations of Jesus Christ (Ether 12:39), the three Nephites (Mormon 8:11), and, most of all, the companionship of the Holy Spirit—Moroni succeeds in finally leaving the Book of Mormon where he would like us to find it.

As you read Moroni 10, you may wish to ponder personally, and share conversations with others, about any of the following details and questions. If we don’t know where we’re going, how will we know when we get there?

• Moroni 10:1. Four hundred and twenty-one years have passed since the birth of

Jesus when Moroni wrote this last chapter. To put that date into perspective, in

Europe, between AD 385 and 420, wars were fought between the western and

eastern halves of the Roman empire, Christianity became the state religion, and

invasions were mounted from the northeast into France, Germany, the Balkans

and other Roman territories. Also, there have been 421 years between AD 1599

(when Queen Elizabeth and Shakespeare were alive) and the present year of 2020.

The year 1620 (when the Mayflower landed at Plymouth Rock) was also four

centuries ago. That is a long time ago, in which much has happened. How does

that awareness of the wide scope of history give you perspectives that help you

put Moroni’s final words into a broad timeframe?

• Moroni 10:1, 24. Moroni first said that he was writing here to the Lamanites, then

he turned to addressing “all the ends of the earth.” And next, in his Title Page, 1194 John W. Welch Notes

Moroni says that he hopes that his message will reach three groups—the Lamanites

and Jews in the House of Israel, and also the Gentiles—to whom he was writing.

How is Moroni’s desired purpose being fulfilled today? What is your role personally

in seeing that the Book of Mormon is fulfilling its purposes to these audiences?

• Moroni 10:3. What does Moroni suggest that people ponder before they ask if the

record is true? How does remembering the previous mercies of God help prepare

any person to know the truth of the Book of Mormon and to receive any gifts of

the Spirit from God?

• Moroni 10:4. In what way is the three-witness law evident in verse 4? Who are the

three witnesses that bear testimony to us of the truthfulness of the Book of

Mormon? Why would Moroni have called particularly upon those three as his

witnesses? What traditional functions does this fulfill in certifying the accuracy of

his record?

• Moroni 10:7. We are asked here not to deny the power of God. On what principles

will God apply his powers for the benefit of His children?

• Moroni 10:8. Moroni repeatedly asks us not to deny the gifts of God. Moroni then

lists some of the spiritual gifts that are available. Which gifts are included in

Moron’s list, and why? For what purposes are these many gifts given? What did

Amaleki say about spiritual gifts in Omni 1:25? What spiritual gifts did Alma

mention in Alma 9:21–22? How do these lists, and other such lists, compare with

each other and relate to their particular times and circumstances?

• Moroni 10:9–17. What does Moroni say about spiritual gifts being available in our

day? What drives away the gifts of the spirit? Consider and compare the list in

DC 46:8–27. In DC 46:8, for what important purpose did the Lord suggest we

could use these gifts? How do the purposes, availability, and the list of gifts in

DC 46 line up with those in Moroni 10? Do you have any of these gifts? How do

you use them? If you need a gift for a righteous purpose, when and how can you,

or have you, sought for that gift?

• Moroni 10:27. Moroni declared that his words would come forth “out of the dust.”

When that occurred, what ancient prophecy was being fulfilled, and in what ways

was it fulfilled?

• Moroni 10:27, 34. Here again (twice now), Moroni tells us that he will meet us at the

“bar,” even the “pleasing bar” of God. Why might he have called it a “pleasing bar”?

What circumstances led Moroni to add this final conclusion and witness to his

record when he had already done so at the end of his Jaredite record? See Ether 5:6.

Who else will be there at the judgment bar of God to testify? See also 2 Nephi 33:11.

• Moroni 10:30. Isaiah gave guidance similar to this verse in Isaiah 52:11. What are

“unclean things”? How are we to avoid them? Look at Genesis 39:12. When

Moroni 10 1195

Potiphar’s wife was tempting him, it says that Joseph “fled and got him out.” How

can and should we maintain purity in our lives?

• Moroni 10:31. What ancient prophet is Moroni quoting here? How well did Moroni

know the scriptures from which these phrases have come and also in general?

• Moroni 10:31–33.How may we become “perfected in Christ”? What does it mean

to be perfected in Christ? What does it not mean?

Moroni Concludes His Writings

Moroni had written what he had believed was going to be his final words in Mormon chapters 8 and 9. In that earlier conclusion, he focused on fulfilling his father’s requests— writing things that were important and necessary to be included in the Nephite record. Although his words were heartfelt, Moroni was recording these things as part of his duty as his father’s scribe and editor.

Now, in Moroni chapter 10, Moroni opened up his heart and expressed what he really wanted to say. These were the things about which he felt passionate. There could be no better ending to the Book of Mormon than chapter 10 of Moroni.

Hugh Nibley often spoke candidly about the relevance of the Book of Mormon to our day, and particularly the words of Moroni. Nibley memorably stated, “I intend to take Moroni as my guide to the present world situation.” He pointed out that the Book of Mormon gives answers to issues of today—important questions of “prosperity and security—the great inseparably related issues of wealth and war.” He further noted, “In the Book of Mormon, the very questions which now oppress the liberal and fundamentalist alike, to the imminent overthrow of their fondest beliefs, are fully and clearly treated. No other book gives such a perfect and exhaustive explanation of the eschatological problem. … Here you will find anticipated and answered every logical objection that the intelligence and vanity of men even in this sophisticated age has been able to devise against the preaching of the word. And here one may find a description of our own age so vivid and so accurate that none can fail to recognize it.”

Further Reading

Hugh W. Nibley, “Gifts,” in Approaching Zion (Salt Lake City, UT: Deserert Book and FARMS, 1989), 89.

Gary P. Gillum, ed. and comp., Of All Things: A Nibley Quote Book (Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 1981), 86–87.

John W. Welch, “Hugh Nibley and the Book of Mormon,” Ensign, April 1985, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

1196 John W. Welch Notes

Moroni 10:1 — Moroni’s Words to the Lamanites

At the beginning of chapter 10, Moroni addressed the Lamanites, his former enemies. He wanted to warn and urge them to be righteous. Moroni used the word “exhort” eight times as he warned and taught. While there can be many powerful dimensions in the meanings of the word “exhort,” Moroni was careful to not be overly zealous, which could turn the Lamanites and readers away from his teachings. He also did not use here the more pointed questioning and challenging verbal registers that he had used earlier in Mormon 8–9.

How might we speak like Moroni and avoid offending people and prevent our teachings from being rejected? How can we avoid going too far with “exhortations”? From Moroni, notice that in verses 18 and 19, he twice added the words “my beloved brethren” into his exhortation. These words were used a dozen times by Mormon in his three letters which Moroni treasured. As missionaries exhort people to come unto Christ, love and understanding make that invitation more pleasant. If a person understands that the missionaries teaching them actually care and have concern for them, their words carry a stronger message without sharpness.

Moroni 10:2 — “I Seal up These Records”

Usually, when people talk about sealing something, they are thinking of licking and sealing an envelope. Perhaps Moroni’s closing up the stone box would have been considered a kind of sealing, but the phrase “to seal” has a lot more to do with authority than closure. When people are sealed in the temple, it does not mean they are glued together forever; rather, they are authenticated as part of the eternal family.

In the ancient world, court or state officials often had a unique seal, which may have been a little cylinder seal or a signet ring that left an impression when rolled onto clay or wax. When a seal of approval was placed on something, it became official. Jewish law required three witnesses to sign and put their seal on a lump of clay that was then attached to the document. This was necessary in order for a document to be legally binding. Only a judge could break the seal and if the seal was otherwise broken, the integrity of the document was compromised. A broken seal indicated someone may have tampered with the contents. Without sealing a document, someone could rub a character out of a metal plate and scratch in a new one, changing the original intent of the document.

Two Roman brass plates from AD 109, which we acquired in 2005, were witnessed in this ancient manner and now reside in the BYU Special Collections Library. They are an official decree of the Roman Emperor Trajan granting citizenship to a retiring Roman soldier who had fought for 25 years in the Roman Army. This doubled, sealed, witnessed document served as the soldier’s retirement passport, giving him Roman citizenship and privileges

Moroni 10 1197

as a retiree. Fragments of such plates are found all over the old Roman Empire. However, there are less than twenty such sets of two plates—and one of them is archived at BYU. These ancient sealed Roman plates are interesting because they are composed of two bronze plates connected by a ring so that they open like a book. The full text is written on the outside (equivalent to the front cover) and then the same text is replicated on the inside. On the back are listed the official names of seven witnesses, as required by Roman law. These witnesses are officials of the Roman Empire. All such documents have not only the names of seven Roman officials, but also the personal seals of these seven witnesses.

When the Book of Revelation chapter 5 talks about John seeing a book that was written on the inside and on the outside, sealed with seven seals, and given to the judge who can then break the seal, he may well have been using this standard kind of authentication of documents. A similar mode of authenticating a real estate deed is found in Jeremiah 32. This authentication method is evident in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin. It was used in Mesopotamia for over 2000 years before the time of Christ. There are numerous ancient legal documents authenticated this way.

Figure 1 Pre-exilic Hebrew royal seal, in the Louvre Museum, Paris. Photo by John W. Welch

1198 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 2 Model of typical Hebrew papyrus legal document from Elephantine, Egypt, showing the names and seals of

the required three witnesses. From the BYU Studies and FARMS exhibition of Two Doubled, Sealed, Roman Metal

Plates, currently in the library of the LDS

Putting on the official binder with the seal of the witnesses would have been an important part of closing up an official document in Moroni’s mind. This was standard operating procedure for any legal documentation in the ancient world.

In addition, Moroni knew Isaiah’s prophecy about “a book that is sealed” (Isaiah 29:11) that would come forth “out from the dust” (Isaiah 29:4), as it was quoted by Nephi in 2 Nephi 27:7–9. No doubt Moroni had Isaiah 29 in mind when he finally sealed up the final record.

Further Reading

Evidence Central, “Book of Mormon Evidence: Doubled, Sealed, and Witnessed

Documents,” September 19, 2020, online at evidencecentral.org.

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Was the Heavenly Book Sealed with Seven Seals? (2 Nephi 27:17),” KnoWhy 541 (December 12, 2019).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Would a Book Be Sealed? (2 Nephi 27:10),” KnoWhy 53 (March 14, 2016).

Moroni 10 1199

John W. Welch and Kelsey D. Lambert, “Two Ancient Roman Plates,” BYU Studies 45, no. 2 (2006): 55–76.

John A. Tvedtnes, “Sealed Books,” in The Book of Mormon and Other Hidden Books: “Out of Darkness Unto Light” (Provo, UT: FARMS, 2000), 59–73.

John W. Welch, “Doubled, Sealed, Witnessed Documents: From the Ancient World

to the Book of Mormon,” in Mormons, Scripture, and the Ancient World: Studies in Honor of John L. Sorenson, ed. Davis Bitton (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 391–444.

Moroni 10:2 — Moroni’s Eight Exhortations

Moroni organized his final message by giving a series of exhortations. He used a form of the word “exhort” nine times in this chapter—first, as he introduced this section and then eight more times as he gave eight specific exhortations. This word sets the main tone that runs throughout this final chapter. Moroni had exhorted his readers in similar ways earlier in Mormon 8 and 9. However, in his final words in Moroni 10, something gentler and more compassionate is now found, even though his message is still very intense and urgent. Here, Moroni took time to offer more explanation and instruction together with each of his exhortations.

In Greek, the origin of the word “exhort” is related to swearing an oath and “to encourage extremely or strongly.” In English, it means “to encourage, entreat, persuade, preach, urge, and warn.” Moroni knew that this was his last chance to communicate with his readers. He said, in effect, “Do not procrastinate and set this message aside,” and he said repeatedly, “I would exhort you … I would exhort you.”

Moroni’s Four Pairs of Exhortations in Moroni 10

Pair Item Scripture Context

Pair One

1 10:3 Remember God’s mercy

2 10:4 Ask God in the name of Christ

Pair Two

3 10:7 Deny not the power of God

4 10:8 Deny not the gifts of God

1200 John W. Welch Notes

Pair Three

5 10:18 Remember that every good gift cometh from Christ

6 10:19 Remember that He is the same yesterday, today, and forever

Pair Four

7 10:27 Remember all these things

8 10:30 Come unto Christ

These exhortations and the method in which Moroni presented them are valuable to anyone leading Come Follow Me discussions, giving Home Evening lessons, doing missionary work, seeking personal improvement, and teaching the gospel in general. Each exhortation given by Moroni, or for that matter the earlier prophets, may be usefully studied by following their themes as they run through the Book of Mormon. These settings increase understanding, give enlightenment, guidance, and ideas for application. Moroni’s final exhortations were not included as mere afterthoughts. Moroni worked with this text intentionally, intricately, and intimately. He knew every theme in the materials that he and his father had abridged, and he understood which themes would be most important for those who would eventually read the record. Each of these important exhortations deserve to be discussed separately and contemplated as necessary parts of one great whole.

Further Reading

James E. Faulconer, “Sealings and Mercies: Moroni’s Final Exhortations in Moroni

10,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 22, no. 1 (2013), 5–19.

Moroni 10:3 — Remember the Lord’s Mercy (First Exhortation) In verse 3, Moroni’s first exhortation was, “I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men.” The theme of remembering how merciful the Lord has been is threaded throughout the entire Book of Mormon. For example, Alma, Benjamin, and Jacob all addressed this topic. Because it is such a strong theme throughout the Book of Mormon, the words “mercy,” “mercies,” or “merciful” appear in the book very frequently: “Mercy” appears 85 times; “mercies,” especially tender mercies, 18 times; and merciful appears 47 times. That is a lot of use for any content-rich word in the Book of Mormon.

Moroni 10 1201

Putting on a special lens to watch for a particular topic, such as “God’s mercy,” is an effective way to study the Book of Mormon. Searching for instances in the Book of Mormon where the word “mercy” is mentioned explicitly or linked through a story about a merciful aspect of God, will reveal a great deal about the mercy of God and will demonstrate how, why, and when God’s mercy works. Studying the scriptures by subject or topic is a very effective method of delving deeply into gospel doctrine. Are there any better places to learn about God’s mercy than by studying the Book of Mormon?

In fact, the first chapter of the entire Book of Mormon launches the theme of the Lord’s mercy as a key concept that runs throughout this record, making it all the more appropriate that Moroni ends with that theme as well. In 1 Nephi 1:1, while not specifically using the word “merciful,” Nephi introduced this concept by stating that he had seen many afflictions, “nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and mysteries of God …” Referring implicitly to God’s mercy, Nephi assures us as his readers that the Lord visits, helps, reassures, blesses, and reveals his will to people.

A few verses later, in 1 Nephi 1:14, Lehi made the following observation, after receiving his vision of the destruction of Jerusalem:

Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty! Thy throne is high in

the heavens, and thy power, and goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants

of the earth; and, because thou art merciful, thou wilt not suffer those who come

unto thee that they shall perish.”

What did Lehi consider merciful about the destruction of Jerusalem? Lehi understood that there would be an opportunity for repentance for any person who chose to come back to the Lord—the Lord will save any who come to Him. Part of the mercy is that God always points out the mistakes for which people can repent. How would they know what they needed to correct if there were no schoolmaster; if they had no one loving enough to say, “If you keep going down this path, it is not going to work out”? Warning is an act of mercy.

Six verses later, in 1 Nephi 1:20, responding to the Jews’ treatment of his father, Nephi adopted this theme as one of the main purposes for his writing: “But behold, I, Nephi, will show unto you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance.”

Indeed, the mercy of the Lord extends throughout all time and to all people. In Jacob 4:10, Jacob recorded, “For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works.”

1202 John W. Welch Notes

When discussing the great plan of God that includes the Atonement, Alma referred to the entire plan as the “Plan of Mercy.” In his words to his son Corianton, in Alma 42:15, Alma explained:

And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement

should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring

about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a

perfect, just God, and a merciful God also.

God’s “Eternal Plan,” when viewed from different perspectives is variously called the “Plan of Happiness,” the “Plan of Salvation,” or in the Book of Mormon, the “Plan of Redemption.” God’s mercy is a prime focus, no matter which name is used for God’s plan. Therefore, the mercy of God is demonstrated and presented throughout the whole Book of Mormon.

And why is it important for people to remember how merciful God has been from the time of Adam until now? If a person gratefully remembers the mercy and the love of God, instead of demanding God’s attention or being afraid ofGod’s condemnation, the attitude of appreciation softens the heart, making one more receptive to God’s Spirit, God’s word, and God's personal revelation. Knowing that God has been merciful in the past gives people confidence that He will be generous and openhanded again. We can learn something important, and often overlooked, from Moroni’s approach. If you want to encourage righteousness, begin by remembering the mercy of God.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Can We Be Delivered through the Lord’s Tender

Mercies? (1 Nephi 1:20),” KnoWhy 447 (July 5, 2018).

Evidence Central, “Book of Mormon Evidence: Politeness Formula in Ancient

Epistles,” September 19, 2020, online at evidencecentral.org.

Moroni 10:4–5 — Moroni’s Promise: Ask God in the Name of Christ (Second Exhortation)

Moroni instructed and exhorted his readers next to “ask God the Eternal Father in the name of Christ, if these things are not true.” Using the name of Jesus Christ was sacred and important in Moroni’s mind, as it should be in ours. In 3 Nephi, as the Lord instructed and demonstrated how to administer the sacrament, Jesus himself gave priesthood authority to ask and to do things in his name. The authority to righteously use the name of Jesus Christ, especially in ordinances, was and is a sacred priesthood responsibility. That may be why Moroni waited to the very end (see Moroni 4 and 5) to record the exact

Moroni 10 1203

wording for the sacrament prayers—not wanting these prayers over the emblems of Christ’s sacrifice to fall into unworthy hands.

The witness of the Holy Ghost, of course, is crucial to knowing the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon—or for that matter, to knowing any truth by revelation. Moroni 10 is where Moroni promises us that if we will ask God, the Holy Ghost will testify to us of the truthfulness of this ancient scriptural record. We want people who are investigating, or who are having questions, to get to the point where they will pray in faith and actually ask God for an answer to their probing questions. It might help the person seeking answers if she or he understands why and what Moroni was doing at the very end of his book. Here Moroni was putting his personal conclusion, his colophon—his “seal”—on the record. In this case, the form of the seal was to invite you to ask God if it is true. Moroni’s promise was that the Holy Ghost would “seal” or validate the authenticity of the record.

Normally, upon completion of such plates, when a scribe sealed and closed up an important record, he would not authenticate the record by simply stating “I Nephi” or “I Mormon” wrote these things. He would call upon other people to authenticate the record—to be witnesses, to sign their names, and to put their official seal—either a stamped seal or a cylinder seal—on the record to testify, “I validate what is being said.” Put yourself in Moroni’s position. He was all alone. Who was he going to get to serve as a witness?

Providing witnesses for foundational documents was a legal requirement in ancient times as it is today, and Moroni fulfilled that requirement, though not in the traditional manner. His exhortation and promise in Moroni 10:4 provided much more than a testimony-building moment. Ancient Hebrew law required that there be two or three witnesses in order for an article to be legally enforced. In Matthew 18:16, Jesus, referring to the laws such as those in Deuteronomy, chapters 17 and 19, said, “[I]n the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.” This practice was extended to legal documents. No bill of divorcement, deed, or will was enforceable without calling the witnesses who had sealed it.

It is interesting that 2 Nephi 27:12 records that there will be three witnesses to the plates that had been delivered to the prophet for translation: “Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.”

The first edition of the translated Book of Mormon followed the ancient pattern of having the statement of three witnesses authenticate the record. The testimonies of eight 1204 John W. Welch Notes

additional witnesses were later added. In subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon, the statements of the witnesses were placed on the page following the introduction to the book, so readers could read the witness testimonies first.

One may well ask how Moroni provided for the witnessing of his completed work. How did he follow traditional practices in the sealing and witnessing of the plates? Whom did he call as witnesses? We know that Moroni, being entirely alone, had no people around to call as his witnesses. Yet, he planned to perform a kind of sealing as explained in Moroni 10:2: “And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you.”

Moroni, performing his final acts as a scribe, named three witnesses who would testify of the truthfulness of what he had written—not in the way that ordinary witnesses might testify, because he had no ordinary witnesses. The three that he called upon are the members of the Godhead. Moroni 10:4 states, “And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.”

These are the three most reliable witnesses that will repeatedly provide the final legal function of authenticating truth for any era. They are far more reliable than any earthly witnesses. They will testify of the correctness of scriptural records, not only during people’s earth-lives today, but also at the judgment bar. In verse 27, Moroni states that we will know that his record is true and that he did not lie, “for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust?”

Thus, Moroni was able to complete the ancient procedures of authentication and verification and thereby proved himself a worthy editor and scribe. The seal on Moroni’s record is greater than that found on any important record, and it is incumbent upon the reader to observe Moroni’s closing and seventh exhortation in verses 24 through 27—to believe and trust the record that he has provided.

Confirmation of truth by the Spirit is the ultimate desire and is of utmost importance when receiving revelation. However, we are told that we need to seek wisdom by study and also by faith. When we are seeking answers or when we are working with people seeking answers, we must use both tools—the Spirit and learning. B. H. Roberts, writing a hundred or so years ago, stated the following in his introduction to a couple of books entitled, A New Witness for God in America: “The Holy Ghost will always be the ultimate

Moroni 10 1205

source; the most important source of our knowledge. But the clearer the truth can be stated, the greater the opportunity will the Holy Ghost have of bearing witness of the truth of what is being said.” We have to be articulate, specific, and clear about what we are asking of God so that the Holy Ghost can penetrate through and touch a soul who may not initially seem ready.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Will God Manifest the Truth of the Book of

Mormon? (Moroni 10:4),” KnoWhy 254 (December 16, 2016).

Book of Mormon Central, “How Important Was it to Moroni that We Pray about

the Book of Mormon? (Moroni 10:4-5),” KnoWhy 359 (August 30, 2017).

Robert L. Marrott, “Witnesses, Law of,” in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4 vols., ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (New York, NY: Macmillian, 1992), 4:1569–1570.

Moroni 10:6–18 — Moroni Teaches about the Gifts of the Spirit God blesses us with specific gifts of the Spirit necessary to bring about our own conversion, the conversion of others, and to build the Kingdom of God here on earth. These are the purposes of gifts of the Spirit—not for our own self-aggrandizement; not to satisfy our own curiosity or to prove something because we lack faith.

Moroni discussed the source of spiritual gifts—the Spirit of Christ—as well as their various manifestations. He explained “there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them” (Moroni 10:8).

By applying this principle, Moroni helps us understand that we should not confine the expected confirmation of truth to a specific type of spiritual manifestation, but rather should be open to the various ways or gifts through which God communicates inspiration and revelation. Elder David A. Bednar taught, “Revelations are conveyed in a variety of ways, including, for example, dreams, visions, conversations with heavenly messengers, and inspiration. Some revelations are received immediately and intensely; some are recognized gradually and subtly.”

Personal revelation has been a theme of President Russell M. Nelson since the early part of his ministry. He has emphasized the importance of receiving our own personal revelation and has explained that receiving personal revelation is especially crucial for those of us living in these, the latter days. He has stated:

Through personal revelation you can receive your own witness that the Book of

Mormon is the word of God, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that this is the 1206 John W. Welch Notes

Lord’s Church. Regardless of what others may say or do, no one can ever take

away a witness borne to your heart and mind about what is true. … In coming

days, it will not be possible to survive spiritually without the guiding, directing,

comforting, and constant influence of the Holy Ghost.

Moroni certainly understood our day and knew what counsel would be most important.

Further Reading

David A. Bednar, “The Spirit of Revelation,” Ensign, May 2011 or online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Russell M. Nelson, “Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives,” Ensign, May 2018 or online at churchofjesuschrist.org

Moroni 10:6–7 — Deny Not the Power of God (Third Exhortation) Moroni preceded his discussion about the gifts of God with an exhortation to “deny not the power of God,” and later explained that when people are unbelieving, “the power and gifts of God shall be done away” (Moroni 10:24). We must have faith in Jesus Christ before God’s power can reveal truth.

Whatever the timing or method of personal revelation, Moroni declared that God only “worketh by power according to the faith of the children of men” (Moroni 10:7). In all cases, it is faith in Jesus Christ that activates the spiritual witness of truth.

Moroni’s Seven “Deny” Statements in Moroni 10

Block Item Scripture Context

Block One

1 10:6 Nothing that is good denieth the Christ

2 10:7 Deny not the power of God

3 10:8 Deny not the gifts of God

Block Two

4 10:32 Deny yourselves of all ungodliness

5 10:32 Deny yourselves of all ungodliness

Moroni 10 1207

6 10:32 If by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise

deny the power of God

7 10:33 If ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his

power, then are ye sanctified in Christ

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does It Really Mean to Be a Good Person? (Moroni 10:6),” KnoWhy 499 (January 24, 2019).

Moroni 10:8–16 — Deny Not the Gifts of God—Block One (Fourth Exhortation) In the context of attesting, testifying, exhorting, and warning in Moroni 10, Moroni uses the word deny exactly seven times.

He first uses the word deny three times in three verses in addressing his future Lamanite readers, and anyone else who might be listening in.

good acknowledgeth that he is (10:6). And then he then exhorts these people:

God unto men, to profit them” (10:8).

First and second, people must not deny Christ or the power of God. Third, people must not deny the panoply of the many gifts of God. It is important to recognize that these gifts are manifested in many ways. God, after all, is a God of fullness and abundance.

There are thus many gifts of the Spirit, some of which Moroni listed in verses 8–17. It is interesting, but not coincidental, that the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants all contain sections explaining gifts of the Spirit. The prophet Moroni, the apostle Paul, and the prophet Joseph Smith list these gifts, respectively, in Moroni 10, 1 Corinthians 12, and DC 46. Obviously, this multiplicity indicates the importance of this topic in order for us to gain and maintain a testimony of Jesus Christ and his gospel. Where else in the world can one go to receive a patriarchal blessing to help recognize and embrace the spiritual blessings God has particularly afforded to us individually?

As readers reach the end of the Book of Mormon, some may have already received a witness of the truthfulness of the record but perhaps may not have recognized it for what it was. Others might be seeking a specific type of spiritual manifestation and yet overlooked how the Spirit works through a number of different manifestations. Those who carefully read 1208 John W. Welch Notes

the context of Moroni’s promise will more fully understand the wide variety of spiritual manifestations that are given for our benefit. The abundance of these gifts helps us to “deny not the power of God” and to “deny not the gifts of God” (Moroni 10:7–8).

It is probable that Moroni’s teaching about spiritual gifts was triggered by what he himself had learned as he worked on the Nephite record. As he abridged the text of the Book of Mormon, Moroni was undoubtedly touched by the many narratives of faithful people who were blessed with and by gifts of the Spirit. For example, he likely recognized that Nephi, the people of Ammon, and many others had the gift of exceeding great faith. He was familiar with narratives of people who “beheld angels and ministering spirits”— including Nephi and his brothers, Alma the Younger and his companions, the people and their children upon Christ’s appearance in Bountiful, and many others. Moroni was intimately familiar with the plates which were full of accounts of people who saw, experienced, and worked “mighty miracles.”

Moroni, himself, was blessed with many gifts of the Spirit throughout his lifetime. These things were part of his personal testimony and experience. The Lord blessed Moroni with the gift of “tongues and interpretation of languages” as he worked on the plates in general. He relied on these gifts as he abridged the Jaredite records. Undoubtedly, Moroni recognized and knew that King Mosiah also had these same gifts.

Spiritual gifts are necessary and present in all dispensations of the gospel. Moroni received personal revelation about the Nephite record coming forth in a future day by the gift and power of God. He understood that special spiritual gifts would be necessary for interpreting and translating the record. In addition, Moroni knew that his work would go to the Lamanites, Gentiles, and Jews—people of many languages. Spiritual gifts are indispensable in providing and increasing faith in Jesus Christ and for communicating the word of the Lord and bringing it into the hearts of people everywhere.

Moroni’s four other uses of “deny” occur near the end of chapter 10, in verses 32 and 33 (see below).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How did the Book of Mormon Help the Early Saints

Understand Spiritual Gifts? (Moroni 10:8),” KnoWhy 299 (April 12, 2017).

Book of Mormon Central, “How Will God Manifest the Truth of the Book of

Mormon? (Moroni 10:4),” KnoWhy 254 (December 16, 2016).
