Moroni 10 1209

Moroni 10:17 — Gifts of the Spirit Come unto Every Man Severally Verse 17 states that “all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally, according as he will.” It is not a gift from God if we somehow create these things by ourselves. It is a spiritual gift when it is given by Christ and by God’s will.

What does the word “severally” mean? The phrase “joint and several liability” is familiar legal terminology. People who are “jointly liable” can be sued as a group and, if any one person in the group is found to be in the wrong, each person would pay an equal amount due the victim or plaintiff. However, if the liability is several, then each one of them can be sued individually without involving the entire group or whole partnership. “Severally” is an old way of saying “individually.” “Collectively” or “individually” means the same as “jointly” or “severally.”

For instance, in the Parable of the Talents, before traveling into a far country, a man called his servants together and gave one of his servants one talent, two to another, and five to another—“to every man according to his several ability” (Matthew 25:15).

Moroni was saying that the spiritual gifts are given severally —individually— because God knows who we are. He knows what we can do, what we should do, and what he would like us to have the opportunity to do. It is useless to envy the gifts of others.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Will God Manifest the Truth of the Book of

Mormon? (Moroni 10:4),”KnoWhy 254 (December 16, 2016).

Moroni 10:18 — Remember That Every Good Gift Cometh from Christ (Fifth Exhortation)

Following Moroni’s list of gifts of the Spirit and his explanation of the origin and nature of gifts, Moroni exhorted the reader to remember that “every good gift cometh from Christ” (verse 18). This statement presumes the existence of bad gifts. Indeed, in verse 30, Moroni reminded his readers to “touch not the evil gift.” These evil gifts come from those who do not have other people’s best interests at heart. Think of the Trojan horse given by the Greeks in the Trojan War. “Evil gifts” may initially look enticing or helpful, but they lead down the wrong path or encourage pride.

The Book of Mormon contains many references to the principle of learning by the Spirit, which is done by relying on gifts of the Spirit and not relying on the philosophies of men. For example, in 2 Nephi 9:28–29 Nephi warned of “the evil one” and of “the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men.” He explained:

1210 John W. Welch Notes

When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the

counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves,

wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall

perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God.

Although Moroni was speaking predominantly to the Lamanites in verse 18, it is a valid warning for everyone today. The Book of Mormon is a blessing and is truly a gift to anyone who receives it, reads it, and then applies Moroni’s promise from Moroni 10:4–5. Receiving and acting upon spiritual gifts may lead to another principle: “by their fruits ye shall know them” (3 Nephi 14:20). By the fruits that are borne of “good gifts,” we can recognize and harvest the benefits or abilities that they generate.

Moroni 10:19 — Remember God Is the Same Yesterday, Today, and Forever (Sixth Exhortation)

Moroni’s sixth exhortation is to remember that God always remains the same, meaning he is constant in keeping his covenants.God’s promises are sure—he will keep his side of the bargain.

Covenants are a very important focus of the Book of Mormon. Covenants are mentioned in the title page of this book of scripture. One of the main reasons the entire record was written was so people will know God’s covenants and will know that God is the same today as he was when he made each covenant. Moroni’s themes fold back on each other.

President Spencer W. Kimball was fond of teaching that the most important word in the dictionary could be “remember.” Kimball believed that “because we have made covenants with God, our greatest need is to ‘remember’ them.”

Further Reading

Evidence Central, “Book of Mormon Evidence: To Remember and to Forget,” September 19, 2020, online at evidencecentral.org.

Henry B. Eyring, “Always Remember Him,” Liahona, February 2018, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Moroni 10:20–23 — Faith, Hope and Charity

Moroni’s writings in these verses contain a sequence that illustrates the rising effect of faith, hope, and charity that leads, in steps, to positive eternal consequences. This upwardly rising list is followed by an equivalent downward spiral that transpires if one does not have faith—a spiral that leads to despair because of iniquity. Moroni does not go into detail as he mentions the necessity of having faith, hope, and charity, probably because he has already included his father’s lengthy discourse on this grand trilogy in Moroni 7.

Moroni 10 1211

But Moroni does add an important summation of the necessary co-existence of these three (in verse 20), and then states (in the opposite order) the necessary requirement of having charity, hope, and faith (verses 21, 22, and 23). He stresses that these three are both necessary and sufficient. One can be “saved in the kingdom of God” if and only if one has all three.

And he also quotes, as his father had done, a saying of Jesus that we don’t otherwise have. Mormon had quoted this saying as follows, “And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me” (Moroni 7:33). Moroni then intensified that saying to read: “And Christ truly said unto our fathers: If ye have faith ye can do all things which are expedient unto me” (10:23).

Moroni 10:24–27 — Remember All These Things (Seventh Exhortation) Initially, Moroni’s message in chapter 10 was directed to the Lamanites (verses 1–23). However, in verse 24, Moroni turned his attention to “all the ends of the earth.” Expounding further on the gifts of God, he warned that if the gifts of God were to be “done away,” it would be because of unbelief, and unrighteousness. This is followed by his seventh exhortation in verse 27. Speaking still to the entire world, he explained why we must remember:

… for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me

at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words

unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea,

even as one speaking out of the dust?

Among his exhortations in chapter 10, Moroni encouraged his readers to “remember” four times. The theme of “remembering” permeates the Book of Mormon. The first three of Moroni’s appeals to remember were directed at the reader to remember a particular good, loving, or divine trait of the Father and Christ—including the advice to remember that they will not change (verses 3, 18, and 19). The fourth was an injunction to remember what Moroni had said—to act, obey, and accept Christ.

Both “remember” and “forget” are words through which one may gainfully study the whole Book of Mormon. These two words are used repeatedly throughout the record. King Benjamin said, “And now, O man, remember, and perish not” (Mosiah 4:30). There is more to remembering than just being able to memorize something, like a multiplication table. “Remembering” in the sense of memorizing something may be helpful with certain points of the gospel, but there is more to remembering than just recalling memorized material. Moroni does not direct us to “memorize” or “recall.” He exhorts us to “remember.” 1212 John W. Welch Notes

The Hebrew word behind “remember” is the word for “obey.” When you really remember something, you obey it. How many mothers have said, “Remember what I said?” Mothers were not asking, “Can you repeat back to me what I said.” They were asking, “Why did you not do it?” The same meaning accompanies the Hebrew understanding of the word “hear.” “Hear, O Israel!” does not just mean to listen and let it go in one ear and out the other. There is an element of obeying when you really “hear” and “remember.”

Sister Julie Beck, who served as Relief Society General President, gave a talk at General Conference that explained the process of “remembering.” The word “member” means “a part of something.” To “re-member” means “to put the parts back together.” A memory of one particular experience with the Spirit may be vague. However, by consciously putting together one memory after another—adding each spiritual experience one piece at a time—you recognize the validity and strength of God’s dealings in your life. This process builds and strengthens testimony. That is remembering in a very active way. This is what Moroni wanted us to do when he exhorted us to remember. He was not asking us to memorize or make a list. He was asking us to recall and then to put back together and feel again what we experienced every time a good gift came to us. He was giving us a recipe for building, strengthening, and maintaining our testimony of Jesus Christ.

Further Reading

Evidence Central, “Book of Mormon Evidence: To Remember and to Forget,” September 19, 2020, online at evidencecentral.org.

Book of Mormon Central, “Why is the Book of Mormon’s Historical Authenticity

So Important? (Moroni 10:27),” KnoWhy 480 (October 30, 2018).

Julie B. Beck, “Remembering, Repenting and Changing,” Ensign, May 2007 or online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Moroni 10:30–31 — Touch Not the Unclean Thing, as Jesus and Isaiah Commanded Moroni was not the first to warn, “touch not the unclean thing.” This was a quotation from Isaiah 52:11 where he stated, “Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.” This phrase was used in Alma 5:57: “Be ye separate, and touch not their unclean things.” Jesus quoted Isaiah almost verbatim at Bountiful in 3 Nephi 20:41. Moroni, then, was not the first to touch on the theme, “do not touch the unclean thing.” There is plenty of material throughout the Book of Mormon for a study of that theme. In his summary, Moroni was teaching principles that had been demonstrated and taught throughout the record.

In verse 31, Moroni followed that quotation by stating, “awake and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem,” quoting from Isaiah 52:1–2. Moroni continued with “and put on thy beautiful

Moroni 10 1213

garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever.” He blended three passages from Isaiah 52 and Isaiah 54, all of which Jesus had quoted in 3 Nephi chapters 20 and 22. Moroni was echoing the words of Jesus as he invited us to come unto Jesus. He was pulling his teachings from the strong themes of the Savior and the earlier prophets.

In addition to incorporating these important concepts in this powerful conclusion in verse 31, Moroni also included phrases from Isaiah and 3 Nephi in the Title Page, which was the last thing written by Moroni. The Title Page is included as the first page in modern versions of the Book of Mormon, even though it was probably the last of Moroni’s writings. It mentions the Lord’s confounding the language of the people of Jared and gives reassurance that the House of Israel “are notcast off forever.” The “covenants of the Lord” are also mentioned on the title page. In Moroni’s summary in verse 31, he reassures the reader that people will “no more be confounded” and that “the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O House of Israel, may be fulfilled.” In other words, the House of Israel will not be cast off forever.

Moroni 10:30–32 — Come unto Christ and Be Perfected by His Grace (Eighth Exhortation)

In these verses, Moroni presents a sequence of steps to attain the goal of coming unto Christ and being perfected in him. This is a checklist for Celestial behavior.

In order to become perfected, Moroni explains that one must deny oneself of all ungodliness, which is a path to not denying the power of God. By doing these things, we will love God with all our might, mind and strength. Jesus identified this as the greatest commandment. “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.” This was part of the Law of Moses delineated in Deuteronomy 6:5 and was reiterated by Jesus to the Pharisee in Matthew 22:37.

By taking these measures, the grace of Christ will be sufficient for perfection or completeness. The Lord’s grace is given unconditionally, but it will only be effective and sufficient after these preliminary steps have been taken. His grace is always there. But Moroni powerfully says in these verses, that unless these outlined steps are taken— denying all ungodliness, recognizing the power of God, and loving God—the grace of Christ will not be sufficient. Members of the Church believe that grace is always there— but, like the light in a room, it does not do us much good as long as our eyes are closed.

What does it mean to be perfected in Christ? The word “perfected” means “finished.”

The word for “perfected” in Hebrew means “to be at peace, finally settled, everything is calm.” The Hebrew greeting, “Shalom,” comes from that same root. In Greek, the words 1214 John W. Welch Notes

“to be perfected” mean “to come across a finish line.” The concept does not mean that everything is over or that a person is totally finished. It means a person has finished a race or finished a course–one has come to an endpoint.

After going through the ordinances of the gospel and following Moroni’s steps, one is perfected in a sense—one is finished, but not yet a perfect being. The course is completed. Paul used this when he said that he had finished the course set before him (2 Timothy 4:7).

Elder Bednar has addressed this matter:

We will not attain a state of perfection in this life but we can and should press

forward with faith in Christ along the straight and narrow path and make steady

progress toward our eternal destiny. The Lord’s pattern for spiritual development

is line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. Small, steady,

incremental, spiritual improvements are the steps the Lord would have us take.

Preparing to walk guiltless before God is one of the primary purposes of mortality

and the pursuit of the lifetime. It does not result from sporadic spurts of intense,

spiritual activity.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does It Mean to Love God with ‘All Thy Mind’? (Moroni 10:32),” KnoWhy 517 (May 23, 2019).

David A. Bednar, “Clean Hands and a Pure Heart” Ensign, November 2007, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Brent J. Schmidt, Relational Grace (Provo, UT: BYU Studies, 2015), 158–160.

Moroni 10:32–33 — Deny Not: Block 2

Four final exhortations to “deny not” are all included in verses 32 and 33. After having expanded his range of audience to include people in “all the ends of the earth” (10:24), Moroni goes on to exhort everyone to “come unto Christ and lay hold upon every good gift.” He then places the next two “denys” at the center of a small inverted parallelism or chiasm in 10:32:

and [2] be perfected in him,

and [3] deny yourselves of all ungodliness;

Moroni 10 1215

ye may [2] be perfect

in [1] Christ.”

And then in 10:32–33, he doubly intensifies his final point, with a direct parallelism:

ye are [5] perfect

in [6] Christ, ye can in nowise

[7] denythe power of God” (10:32).

are [5] perfect

in [6] Christ,

and [7] deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ” (10:33).

Having completed his seven-fold emphasis on the word “deny,” Moroni signals to all readers that everyone should make special efforts to avoid ever wrongly denying the manifestations of God’s spirit unto us.

Obviously, the exhortation to “deny not” occupies a profoundly central place here in Moroni 10, as it has throughout the Book of Mormon. It was a key concern for Mormon as well as for Moroni. The word deny (denied, denieth, or denying) is used 83 times in the Book of Mormon, more than twice as often as it is found in the Bible.

In trying to unpack fully why Moroni chose to end his writings with this particular set of instructions and warnings regarding “denying,” it helps to make use of a full set of analytic tools. For example, here are some reflections in this regard that I find most intriguing and beneficial.

Why Seven Times?

Here is yet another significant set of seven in scripture. This number may convey several meanings. It is an apocalyptic number of completion (7 vials, 7 trumpets, 7 seals, etc.), and thus is appropriate here at the completion of the Book of Mormon. Note also the importance of sealing in Moroni 10:2, so perhaps Moroni intended these 7 words to function in way as his fully authoritative personal seal. Seven was also a number of priestly sanctification, especially with the 7-fold sprinklings of the blood in Leviticus (and note the mention of the blood of Christ in 10:33). It also signified power and victory, as Joshua conquered Jericho marching around the city seven times, blowing trumpets, rams’

1216 John W. Welch Notes

horns. The usage in Moroni 10 seems purposeful, to herald in, as Moroni says, Christ’s coming in triumph through the air to meet us at the judgment bar of God (10:34).

It would also seem purposeful that these negative 7 denies are counterbalanced with precisely fourteen (7 x 2) appearances in Moroni 10 of the most positive word, Christ. In effect, Moroni is saying that the grace of God, perfecting us in Christ, both in heaven and earth, will outdo by double any inclination we might have to deny the power or the gifts or the goodness of God.

Legalistically, How the Idea of “Denial” Accentuates the Legal Nature of Moroni 10 Realizing that the word “deny” is used often in legal contexts, especially in the courtroom challenges or judicial interrogations reported in the cases of Sherem, Korihor, and others in the Book of Mormon, this may also help us notice the full force and effect of the judicial nature of Moroni 10. Here Moroni deals pointedly with God’s justice, with our ultimate courtroom appearance before the judgment bar of God. In Moroni’s exhortations that we “deny not the power” and “deny not the gifts” of God, strong threads of legalisms can also be found. This legal register intensifies the seriousness of denying things that should not be denied, as the following consideration of Moroni 10 through this lens repeatedly shows.

Moroni 10 1217

do all things which are expedient unto me” (10:23), thus concluding his adjuration to the Lamanites.

First, “Wo unto you if the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you because of your unbelief,” but Moroni adds here a saving clause, namely allowing for the condition that even if only one person has spiritual gifts, that’s still good, because it means that faith, hope and charity have not completely passed away (10:24–25).

Second, “Wo unto them who shall do these things away [or in other words, deny the gifts of the Spirit and power of God], and die in their sins.” But again there is a saving proviso, namely that the curse will not have effect if one repents, touches not the evil gift, and comes unto Christ.

Moroni 10 1219

these bring forth their evidences of good, just, and true works. But if people have refused these gifts and instead have defiled themselves with evil or unholy things, those things will surely be evidence testifying against themselves.

Perhaps these many doublets are all here to invoke the unstated but fundamental talonic principle that surely operates in this divine court, namely that if we have denied or refused the Christ and his gifts on earth, he must deny or renounce us before God in heaven.

Linguistically, There Are Many Meanings for the Word “Deny” To succeed, it is most important, as Moroni repeatedly says, for us to “deny not,” in any way, shape or form. Linguistically, it helps to identify all that it might actually mean to “deny” something or someone. The English word “deny” comes from the Latin de-nego, or denare, literally meaning “to not say yes.” The word “deny,” whether in English, or in the Hebrew (which is kay-khash) or the Greek (arneomai) which stand behind the word “deny” in the KJV, has many strong meanings, at least a dozen, all of which can be 1220 John W. Welch Notes

instructive in reading Moroni 10. All of these commonly associated meanings appear to have meant something important to Moroni. Considering them all can help us can grasp all that Moroni is trying to tell us.

Moroni 10 1221

priesthood blessings or for encouraging validation of spiritual experiences and yet by discouraging or holding back the facilitation of the receipt of those gifts by those in need. In this vein, Moroni advises all to be generous and charitable, for “except he have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the kingdom of God” (10:21). This problem becomes even more extreme when one refuses to grant a specific request made by one in need, turning the spiritual beggar away, thus choosing to deny such a request.

been commanded to do, such as to seek the gifts of the spirit or to believe, as that would be to deny the faith.

Judging by his choice of words throughout this chapter, Moroni may well have had all nine of these meanings in mind. They all explain to us ways in which we should assiduously guard against ever denying the gifts or power of God. Just as King Benjamin could not state all the ways in which one can commit sin (Mosiah 4:29), we cannot say all the ways in which we can deny the powers and gifts of God. This topic was obviously of urgent important in Moroni’s mind. We would do well to check ourselves to be sure that we do not deny anything improperly. Otherwise, if we do not watch ourselves, our thoughts, our words, and our deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in faith, even unto the end of our lives, we must perish (see Mosiah 4:30).

Moroni 10:33 — Sanctification Comes through Christ The scriptures teach that no unclean thing may enter into the presence of God, but Moroni commented on an additional benefit of becoming perfected in Christ:

[I]f ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then ye

are sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of

Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that

ye may become holy, without spot.

What an invitation! What a wonderful, enabling instruction on how to receive the grace of Christ—be perfected in him, made holy, and without spot; all of which will qualify us to abide in his holy presence.

One can truly enjoy the spirit of Moroni’s distillation of everything that he was trying to convey. It is inspiring to observe how the principles that we encounter at the end of the Book of Mormon have been taught throughout the record, how the way had been prepared, and how the groundwork had been laid all along so that Moroni could tie it together for a meaningful conclusion. There is hardly a single verse in the whole Book of Mormon that is not somehow directed at channeling the reader to these concluding points. It is a brilliantly superb summation of the entire Book of Mormon and, in and of itself, it is a truly remarkable, communicative conclusion and composition.

Moroni 10:34 — Moroni Finally Invokes the Name Jehovah Moroni’s thoughts completely turned to Jesus Christ and to the Father as he was putting the final stamp of divine imprimatur and validity upon the record.

The name “Jehovah” only appears one time in the whole Book of Mormon, except for places where it is in a quotation from Isaiah or some other ancient prophet. Why is that

Moroni 10 1223

the case? Why would Moroni wait to the very end and say, “Until ... I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead”?

One possibility for using the name “Jehovah” very sparingly is that the name of Jehovah was extremely sacred to the ancient Israelites. In attempts to carefully observe the commandment not to take God’s name in vain, they did not speak openly using the name of God, considering his name to be very sacred. This is one reason why there was confusion among the Jews and others about who Jesus was, who Jehovah was, who Elohim was, and who God the Father was.

Every year, on the Day of Atonement, the High Priest had the name of Jehovah (YHWH - “Yaweh”) written on his forehead. On this day, as the High Priest performed the atoning sacrifices, he was acting in the place of the Savior, who would perform the real eternal atonement. Under the Law of Moses, so sacred was the name “Jehovah,” it could only be pronounced out loud on the Day of Atonement. Otherwise, when the Israelites spoke of Jehovah, they would use a euphemism of some kind in place of using the name “Jehovah”—using the title “Lord,” among others.

In King Benjamin’s Speech, the phrase “Lord God” is mentioned ten times. “Ten” was considered the number of perfection. King Benjamin said the name or title of God a perfect number of times. A High Priest could mention God’s name on the Day of Atonement, but he had to mention it out loud in the prayers a perfect number of times. The name “Jehovah” appears in the Dead Sea Scrolls in a few places. Where the name “Jehovah” does appear, the ancient Hebrew scribes would not spell out the four letters of the name in Hebrew (JHWH). Instead, they put four dots to remind people that they should not say the sacred name out loud.

When Moroni got to the very end of the Nephite record, he put the very sacred name “Jehovah” as the final punctuation mark on his text, sealing it with the name of God. The sacred name written in the Nephite record made the record itself sacred. Moroni felt that he could safely and respectfully write the name of Jehovah because he then buried the record in the ground so no unauthorized person or natural event would damage it. There would be no risk of someone reading the holy name of Jehovah and misusing it until God brought the record forth. This indicated the reverence that Moroni had for Jesus Christ and for his name, Jehovah.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Alma Repeat the Lord’s Name Ten Times

While in Prayer? (Alma 31:26),” KnoWhy 139 (July 8, 2016).

1224 John W. Welch Notes

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does an Angel Reveal the Name of Christ to

Jacob? (2 Nephi 10:3),” KnoWhy 36 (February 18, 2016).

Moroni 10:34 — The Pleasing Bar

Moroni ended his words by bidding farewell until he is “brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead.” There has been discussion about Moroni’s use of the word “pleasing.” How can the judgment bar be pleasing?

For the righteous, accountability and judgment before God is going to be a pleasant experience. The word “pleasing” is very powerful in this context and setting. This same phrase is also found in Jacob’s farewell recorded in Jacob 6:13. Moroni knew the cultural norms for saying goodbye—indeed, Jacob’s and Moroni’s farewells are very similar.

Believing the word “pleading” gives the phrase stronger textural weight, Royal Skousen, in his critical edition, suggests that the phrasing might also possibly read, “pleading bar of Christ.” And indeed, as shown above, in a courtroom setting, people do plead for mercy and for justice.

But since the word “pleasing” is used in both Moroni 10:34 and Jacob 6:13, it is a little hard to imagine the same “hearing error” occurring twice during the translation process between Joseph Smith and his scribe. Thus, the word “pleasing” need not be emended.

Moreover, Jacob used the word “pleasing” six times in his short, sensitive book (see John W. Welch Notes, p. 280), and it appears a total of twelve times in the Book of Mormon. The word “pleading” appears only once in all the Book of Mormon, in a non-judicial setting in Alma 55:23, when captured soldiers are pleading for mercy. So, it is more likely that Moroni was using the fairly widespread word “pleasing” or “pleased,” if not the more particular expression “pleasing bar” used by Jacob. The word “pleasing” was a familiar piece of traditional Nephite language.

It is also important to note that God is going to be both just and merciful, which seeming paradox transcends the powers usually open to judges on earth. That may also have influenced Moroni in calling it the “pleasing bar.” Alma 42 makes it very clear that God is both just and merciful, and that the one cannot exist without the other. Understanding God as a merciful judge provides us with great reassurance.

Moroni’s life was dedicated to bringing all people and all readers of this treasured book of scripture to that threshold—come unto Christ, remember, ask, believe, and come unto the Savior to receive all promised blessings. What a wonderful privilege it is to be able to talk about this beautiful text. The Holy Ghost bears witness that this book is true.

Moroni 10 1225

Further Reading

John S. Welch, “Keep the Old Wine in Old Wineskins: The Pleasing (Not Pleading)

Bar of God,” FARMS Review 18 no. 1 (2006): 139–147. It is true that one finds “a variety of examples of ‘pleading bar’ on the internet, all dating back to the 1600s,” referring to a cage or limited area in English courtrooms where accused criminals were barricaded (hence the English word “bar” or “barrier”), where they were allowed to state in court their

“plea” of guilty or innocent. See Royal Skousen, “The Language of the Original Text of

the Book of Mormon,” BYU Studies Quarterly 57, no. 3 (2018), 87–88. But, as I would add in friendly reply, that British and American colonial courtroom feature was not a part of any Nephite or Hebraic places of criminal judgment known to Moroni, and much less, one would think, a feature in God’s heavenly place of our final judgment.

In the End, Seeing Moroni 10 as a Summation of Moroni’s Book of Moroni To understand why Moroni structured his final comments the way he did, it helps to look back, one final time, at the overall composition of the book of Moroni as a whole. Seeing what he has included in chapters 1 to 9, emphatically punctuates his parting words in chapter 10.

For at least 36 years Moroni had lived in excruciating terror, not only of loneliness but also of fear of being put to death for refusing to deny Christ. He opens his final book by emphasizing that he has not made himself known to the Lamanites, “lest they should destroy me.” Because of their enmity “they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ” (Moroni 1:1–2). And despite all that he must go through as a consequence and everything else he might gain by doing so, Moroni absolutely attests, “and I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ” (1:3). This being his constant driving force, he makes this ground of his very being the dominant Leitmotif of his concluding book.

Knowing and planning that his final statement would culminate in his exhortations about how people might know things through the power of the Holy Ghost, so that they would know that which is good and does not deny the Christ (10:6), and desiring to warn people not to deny the gifts administered by the Spirit of God so that they could become perfected, finished and completed themselves and “in nowise deny the power of God” (10:32), Moroni began his book purposefully in a very deliberate way. In chapter 2, he lays the foundation for Moroni 10:4 by disclosing the words of Christ, which were spoken in 3 Nephi 18 as he gave them the power to give the Holy Ghost.

Then, in chapter 3, he told the manner in which elders were ordained “to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faithon his name to the end” (3:3), and he made a point of emphasizing the fact that they were called and ordained “according to the gifts and callings of God unto men” and that they were ordained “by the 1226 John W. Welch Notes

power of the Holy Ghost which was in them” (3:4). Then, in order that all members of the church might “always have [Christ’s] Spirit to be with them,” which are the words with which both of the sacrament prayers end (4:3; 5:2), Moroni set forth the priesthood directions for the administration of the bread of the wine, in remembrance of the body which he had shown them and of the blood which was shed for them (see 10:33).

Then, after explaining the requirements for baptism, Moroni explained how the church follow the directives of Christ at the end of 3 Nephi 18, by which the church maintained a faithful membership, which required three witnesses (Moroni 6:7), in order to call a person to repentance, so that their meetings could then proceed “after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost,” which led them either to preach or exhort, or to pray or to supplicate, or to sing in joy and praise of God (6:9).

Readers may wonder why Moroni has placed these treasured ecclesiastical and liturgical instructions at the beginning of his final farewell. But their emphasis on facilitating and protecting the gifts of the Holy Ghost clearly seem purposefully aimed at laying the groundwork for Moroni’s final exhortations about asking for and experiencing the gift of the Holy Ghost, perfection in Christ, and the fulfillments of the covenants of God, the Eternal Father (10:31, 33).

And then one may also wonder why Moroni then pulls out of his satchel three letters that he has treasured all these years, that were written to him by his father about 70, 60, and 40 years earlier. In the first letter, Moroni 7:17, Mormon speaks of how “the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; … for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge that it is of God. But whatsoever thing persuaded men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil” (7:16–17). The obvious relationships between these words and Moroni’s statements in chapter 10 about knowing the truth of all things by the power of the Holy Ghost and denying not the power and gifts of God, as well as his restatement of the triad of faith, hope, and charity, prepare the reader to connect these precedents and to recognize and embrace Moroni’s powerful exhortations and concluding invitations.

And likewise, Moroni chapter 8, about the lamentable rise of the practice of infant baptism, also includes a four-fold warning regarding this practice as a denial of the gift and power of the atonement of Christ. Mormon’s words here find several echoes in Moroni 10: “God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity. Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them; … But it is mockery before God,

Moroni 10 1227

denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit, … and they are denying the Holy Ghost” (8:18–19, 23, 28). Moroni carries this torch forward, stringently warning people to “deny not.”

One may also wonder why Moroni included the gruesome chapter 9, about the total depravity of both Nephites and Lamanites obsessed in the convulsions of terminal warfare. Perhaps he did this for two reasons: first, simply to help us understand the reality of the fears that he had lived with for 36 years, all because he would not deny Christ; and second because, in spite of all those ugly atrocities, Moroni had clung to his father’s final blessing to him, that “May Christ lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind for ever. And may the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who sit on the right hand of his power, until all things shall become subject under him, be, and abide with you forever. Amen” (9:25–26). Moroni’s final blessing in Moroni 10:30–34 extends unto all the ends of the earth the gist of these very personal words of comfort and encouragement that he had received from his own father.

Of Endings and Beginnings: Where to Start?

Steve Walker has said it well: “I find the final section of the Book of Mormon to be particularly engaging. Like any good climax, it tends to be the most intense part of the book. It is arguably the most significant section. This culmination of a thousand-year chronicle puts the whole volume into overview mode—the summary at the end of the book that encapsulates what has mattered most. T. S. Eliot observed that ‘what we call the beginning is often the end / and to make an end is to make a beginning. / The end is where

we start from.’ Endings reorient us.” (Steven C. Walker, “Last Words,” inThe Reader’s Book of Mormon, ed. Robert Reese and Eugene England, 7 [Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 2008], pp. x-xi, quoting “Little Gidding,” in Four Quartets [London: Faber and Faber, 1942). And so it is with Moroni 10. It reorients us. The end is where we really start.

And indeed, as we learn where the Book of Mormon was bound and determined, from the beginning, to end, we can now look backward to see how Mormon and Moroni have carefully brought us to this all-important conclusion. More than summarizing all that has been said before, these endings tell us Mormon’s and Moroni’s concerns that shaped their book. Those concerns of the Lord, made plain in Moroni’s masterful final ending, indeed have masterminded the entire Book of Mormon project from its outset.
