2 Nephi 1–5 141

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Who Are the Witnesses of Christ in 2 Nephi? (2 Nephi 11:2–3),” KnoWhy 37 (February 19, 2016).

2 Nephi 2:4 — God Is the Same Yesterday, Today, and Forever Continuing verse 4, “Wherefore thou art blessed even as they unto whom he shall minister in the flesh. For the spirit is the same yesterday, today and forever.” The Holy of Holies in the ancient Jerusalem temple was a cube, 10 cubits by 10 cubits by 10 cubits—a perfect cube. It represented the perfect creation and the holy unity of God who is constantly always good in every way imaginable.

2 Nephi 2:4–5 — The Way Is Prepared and Salvation Is Free “And the way is prepared from the fall of man and salvation is free.” There was a way that led to the Tree of Life, and that path had to be protected by flaming swords so that the people wouldn’t partake of the fruit early and live forever in an impure state. Lehi knew that, from the moment that Adam and Eve were discovered in a fallen state after their transgression, a way was provided and a Savior was promised so that they would not perish.

In the flesh, Jesus Christ will say, “I am the truth and the way and the life.” And the word that he uses there for way is this word that is also in Genesis 3. It is in Lehi’s vision as well, with the iron rod that guides you on the way. Walking in the way is one of the main themes of Psalm 1, which is the introduction of the path that leads back to God. We need a Redeemer, someone who will offer us the gift of salvation.

All people will be resurrected with a gift that is definitely free. Gerald Lund has argued very cogently, that our is resurrection free because all people must stand physically in His presence. But if the grace of Christ did not also create the way in which we could move up that path toward exaltation, all would be in vain. So, not only is our resurrection free and given to all people, but the creation of the path and the way in which we can become exalted is also free and open to all people. Furthermore, moving along that path is also possible for all people, because everyone has been “instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil” (2:5).

2 Nephi 2:6–10 — The Holy One of Israel Will Make an Atonement for Mankind

Lehi teaches his son Jacob about Jesus Christ in the next few verses. In verse 7, He will offer himself as a sacrifice for sin. In verse 8, no flesh can dwell in the presence of God, that’s the Holy of Holies. In verse 9, He is the first fruits which belonged to God and had to be brought to the temple under the Law of Moses. Through the sacrifice of the first 142 John W. Welch Notes

fruits one could be reconciled with God. Lehi would have known that from his own revelations and also from Isaiah Chapter 53.

“He offers himself to answer the ends of the law unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit.” Those last words are found in the Psalms, and they will also be spoken by Jesus from the darkness of the cloud in 3 Nephi, and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered. “Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God save it be through the merits and mercy and grace of the Holy Messiah.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How is the Day of Atonement Understood in the Book

of Mormon? (2 Nephi 2:10),” KnoWhy 479 (October 25, 2018).

Book of Mormon Central, “Was the Requirement of a ‘Broken Heart’ Known

Before the Time of Christ? (2 Nephi 2:7),” KnoWhy (February 5, 2016).

2 Nephi 2:8 — The Merits, Mercy, and Grace of the Savior We might ponder what those three words mean. Right in the next phrase, Lehi says that the Savior will lay down his life according to the flesh. Those are his merits, and he taketh it up again by the power of the spirit that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead being the first that should rise. That’s certainly his suffering, his overcoming of death which gives him the power, gives him the merits, the strength, the worthiness, to be able to then become the first-fruits unto God inasmuch as he shall make intercession for all the children of men and there I see the mercy, the intercession which allows for further time for repentance to take place, that they that believe in him shall be saved. And that’s the grace that operates to allow us to be saved. And then, because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God and must stand in the presence him to be judged according to the truth and holiness which is in him. We will not only be judged according to our works, but we will be judged in accordance with the mercy, truth, and holiness of God as well.

Intercession is a word relating to how the priests, particularly the high priest in the temple of Israel, would make an offering, an atoning sacrifice which would act as an intercessory sacrifice—one person doing it for the benefit of the whole nation—and this what Lehi is referencing. Christ will make himself an intercessor, offering himself as a sacrifice for all the children of men. That is classic temple imagery.
