2NEPHI 6–10

John W. Welch Notes



2 Nephi 6

2 Nephi 6:1–10 — Why Is Jacob’s Sermon in Nephi’s Record? Many of the themes that show up in 2 Nephi 6–10 have been identified as typical of the New Year and the Feast of Tabernacles on the regular Jewish calendar. At that time, ancient Israelites also typically held coronations and the renewal or re-enthronement of the king. Every year there was a renewal of the people’s loyalty to obey the king of Israel. So, what we have here in Jacob’s speech is likely a covenant renewal speech. We know that this is dealing with covenant because 2 Nephi 9:1 states Jacob’s purpose as follows: “Behold, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye may know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the House of Israel.” Several parts of Jacob’s speech follow old traditions that the Nephites carried on.

For example, several scholars, both those who are and are not Latter-day Saints, have identified in the Old Testament a covenant treaty pattern. This pattern was not just limited to the Hebrews. Such “treaty-covenants” had (1) a preamble, (2) gave a historical overview, (3) stated stipulations of the covenant, (4) extended blessings and curses structured as “if you do this, this will happen; if you do not do it, such and such will happen.” Then there was (5) a witness formula, and (6) a recording of the covenant.

Joshua 24 offers an example of an ancient covenant renewal: “Choose ye this day whom ye will serve; whether the Gods which our fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell, but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.” Jacob’s words in 2 Nephi 6–10 can be read well in the 166 John W. Welch Notes

context of that treaty-covenant pattern, as covenants were renewed on several different occasions, including coronations and covenant-renewal festivals. Such is quite prominently the case at the coronation of Mosiah by his father Benjamin.

One might get the impression that this was Nephi’s inauguration or coronation as king. However, 2 Nephi 5:28 tells how the Nephites built a temple, and thirty years passed away, and then Nephi made the record, and then another ten years had passed away (5:34). So, Jacob’s speech appears to have been given at least ten years after Nephi’s coronation. It may have been a ten-year anniversary celebration.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Did Jacob Refer to Ancient Israelite Autumn

Festivals? (2 Nephi 6:4),” KnoWhy 32 (February 12, 2016).

2 Nephi 6:17–18 — What Drew Jacob to These Words of Isaiah? From 2 Nephi 6:6–7 and 6:16 to 2 Nephi 9:2, Jacob quoted Isaiah 49:22 to Isaiah 52:2. What was it that had drawn Jacob to these particular words of Isaiah?

First, Jacob was told by Nephi to read these selected words to the assembled people of Nephi (6:4). As prophet and king, Nephi surely wanted to reassure his people that God would protect his people: “the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people” (6:17; Isaiah 49:25). This fledgling community must have worried and needed this reassurance. And thus, Nephi and Jacob wanted their people especially to be a faithful “covenant people.” For that precise reason Jacob spoke to them so they might “know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel” (9:1).

Second, all the people were to know that “all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob” (6:18; cf. Isaiah 49:26). Jacob, the priest of the temple in the city of Nephi, would have been especially desirous that his people would find redemption and deliverance through Jehovah, their Redeemer. In their isolated state, it was pertinent for them to know of their “deliverance” (Jacob used the word “deliver” or “deliverance” 12 times in 2 Nephi 9) by the Mighty God (Jacob calls Him the Lord God “Almighty” in 9:46). Despite their being more alone than ever before, the Lord had not abandoned them out in the wilderness. Thus, this block of text suited their needs perfectly.

Third, from these words, Jacob hoped that the people were to “learn and glorify the name of your God” (6:4). Previously, Jesus Christ had been called several names, such as “messiah,” “the Lamb of God,” “the Lord [Jehovah],” and others. Now, in order that they might “learn . . . the name” of their God, to be used in glorifying Him, Jacob will

2 Nephi 7 167

disclose to his people that his holy name, when he would come among the Jews in the flesh, would be “Christ.” That name had been spoken to Jacob by the angel of the Lord during the night (10:3) in the interval between the two days of this coronation and covenant renewal celebration. Because the word “Christ” literally means “anointed,” raising that name on the occasion of renewing the people’s covenant to God and loyalty to His anointed king (as kings in Israel were called, Psalm 2:2) would have been especially appropriate.

Finally, Jacob would have been especially pleased at the opportunity to draw his people’s attention to the name for the Lord that was used by Isaiah, “the Mighty One of Jacob” (6:18; Isaiah 49:26).

Further Reading

John S. Thompson, “Isaiah 50–51, the Israelite Autumn Festivals, and the

Covenant Speech of Jacob in 2 Nephi 6–10,” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 123–150.

2 NEPHI 7

2 Nephi 7:1–10 — The Lord Has Not Put Away His people The first verse in this chapter uses poetic language to describe the love of the Savior as being mother-like—unbreakable. The phrase “thus saith the Lord” had been used twice in 6:17 and it is used twice again in 7:1. We know to pay close attention when the prophet says, “thus saith the Lord.” Here it emphasizes that, like a mother, Jesus Christ will not cast off His covenant children. As the poetic emphasis grows, so too does the promissory certitude that he will stand immoveable, to a greater degree than even a mortal mother is capable. If there is separation, it will be due to the choice of man, and not to God’s withdrawal.

Isaiah likens our covenant with God to a marriage covenant. Under the Law of Moses, a man could find some offense in his wife and say, “I divorce thee” and give her a paper of divorcement, which would end the marriage. But the Lord has not done that. If a person had huge debts, they would sometimes sell their children into slavery to the creditors. But the Lord has not done that, and He will not do that.

Look at verse 2. There it says, “O house of Israel is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem or I have no power to deliver?” Is the Lord’s hand shortened? If you look back at 2 Nephi 6:6, the Lord says “I will lift up my hand to the gentiles.” What does it mean to “lift up the hand?” When the Israelites were wandering through the wilderness, they had several conflicts with other groups. On one occasion Moses had to literally hold 168 John W. Welch Notes

his hands up in order for his people to win a battle. For this reason, he had to have two counselors of sorts, one on each side of him to hold up an arm. Christ is going to hold up his hand to the gentiles—he is going to extend to them his protective authority as long as possible.

Indeed, the Lord will send his Servant who has been given knowledge (7:5). The Servant was not rebellious, but instead would give his back to the smiter, the plucker, the shamer, and the spitter (7:6). He would set his face like flint, and would not be ashamed (7:7). And thus the Servant will be justified in the face of his accuser. They will stand together to be judged, and those who condemn him will wax old as a garment, and a moth shall eat them (7:9). These words of Isaiah, quoted by Jacob in the city of Nephi, will reverberate four hundred years later, also in the city of Nephi, when Abinadi will warn king Noah that his life will be valued as a garment in a furnace because of his wicked ways.

Further Reading

Leland Gentry, “God Will Fulfill His Covenants with the House of Israel,” in Second Nephi: The Doctrinal Structure, The Book of Mormon Symposium Series, Volume 3, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1989), 167–172.

2 Nephi 7:11 — What Does It Mean to “Walk in the Light of Your Own Fire?” Joseph F. Smith warned against those who falsely teach, using their own light, preaching false doctrines disguised as Gospel truths. He said they are “proud and self-vaunting ones, who read by the lamps of their own conceit; who interpret by rules of their own contriving; who have become a law unto themselves, and so pose as the sole judges of their own doings” (Gospel Doctrine, 381).

2 NEPHI 8

2 Nephi 8:1 — The Rock from Whence Ye Are Hewn Isaiah’s words continue by telling people to “Look unto the rock from whence ye are hewn.” This is how the victory of the Lord will be won. First, his people must look. But what rock are we hewn from to which we must look? Consider the eternal bond of Abraham and Sarah (the promise), the priesthood that Peter would be entrusted with when he was called the Rock (the power), the eternal nature of the covenants made in the temple also called the dome of the rock (the place); in other words, the rock of our Redeemer.

2 Nephi 8 169

As Jacob continues to read, his people heard a number of words and phrases that would have helped them remain firmly founded on the rock of the Lord. They were assured that the Lord will comfort them in all their “waste places” (8:3). His law, judgment, righteousness, and salvation shall extend to judge the people. Those on “the isles of the sea shall wait upon” the Lord (8:5), if the law of God is written in their heart (8:7).

Three times, the Lord calls for his people to “Awake, Awake” (8:9, 17, 24), as the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and the Lord will plead the cause of his people, as the Lord will take the cup of trembling out of the hands of His people (8:22). The scene of God’s judgment will reappear in Jacob’s text in chapter 9, where the word judgment appears seven times.

In one other way, the words of Isaiah pave the way for Jacob’s main words to his people. Seven times Isaiah used the emphatic opening expression, “O . . .” in Isaiah 51 (2 Nephi 8): O my nation, O arm of the Lord, O Jerusalem, O Zion, O Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, O captive. Jacob will continue this pattern, beginning fourteen of his powerful exclamations this same way: O the wisdom, O how great the goodness, O how great the plan, O the greatness and justice, O the greatness of the mercy, O how great the holiness, O that cunning plan, O the vainness, O my beloved brethren (five times), and O Lord God Almighty. Not just stylistically, but thematically, Jacob’s words elaborate and personalize many of the main themes found in the words of Isaiah that Nephi assigned Jacob to read and teach.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Helaman Compare Christ to a Rock? (Helaman 5:12),” KnoWhy 176 (August 30, 2016).

2 Nephi 8:24 — Modern-day Revelation Clarifies

In D&C 113:7, a very thoughtful man named Elias Higbee asked, “What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion— and what people had Isaiah reference to?” (Of course, Isaiah 52 and 2 Nephi 8 are the same.) Joseph Smith explained,

[Isaiah] had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who

should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of

Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood,

which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she

had lost. (D&C 113:8)

And then Higbee asked about the meaning of the “bands around the neck,” and Joseph Smith said,

170 John W. Welch Notes

We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the

Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is

that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. … The bands of her neck are

the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition

among the Gentiles. (D&C 113:10)

2 Nephi 9

2 Nephi 9:1–7 — Jacob on the Atonement

Jacob’s marvelous chapter 9 is unsurpassed in the Book of Mormon or elsewhere. The Atonement is the first theme of redemption that he addresses (expressly in 9:7, 25, 26). What are some of the powers of the Atonement that Jacob mentioned here? There are several: the power of resurrection, the power to bring one back into the presence of God, and the power to make what was corrupted incorrupt. That is one of the main powers of at-one-ment, bringing and holding things together.

Although ancient people did not use the term entropy, the basic principle of this law of physics was understood by Jacob. Everything in nature disintegrates. As you look around, you will see decay everywhere. But the power of the Atonement arrests that entropy and reverses it, restoring each corrupted thing to its most perfect state— physically and spiritually. Beyond restoration, Christ will permanently stop the process of entropy and corruption. “If it were not so, this flesh must be laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth and rise no more” (9:7).

We can think of Christ as the Great High Priest, especially in regard to duties the High Priest would have performed when he officiated in the temple. The High Priest is the one who made the atoning sacrifice, and accordingly Lehi had said to Jacob: “Wherefore redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah for he is full of grace and truth. Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin to answer the ends of the law unto those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit” (2 Nephi 2:6). The picture here is of the Great High Priest who not only performs the offering, but he is the offering. What more could you ask for than that?

Elder Jeffery R. Holland wrote,

Jacob’s testimony was that “the Mighty God” will always deliver “his covenant

people” and that the Mighty God is, by his own divine declaration, the Lord God

Jesus Christ, the “Savior . . . and Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”

2 Nephi 8 171

Jacob reflected on such teachings—especially those contained in the writing of

Isaiah—so that his current audience and future readers “might know concerning

the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the House of Israel,”

giving the parents of every generation cause to “rejoice” and to” lift up [their]

heads forever, because of the blessings which the Lord God shall bestow upon

[their children].

And then Elder Holland adds something that is key to chapter 9: “At the heart of the covenant and the reason for such rejoicing is the atoning sacrifice of that ‘Mighty God’ who is the Savior and Redeemer of the world.” (Christ and the New Covenant [1997], 66–67).

2 Nephi 9:14 — A Perfect Knowledge of Our Mistakes For Jacob, it is important that we recognize our sins. “Wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt, and our uncleanness, and our nakedness,” but through the Atonement of Jesus Christ those made righteous shall equally “have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe of righteousness” (9:14). President Gordon B. Hinckley often taught that a daily recommitting to accepting the Atonement of Christ and an honest willingness to change is daily repentance. It is not the Lord’s intent that we read these things and say, “O how wretched am I?” and cry all night. True repentance comes from a bright recollection and a genuine confidence that the Lord has provided everything essential for us, pending our acceptance.

Confidence also requires understanding. That is to say, we do need to understand the commitments we make when we enter into covenants. We cannot be saved in ignorance. We must consider that we have a responsibility and act accordingly. Every time we make a covenant, we invoke either blessings or curses upon ourselves dependent on if we keep or break those covenants. We must make an honest accounting of our actions. We must see if we have called woe upon ourselves. If so, we must do what is necessary to repent; this is what Jacob means when he wants us to have a perfect knowledge of our mistakes.

Jacob’s words don’t seem to be an ordinary call to repentance. Jacob certainly pronounces woes upon the wicked, but his words are more of an encouraging priesthood blessing. His focus is more on the promises that are extended to the righteous, so, it seems, at this point he is not worried too much about the wickedness of the people. Nephi and his group had separated from Laman and Lemuel only about twelve years before. They have worked hard together, and they have dedicated themselves to building the temple. But when things are going well, that is the best time to give a warning, while hearts are still soft, and ears are still open.

172 John W. Welch Notes

At the same time, Nephi’s people were secluded and probably insecure. They didn’t have a large network of connections to potentially keep them safe. If you look back in 2 Nephi 6:2, they were worried about security, protection, and safety. They were looking to Nephi as the king and protector and were depending upon him for safety. They were not starting the fights, but they may have been watching at night. They may have had guards posted, but they were really counting on the Lord to deliver them. In that frame of mind, they were open to Jacob’s powerful speech, one of the most inspiring texts in all the scriptures.

2 Nephi 9:27–38 — Jacob’s Ten Woes

After assuring his people that the Atonement will satisfy the demands of God’s justice “upon all those who have not the law given to them” (9:26), people who know better will be held accountable. As a warning, Jacob then pronounces a set of ten woes upon those (1) who set aside the counsel of God, (2) who despise the poor, (3) who will not hear and obey, (4) who will not see, (5) whose hearts are impure or uncircumcised, (6) who tell lies, (7) who deliberately kill, (8) who commit whoredoms, (9) who worship idols, and (10) all who die in their sins (27–38). In a covenant setting, this list of Woes functions similar to the list of twelve curses found near the end of the book of Deuteronomy (27:15–26).

Several of Jacob’s woes are consequential warnings related to several of the Ten Commandments, which served as the basis of the Lord’s covenant with the children of Israel at Mount Sinai. Covenants come with commitments, and failing to keep one’s righteous commitments leads to unhappiness. Such ten-fold structures signal to listeners the completeness or perfection of the Lord’s covenant teachings and promises (See Figure 1).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does Jacob Declare so Many ‘Woes’? (2 Nephi 9:27),” KnoWhy 35 (February 17, 2016).

2 Nephi 8 173

Figure 1 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. Jacob’s Ten Woes and Ten Commandments. Provo, UT: Foundation for

Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999.

174 John W. Welch Notes

2 Nephi 9:41 — Christ Keeps Watch Over the Gate to Salvation As the High Priest, Jacob would have stood guard over the gates and the holiness of the House of the Lord. Entering the temple can cast our minds forward to the time when we will come to the gate that is kept by the Holy One. Meeting Christ on that occasion is what we each have to look forward to, knowing that He will be there, that he is a person who knows exactly how you feel. He is the gatekeeper. He doesn’t employ any servant there. He is the one who stands in wait of you. We have “gates” of the temple that in many ways are like that gate. As we enter, we can be looking forward to the time we will enter completely into his presence and joy. What role then do the covenants made in the temple play in our passage through that eternal portal? And what does it mean to you that Christ keeps watch over that gate Himself? Jacob would like us to think about that more often.

2 Nephi 9:44–45 — Jacob Shakes His Garments

Visualize Jacob as he took off his high priestly robes and shook them saying, “I shake them before you” (9:44). Why would he do that? He wants his people to be responsible. He is telling them that he has shaken their iniquities from his soul as if saying, “I’m not bearing your iniquities any longer.” Jacob couldn’t have that impurity on him as the high priest, otherwise that would compromise his ability to be a pure officiator in the temple.

This scene must have been very dramatic. Imagine if President Nelson during General Conference took off his coat and stood there and shook it in front of everybody and said, “I have given you all that I can. Now I shake off any responsibility for you and your sins.” How would you feel? Wouldn’t that leave an impression? That is how ancient prophets often got their points across. In this case, Jacob wanted to absolutely impress upon his people the importance of holiness. God wants his people to be holy. Several key words are used by Jacob in this chapter, including “judgment” (7 times), “remember” (8 times), and “deliver” (12 times). But the dominant key word in this temple-covenant speech is “holy.” It appears 23 times, and “holiness” two times more. The dominant name used by Jacob here for the Lord is “the Holy One of Israel,” which appears thirteen times. One may well conclude that the main theme of Jacob’s temple speech here is holiness, Holiness to the Lord.

Further Reading

Parry, Donald W., “Symbolic Action as Prophecy in the Old Testament” in Sperry Symposium Classics: The Old Testament, ed. Paul Y. Hoskisson (Provo and Salt Lake City, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University and Deseret Book 2005), 337–355.
