2 Nephi 11–25 183

Studying 2 Nephi 12–24 this way, see how many more words of Isaiah you can relate to Nephi’s four main prophetic stages. This approach offers power in not only interpreting the words of Isaiah, but also analyzing the prophetic outlook of all writers in the Book of Mormon who follow in Nephi’s tradition. The writings of Isaiah are puzzling for all modern readers, but the fact that Isaiah’s complicated overall scheme goes hand in hand with Nephi’s world-view adds additional credence to Nephi’s testimony that he and Isaiah were talking about the same things. In 2 Nephi 25–30, Nephi’s use of Isaiah in light of his prophetic overview will make coherent sense of these impossibly difficult passages. That is no small feat. See if using this interpretive tool doesn’t make your reading of these Isaiah chapters your best time through them ever.

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Getting through Isaiah with the Help of the Nephite Prophetic

View,” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 19–45.

Book of Mormon Central, “What Vision Guides Nephi’s Choice of Isaiah

Chapters? (2 Nephi 11:2),” KnoWhy 38 (February 22, 2016).

Book of Mormon Central, “Who Are the Witnesses of Christ in 2 Nephi? (2 Nephi 11:2–3),” KnoWhy 37 (February 19, 2016).

2 Nephi 11:2–8 — Isaiah’s Influence on Nephi’s World Isaiah was active as a prophet of Judah living in Jerusalem from 740–701 BC. Lehi and Nephi left Jerusalem approximately 100 years after Isaiah’s death. This may sound like a long time later, but if you consider it in the context of generations, it is only two to three generations later. When Lehi was a young boy, there may have been people alive who remembered the Prophet Isaiah, just as there were still people alive in late pioneer Utah, in the early 1900s, who could tell children what it was like to listen to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Nephi likely thought of Isaiah as The Prophet, much as we think of Joseph Smith as The Prophet. Isaiah was that important.

Further Reading

David Rolph Seely, “Nephi's Use of Isaiah 2–14 in 2 Nephi 12–30” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 151.

2 Nephi 11:2 — Nephi’s Love of Isaiah

When Nephi wrote these passages, he was without his father. Nephi would have rejoiced in knowing that there is a plan, that the covenant of the Lord was still firm, that his arm was outstretched, that his people were not going to be forgotten, and that even the isles of 184 John W. Welch Notes

the sea would not be ignored. Think about being desperately in need of that kind of comfort. We can see why these texts of Isaiah would have meant the world to Nephi.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why is the Lord’s Hand ‘Stretched Out Still’? (2 Nephi 19:12),” KnoWhy 49 (March 8, 2016).

2 Nephi 11:2 — How Much Did Isaiah Know about Christ and His Suffering? When approaching the question of how much the prophets of the Old Testament knew of the Savior’s life, consider Psalm 22. This Psalm was used in the temple (and remember, Isaiah was a temple priest and would have received his call to be a prophet in the temple). Psalm 22 begins, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” You will recognize these as words that Jesus spoke from the cross. Usually, when we read these words in the accounts of Christ’s crucifixion in the Gospels, we think that it is the end of the story—that Jesus feels as though He has been completely abandoned and left alone.

However, for the ancient Israelites, the opening lines of many of the Psalms were a lot like the opening lines of our hymns. If someone were to hang on a cross and say, “Come, come ye saints,” we would know that “no toil nor labor fear” was next. Even if there was toil and labor that the person was called to endure, there would be a positive feeling because we would know that the next line was, “with the saints we shall dwell.” We must consider the totality of the hymn in order to understand what was encompassed by and symbolized by that one, opening line. Christ knew this Psalm and knew how it symbolized Him. Likely, all the prophets knew much of what the Savior would have to endure from this hymn alone.

Further Reading

Terry B. Ball, “Isaiah’s ‘Other’ Servant Songs,” in The Gospel of Jesus Christ in the Old Testament, The 38th Annual BYU Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 2009), 207–218.

Book of Mormon Central, “Can Textual Studies Help Readers Understand the

Isaiah Chapters in 2 Nephi? (2 Nephi 11:8),” KnoWhy 39 (February 23, 2016).

2 Nephi 13

2 Nephi 13:16 — The Daughters of Zion Are Lifted Up in Pride The daughters of Zion can symbolize members of the church who are in the covenant with God, regardless of gender. David Seeley wrote an article in the book entitled, Isaiah

2 Nephi 11–25 185

in the Book of Mormon, explaining that the main lesson we learn from the Isaiah chapters in the Book of Mormon is to avoid haughtiness and pride manifested in every imaginable way. Isaiah was warning the people of his day. You would think we would get the message—it is still pertinent.

Further Reading

David Rolph Seely, “Nephi’s Use of Isaiah 2–14 in 2 Nephi 12–30” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 156–164, esp. 164: “Isaiah looks into the future and sees the destruction of a series of nations and peoples, and in each case he cites pride as the cause of their rejection of the Lord and of their eventual scattering and destruction. In his own prophecy about the history of the Jews, Lehites, and gentiles, Nephi also identifies, often in the language of Isaiah, the main challenge that each of these groups faces as pride.”

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does Nephi Use Isaiah to Teach Us to Avoid

Pride? (2 Nephi 15:21),” KnoWhy 48 (March 7, 2016).

2 Nephi 15

2 Nephi 15:1–7 — Isaiah Saw the Great Apostasy

Isaiah saw there would be a falling away after the Lord established his church. Does that mean that the Lord did not do a good enough job? No. We see in Isaiah’s allegory, recorded in 2 Nephi 15, that the Lord did all he could to save the choice vine.

The vineyard represented the world. A choice vine was planted in the vineyard, representing the House of Israel. The Lord did all he possibly could. He built a wall to protect the vineyard, and he built a tower in the vineyard, perhaps symbolic of the temple. He hoped that the plant would bring forth good grapes, but it brought forth wild ones—even though he had already built a wine press. There may be an allusion to the Garden of Gethsemane and the press of the atonement in this allegory. No stone was left unturned by the Lord. Literally, he took all of the stones out of the vineyard. He made it as productive as he could. He gave it every possible chance, but it still produced wild fruit.

The Lord’s covenant people would not become domesticated. Maybe they were too interested in the ways of the world. They (and we) are influenced too much by the culture of the world. This account is one of many references to the way in which the Lord does everything he possibly can for his vineyard. We will see more of this theme again, when we get to Zenos’ parable in Jacob 5.

186 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What are the Roots of Zenos’s Allegory in the Ancient

World? (Jacob 5:3),” KnoWhy 70 (April 4, 2016).

2 Nephi 15:26 — The Lord Will Call His People Back The Lord will remember the covenants he has made with his people. Verse 26 says that he will lift up an ensign. He will hiss or whistle to them to call them back. The Lord is not angrily hissing—he is reaching out in love to his children and fulfilling his promises. The ensign will be erected; it will be a gathering point and a rallying post that will bring people back together so that, in the end, the Lord will be victorious.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do Early Nephite Prophets Speak about the

Scattering of the Jews? (2 Nephi 15:13),” KnoWhy 42 (February 26, 2016).

2 Nephi 16

2 Nephi 16:1 — Isaiah Receives His Prophetic Call Isaiah recorded his experience in receiving his prophetic call: “In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.” Can you envision that? Does it remind you of Lehi’s vision in 1 Nephi 1:8, where he saw “God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels [the train that filled the temple] in the attitude of singing and praising their God.”

Isaiah was in the temple, in the Holy of Holies, and he saw the Lord. If Isaiah saw the Lord, there must have been some reason for the Lord to come to Isaiah. The Lord does not make cameo appearances. We do not know what he told Isaiah. In the First Vision of Joseph Smith, Joseph was told many things. We only know a few of them. The Lord may have explained to Isaiah the basic Plan of Salvation, his mission, what the Lord would do, and how it would be part of the ministry of Isaiah to declare at least part of this message to others.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Did God Call His Prophets in Ancient Times? (1 Nephi 15:8),” KnoWhy 17 (January 22, 2016).
