2 Nephi 11–25 187

Stephen D. Ricks, “Heavenly Visions and Prophetic Calls in Isaiah 6 (2 Nephi 16),

the Book of Mormon, and the Revelation of John,” in Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, ed. Donald W. Parry and John W. Welch (Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1998), 171–190.

2 Nephi 16:2–4 — Isaiah Sees Seraphim

In verse 2 we read, “And above [the throne] stood the Seraphim.” These were bright, burning beings, and it looked as though each one had six wings. I do not imagine these were actual wings, but maybe flames. How else do you describe a flame? The flames would look like wings. These were glorious, radiant beings. Two “wings” covered their faces, two covered their feet, and two were used to fly. One cried to another and said, “Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory. And the posts [the pillars] of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.” The smoke was probably incense, or perhaps some kind of smoke connected with the fire at the altar.

2 Nephi 16:5–7 — Isaiah Protests That He Is “a Man of Unclean Lips” Isaiah stated, “Wo is unto me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.” Unclean lips! That was the first thing that Isaiah felt self-conscious about in the presence of God. He was a prophet. His main tool was speech. Isaiah spoke, and yet felt that his voice was unclean or inadequate. It is an interesting warning that even though we do all the right things and we go through the right motions, if our lips and our thoughts are not pure, we will strongly feel shame in the presence of God. We need to be clean—every whit.

Isaiah’s concern with his unclean lips is then addressed: “Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand.” This coal was some kind of a burning ember. It may have been a piece of burning wood. I doubt that they had charcoal briquettes or even coal. It may have been hot ashes. Nonetheless, the seraph had something very hot in his hand, “which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; And he laid it upon my mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.”

How did people living in ancient times determine whether or not a witness was telling the truth? How could they know whether to rely on the veracity or truthfulness of the testimony of a witness? We know from some ancient Near Eastern texts that “trial by ordeal” was used in situations where it was difficult to determine if a witness was speaking truth during his testimony at trial. Any person who strongly questioned whether a particular witness was telling the truth could challenge that witness and force him to submit to a specified “ordeal.” Something very hot (a hot spatula or coal) was put 188 John W. Welch Notes

on the tongue of the witness. If the witness was hurt or injured during the ordeal, it was considered to be evidence that he was lying. The reasoning was that someone who is lying would have a dry mouth and tongue. Therefore, a liar would not be able to tolerate something hot placed on his tongue. It would hurt a lot and cause physical damage. However, if the witness was telling the truth, he would be relaxed and his tongue would be coated with saliva to prevent the heat from searing and hurting his tongue. This operated like a type of primitive lie detector test.

I wonder if Isaiah saw himself being subjected to this type of ordeal. He passed the test. Isaiah was sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and his sins were forgiven. This is one of the responsibilities of the Holy Ghost, is it not?

This experience was symbolic. I do not believe Heavenly Father was chastising Isaiah with a negative message like, “You bad, evil, child. Let me cleanse you.” I think Heavenly Father was comforting Isaiah and addressing his concerns or doubts about his ability to preach repentance to the people in Jerusalem. The Lord was telling Isaiah that he was forgiven of his sins and that he would receive divine assistance in his personal ordeals as he preached truth. It reminds me of Enoch’s doubts when he was called as prophet. Enoch knew that he was slow of speech and questioned why he would be called as a prophet. We all feel inadequate about these types of callings, and Isaiah was no exception.

Further Reading

Jeffrey M. Bradshaw and David J. Larsen, In God’s Image and Likeness 2: Enoch, Noah, and the Tower of Babel (Salt Lake City, UT: The Interpreter Foundation and Eborn Books, 2014), 36: “Obvious similarities with the calls of Moses and Jeremiah present themselves in this verse. Moses responds to his call as follows: ‘Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?’ Later Moses objects more specifically in saying that he was ‘slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.’ Jeremiah complains by saying: ‘Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.’ Enoch combines the objections of Moses and Jeremiah, adding that ‘all the people hate me.’”

Blake T. Ostler, “The Throne-Theophany and Prophetic Commission in 1 Nephi:

A Form-Critical Analysis,” BYU Studies 26 no. 4 (1986): 72, 83.

2 Nephi 16:8–10 — The Lord Calls Isaiah to be a Prophet The Lord asked, “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” Isaiah answered the call, “Here am I; send me.” As recorded in Abraham 3:27, this is identical to the words spoken by the Savior in the premortal council as He accepted the call to perform the

2 Nephi 11–25 189

Atonement as Savior of mankind: “Here am I, send me.” Isaiah was willing to make whatever sacrifice was necessary to fulfill his calling as prophet.

The Lord then instructed Isaiah: “Go and tell this people—Hear ye indeed, but they understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes—lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and be healed.” The Lord explained that the people in Jerusalem were not ready or worthy to be told everything in plain language. Isaiah would be prophesying at a time when Israel would be destroyed.

These verses explain why many people today find it difficult to understand the words of Isaiah. Isaiah was simply magnifying his calling as instructed by the Lord. He had been told to make his writings and teachings opaque—without absolute transparency. But, as Nephi would later explain, Isaiah’s prophecies would become clear to those who have “ears to hear.”

2 Nephi 16:11–12 — Isaiah Inquires How Long He Should Preach to the People After Isaiah’s mission was explained to him, he enquired, “Lord, how long?” Is this a two-year call, an 18-month mission? The Lord answered, “Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate: And the Lord have removed men far away, for there shall be great forsaking in the midst of the land.” This was, of course, prophesying of the remaining tribes being taken into captivity. How would you like to be called with the knowledge that your efforts would not change or make much difference?

2 Nephi 16:13 — What Is the Symbolism of the Tree and the Holy Seed in Isaiah’s Prophecy?

Finally, the prophecy in verse 13 undoubtedly gave Isaiah some hope that the House of Israel would not be lost forever: “But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return.” So, here is the hope. There will be a tithing, one tenth, or a remnant who will return to Jerusalem at a future time. The prophecy continues, stating that when the remnant return, it “shall be eaten, as a teil-tree, and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves; the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.”

There is much symbolism in this passage. Even though during winter time a tree without its leaves may appear to be dead, there is still life in it. Similarly, even though it may appear like the House of Israel is desolate and dead, without further seed or progeny, there will be a remnant that will return and bring life back to the land and its people. From this remnant will come a “seed” or the promised Messiah, who will bring 190 John W. Welch Notes

life back all-together (to all people). I think this Isaiah passage was perhaps alluding to Psalm 22, which is one of David’s Messianic Psalms.

2 Nephi 17

2 Nephi 17:3 — The Covenant Meaning Behind the Name of Isaiah’s Son Isaiah gave the name of his son as “Shearjashub,” which has been proposed to mean “a remnant shall return.” Perhaps this was not a birth name, but maybe a bar mitzvah or a covenant name. The covenant of the Lord was that a remnant would return.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Onomasticon, “Shearjashub,” online at onoma.lib.byu.edu.

Roseann Benson and Shon D. Hopkin, “Finding Doctrine and Meaning in the

Book of Isaiah,” Religious Educator 15, no. 1 (2014): 107–109.

2 Nephi 17:14 – A Virgin Will Conceive

Some scholars have disagreed on the meaning of this prophecy in Isaiah—specifically how to interpret the condition of the woman who would conceive the Messiah. The original word in Greek describing the woman is parthenon. This is normally interpreted as “a virgin” but can also mean “a young girl.” In the ancient world, women married at a young age and would be young when they conceived. Christians, of course, view this as a prophecy about the virgin birth of Christ. In the Greek world, the word parthenon clearly indicated virginity. However, that was not necessarily the interpretation in Hebrew.

It is important to understand that Isaiah was prophesying that there was going to be something really unusual about this birth. If it were just a girl getting pregnant, that would not be very extraordinary—there would not be much to this prophecy. However, Isaiah’s prophecy indicated that this was going to be a special birth in some way. It was similar to other prophecies of unusual births in ancient scripture—like saying that an octogenarian woman was going to conceive (like Sarah, wife of Abraham or Elizabeth, wife of Zacharias). Isaiah was stating that there would be a very unusual birth and this child would become the Mighty Counselor and the Prince of Peace.

Even though a large number of Jews rejected the Savior, we should not forget that there were many Jews who did accept Jesus. In the early days of Christianity, Jews were the main group of people who converted. Matthew was one of them. Matthew saw Jesus as the fulfillment of prophecy. Paul, also, was a Jew. Where did Paul teach? His first stop was always to the synagogue in every town where he preached. These were the people

2 Nephi 11–25 191

who knew the prophets. They were the ones who knew the tradition and prophecies of the Messiah. They could see how Jesus fulfilled all of these prophecies. Therefore, there were many Jews who did accept Jesus as the Messiah. We can be very grateful for that.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Did Nephi Read Isaiah as a Witness of Christ’s

Coming? (2 Nephi 17:14),” KnoWhy 40 (February 24, 2016).

2 Nephi 18

2 Nephi 18:9—The Lord Will Gather His People from All the Far Countries Verse 9 says, “Give ear all ye of far countries.” This call indicates that the Lord will gather Israel again and bring back his people from wherever they may be in the world. The promise is that even though Israel will be scattered, the Lord will not forget them. This theme runs strongly through all of the Isaiah prophecies. This verse describes Stage 2 of Nephi’s worldview of God’s victory in gathering Israel.

2 Nephi 19

2 Nephi 19:6 — Isaiah Prophesies of Christ (see also 2 Nephi 17:14, above). Though Isaiah knew that somebody important was going to be born at a future time, he did not spell it out very clearly. We know that the child would be a king. He would bear many royal titles and would have divine and powerful roles.

How has the Savior fulfilled each of these roles? Christ is a counselor when we pray for help. Christ is wonderful and a prince of peace when we need grace. Think of how Jesus Christ has fulfilled these roles and functions for you in your personal life.

2 Nephi 21–24

2 Nephi 21:1–5 — The Stem and Root of Jesse

Isaiah continued to prophesy about the coming of Christ in 2 Nephi 21:1–5. Among the many biblical prophecies that Moroni spoke to Joseph Smith, words in Isaiah 11 (2 Nephi 21) were declared to be “about to be fulfilled.” Isaiah 11 speaks of “the stem of Jesse,” “a rod [or branch] that will come out of the stem of Jess,” and a “root of Jesse.” D&C 113:1–6 explains that the stem of Jesse refers to Jesus Christ. Who was Jesse? He 192 John W. Welch Notes

was the father of David from the line of Judah. Isaiah was prophesying that the Savior would come through this line. Seeing Christ as the stem of Jesse has had a long and honorable tradition. Many artistic representations show Jesse sleeping with a tree growing from of his body. David is often represented in the tree and Jesus is at the top. A common theme in medieval art was to show the promise given to Jesse—that Christ, the king of Israel, would come through his posterity (See Figure 1).

Isaiah also spoke of a rod or branch, as well as of roots, that would come from the stem. The rod and the roots are described in D&C 113:3–6 as being two different people who would both descend from the tribe of Ephraim (and Joseph) and also from the tribe of Judah. Does Joseph Smith fit the bill as a rod or branch of Jesse? Is he a descendant of Jesse? He might be through a collateral ancestral line. We don’t know about that for sure, but we do know that he is of the Tribe of Ephraim.

What should we make of the root? Who is that? I think we are still waiting for further light and knowledge to identify that person. The root prophecy could be looking forward to another time or another person who will eventually bring these two lineages together. I think the prophecy is saying that this branch and this root will bring the House of Judah and the House of Ephraim together. It appears that this prophecy is looking forward to the final millennial stage in Nephi’s world-view because chapter 21 introduces the lamb and the lion lying down together with each other.

Even though the entire prophecy of Isaiah may not be clear, the symbolism of the stem is clear—the stem refers to the coming of Christ.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Moroni Quote Isaiah 11 to Joseph Smith? (2 Nephi 21:10),” KnoWhy 50 (March 9, 2016).

2 Nephi 21:9 — Everyone Will Know of the Lord and His Atonement What is this knowledge that will fill the earth at the end of times? It is that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Savior of mankind, and that only through him can we be saved. It shows that the Atonement is for all of us. The whole world will have that knowledge. This describes the final or fourth stage of the Nephite prophetic view.

2 Nephi 21:11 — The Lord Will Gather His People a Second Time Verse 11 states, “And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people.” The important words in this verse are “the second time.” There would be a gathering, as Nephi said, when a remnant of Israel would be brought back from the first exile in Babylon. Nephi explains

2 Nephi 11–25 193

Figure 1 Depiction of the stem of Jesse as the tree of life in the Monreale Cathedral in Sicily. Photo by John W. Welch 194 John W. Welch Notes

in 2 Nephi 25 that they would be brought back so that the Lord could appear to them in Jerusalem.

However, the House of Israel would be scattered again because of the hardness of their hearts and their rejection of Jesus. Here, Isaiah knew that the Lord would have to set his hand a second time to gather them “from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.” Nephi speaks of this gathering of Israel both in physical and also in spiritual terms.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Where Did Joseph Smith Get His Ideas about the

Physical and Spiritual Gathering of Israel? (2 Nephi 21:11),” KnoWhy 290 (March 22, 2017).

For what Isaiah says about the last days, see Nephi’s explanation in 2 Nephi 30

and also Book of Mormon Central, “What Do Nephi and Isaiah Say about the End

Times? (2 Nephi 23:6),” KnoWhy 46 (March 3, 2016).

2 Nephi 25

2 Nephi 25:1 — Nephi’s Commentary on Isaiah’s Teachings After quoting from Isaiah 2–14 (2 Nephi 12–24), Nephi provided five additional chapters of his own interpretation of Isaiah. Rather than being a strict commentary, it is more of a Midrash—an explanation of what he saw in those chapters that he wanted his people, and us, to understand. It was not enough for his people to know what Isaiah said on the brass plates; Nephi wanted his people to understand what it meant.

That tells us something more about Nephi, doesn’t it? He was a teacher. He was meticulous about what he did. He was very careful. He understood what Isaiah was saying. If you are patient with both Nephi and Isaiah, there is no better guide to take you through Isaiah than Nephi.

The Book of Isaiah is somewhat of a scrapbook of seemingly disconnected revelations, like the Doctrine and Covenants. Each little section is a separate prophecy. Isaiah did not sit down and write all of this in one sitting. We do not know when all the prophecies of Isaiah were put together and collected. The old Jewish tradition is that they were collected in the days of King Hezekiah and finally put into one collection then, but we do not know how decisions were made for selecting the order of the Isaiah writings.

2 Nephi 11–25 195

2 Nephi 25:1 — A Brilliant and Insightful Commentary Nephi claimed that we really would not understand Isaiah unless we had lived in Jerusalem in his day and understood the manner of speech, the usage of the language, the culture, and the places. He said, “For behold, Isaiah spake many things which were hard for many of my people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews.” Nephi had lived there, he knew Jerusalem.

These Isaiah chapters are difficult for anyone to understand, but for the Book of Mormon to give us such brilliant and insightful commentary on these very difficult chapters is a most useful element of the book and a great testimony of the Book of Mormon itself.

2 Nephi 25:4 — Nephi Will Prophesy in Plainness Nephi said that his soul “delighted in plainness.” Do you think Christ likes plainness? What is important about plainness? When Christ said “Judge not that ye be not judged,” it was a very plain saying. Of course, you can judge all you want, but you had better be sure that you are judging righteously, because whatever standard of judgment you use, that will be used to judge you. Be wise about it. That is a plain statement. So is, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” Very plain. I think as we look at the words of Jesus, we see that plainness is a great virtue. Sometimes we over-value sophistication and complexity.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does Nephi Help Us Understand Isaiah? (2 Nephi 25:4),” KnoWhy 47 (March 4, 2016).

2 Nephi 25:12–13 — Nephi Saw Christ’s Day

After Nephi had quoted the Isaiah passages, he started going through the four main elements in his prophetic world-view. In verse 12, Nephi talked about how Christ would come and how Jesus would manifest himself to the people in Jerusalem but they would reject and crucify him. Nephi included new information here that had not been mentioned before in the Nephite record, specifically he prophesied that after Jesus was laid in a sepulcher for the space of three days, he would rise from the dead. In 1 Nephi 19, Zenos had been quoted as saying there would be three days of darkness, but it did not mention what was going on during those three days of darkness. Here we learn that there would be a three-day period in which Jesus would be in the tomb.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Caused the Darkness and Destruction in the

34th Year? (3 Nephi 8:20),” KnoWhy 197 (September 28, 2016).

196 John W. Welch Notes

2 Nephi 25:12–17 — Passover and Temple References There is a corollary between the three days of darkness surrounding the death of Jesus and a prior significant experience in Israelite history. Under the Law of Moses, the Israelites celebrated the Passover as a reminder of God’s hand in saving them from death, redeeming them from slavery, and bringing them safely out of Egypt. Moses had cursed the land of Egypt and prophesied that the firstborn of the Egyptians would die by the hand of the destroying angel. However, the destroying angel would pass over those Israelites who followed his specific instructions to paint their doorposts with the blood of a male lamb without blemish. Three days of darkness and death prevailed in Egypt. This was a foreshadowing of the three nights and days of darkness when Jesus would be crucified, would die, and would lie in the tomb. Significantly, the destruction among the inhabitants of the New World particularly afflicted the wicked, while those who were “more righteous” were “spared” (3 Nephi 9:13).

Moreover, in 2 Nephi 25:16, Nephi quotes Psalm 24:4 in order to worship God “with clean hands and a pure heart.” This was the basic temple entrance requirement in the Temple of Jerusalem and, apparently, also in the Temple of Nephi.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Were Nephite Prophets Familiar with the Passover

Tradition? (Mosiah 13:30),” KnoWhy 420 (March 29, 2018).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Nephi Connect Isaiah’s Prophecies with

Joseph Who Was Sold into Egypt? (2 Nephi 25:17),” KnoWhy 375 (October 24, 2017).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Lehi ‘Suppose’ the Existence of Satan? (2 Nephi 24:12),” KnoWhy 43 (February 29, 2016.

2 Nephi 25:18 — One True Messiah

Notice that Nephi needed to say that his people should not look for another Messiah to come. There would be no other Messiah, “for there is save one Messiah spoken of by the prophets, and that Messiah is he who should be rejected of the Jews.” Nephi must have been aware that some people wondered how many Messiahs there would be. What made them wonder?

The word mashiach in Hebrew means “anointed” or “anointed one.” In ancient times, a high priest was anointed to be the high priest. So, in a way, every high priest under the Law of Moses was a “mashiach”—a messiah. In 1Nephi 10:5, Lehi said that a messiah would come. He did not say the Messiah, so Nephi may have wanted to clarify this matter.

2 Nephi 11–25 197

There are reasons why we have multiple anointed people, but that does not make them all the Messiah. The name “Mosiah” is actually related to the same word. “Messiah” was a word that was used in more than one way, but Nephi wanted us to know that there is only one Messiah—he who would perform the atonement and would be the one whom we worship through his holy name. As Nephi taught in verse 13: “for I have seen his day, and my heart doth magnify his holy name.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Was Mosiah a Type of Christ? (Mosiah 26:12),” KnoWhy 104 (May 20, 2016).

2 Nephi 25:19 — Six Hundred Years after Lehi Left Jerusalem Nephi not only made it very clear that there would be only one Messiah, he also revealed the name of the Messiah—“Jesus Christ, the Son of God”—and even gave a timeframe when this one Messiah would be born. Nephi did not pin the date down precisely, but he did say that it would be “six hundred years from the time that [Lehi and his family] left Jerusalem.” In other words, Christ’s birth would be close enough to 600 years that people would have recognized that Jesus was the Messiah, and would have been convinced that there was no need to look for another.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does Prophecy Shape the Book of Mormon’s

Content and Structure? (Words of Mormon 1:4),” KnoWhy 498 (January 15, 2019).

2 Nephi 25:20 — Symbols of Christ

Again, Nephi referred to the Israelite ancestors of the Nephite people: “And as the Lord God liveth that brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt, … there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved.” This is another Passover metaphor.

Nephi continued: “[T]he Lord God . . . gave unto Moses power that he should heal the nations [the tribes of Israel] after they had been bitten by poisonous serpents, if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which he did raise up before them.” The serpent, especially a serpent raised on a pole, is a symbol of Christ, and it refers to when Moses put the brazen serpent on the pole so that anyone who looked at it would be healed. Jesus used that reference in John 3:14: “[E]ven so must the Son of man be lifted up” just as the healing serpent had been lifted up on the post by Moses.

Nephi also referred back to the time in the wilderness that the Lord “gave [Moses] power that he should smite the rock and the water should come forth.” Once again, this is a type and symbol of Christ. In 1 Corinthians 10:4, Paul pointed to this same event in 198 John W. Welch Notes

Israelite history and explained “that Rock was Christ” and the spiritual water would come forth from him. All these things had been revealed to Nephi, and he understood that these images typify Christ. The belief that the Law of Moses and its related events were given to represent what would happen in the life of the Savior is a tradition that goes way, way back in Judeo-Christian thought.

Further Reading

Andrew C. Skinner, “Serpent Symbols and Salvation in the Ancient Near East and

the Book of Mormon,”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 10, no. 2 (2001): 42–55, 70–71.

2 Nephi 25:19–20, 26 — The Name of Jesus Christ

It seems that Nephi, and many of the ancient prophets, had a well-developed and sophisticated understanding of the mission of Christ, of his life, and also of his name. In the ancient world, the people greatly appreciated the importance of what we call “name theology.” We do not have quite the same appreciation today. They had to know the name of the god that they were worshipping, and the name was usually very holy, kept sacred, and only spoken under certain conditions.

In verse 19, Nephi knew and used the Savior’s full name, Jesus Christ. Often, the Savior was referred to as the Only Begotten of the Father, the Father of Heaven and Earth, and the Son of God. There are a number of ways in which Nephi described the Messiah who was to come (see Figure 2). Possibly, the understanding of the Messiah’s name was something that came gradually and Nephi, Jacob, and all the subsequent Nephite prophets from this point forward knew him by his name, Jesus Christ.

Nephi had deep respect for and interest in the name of God. I am sure he emphasized this. So, when Nephi taught that “we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know,” this would have been a very solemn, spiritual, and holy teaching of his time.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Must Christ’s True Church Be Called after His

Name? (3 Nephi 27:8),” KnoWhy 482 (November 6, 2018).

2 Nephi 25:23 — Persuading Our Children to Be Reconciled to God Nephi explained his purpose and focus in life: “For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God.”

2 Nephi 11–25 199

Figure 2 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. Names Used for Christ by Major Book of Mormon Authors. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999, chart 44. Continued on pages 200–201. 200 John W. Welch Notes

2 Nephi 11–25 201
