202 John W. Welch Notes

What does it mean to “be reconciled” to God? “Reconciled” is not a very complicated word, but what does it mean “to be” reconciled? It could mean to be at peace with God and, when we are at peace with God, we follow his commandments and love Him. More than anything, “to be reconciled” is to follow the first great commandment, to love God. When you are reconciled to him, when you love him, everything else will follow.

2 Nephi 25:23 — After All We Can Do

What does “after all we can do” mean? How many ways can that phrase be understood? In the 1960s and 1970s, the German translation of this verse in the Book of Mormon read, “in spite of all we can do,” we are saved by grace. That translation has since been changed. The translation now says, “after all that we can do.” This verse was probably changed to avoid a common misconception among some churches that our works will not matter—we can do whatever we want—as long as we accept the Savior.

As mentioned in the Notes for the previous Come Follow Me lesson, Jacob also said something similar in 2 Nephi 10:24, “Reconcile yourselves to the will of God, . . . and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.” Nephi seems to be paraphrasing and simplifying Jacob’s statement to make it plain. But Nephi most likely understood the doctrine of salvation by grace the same way that Jacob expressed it. “After all that we can do” would thus involve all that it takes for us to “reconcile [ourselves] to the will of God” and to be “reconciled unto God,” as Jacob said, and as Nephi hopes to persuade all “to be reconciled to God” (25:23).

After that, it is not only “by grace” that we are saved, but also, as Jacob said, “in and through the grace of God” that we are saved. “By” seems to express the instrumental effect of God’s grace upon us. “In” would seem to express the interpersonal relationship with God and Christ in which the binding aspects of grace thrive. “Through” grace may inspire a sense of the enduring power of grace that persists through time and throughout all eternity.

Alma 24:11 also correlates well with 2 Nephi 25:23, which is imbedded in the Book of Mormon narrative of the Ammonites, who buried their weapons of war. Regarding their hope of being cleansed from their past wicked, murderous and sinful behavior, they stated:

[I]t has been all that we could do, (as we were the most lost of all mankind)

to repent of all our sins and the many murders which we have committed,

and to get God to take them away from our hearts, for it was all we could do

to repent sufficiently before God that he would take away our stain.”

2 Nephi 11–25 203

In other words, all we can do is turn to Christ and he will be there for us. What was all the Ammonites could do? They buried their weapons, they made a covenant, and they kept it. They refused to fight, even when they were attacked. They offered up their lives rather than fighting. Talk about enduring to the end! This was a deliberate calculation made by the Ammonites. Individually, in their own hearts, they knew and believed that they would be saved and redeemed from all of their problems, but after all they could do. And that turned out to be quite a lot for some of them. So, in our own trials we can look to this scripture as a beacon of hope. We will be free from our sorrows, regrets, burdens and trials after all we can do to turn to God in the midst of that trial.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does Nephi State that We Are Saved by Grace

‘After All We Can Do’? (2 Nephi 25:23),” KnoWhy 371 (October 10, 2017).

2 Nephi 25:23–24— Saved by Grace

Even though we have work to do, we are still saved by grace. The interpretive proof of our reliance on grace is found in these two verses: 2 Nephi 25:23–24. Verse 23 ends with the statement that “we are saved [by grace], after all we can do.” This is followed with verse 24, which begins with “notwithstanding [even though we are saved by grace] we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled.” All of us, every one of us, must rely on grace— the Atonement, the Resurrection, and the sustaining influence of Jesus Christ—in order to be made perfect. Then, through our faith we are made alive in Christ because we are willing to do what he has commanded. We still keep the commandments—that is part of all we can do.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks referenced 2 Nephi 25:23 and the principle of grace, when he made the following comment in his April 1998 General Conference address entitled, “Have You Been Saved”:

Some Christians accuse Latter-day Saints … of denying the grace of God through

claiming they can earn their own salvation. We answer this accusation with the

words of two Book of Mormon prophets. Nephi taught, “For we labor diligently

… to persuade our children … to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God;

for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do.”

One of the footnotes in verse 23 points to D&C 138:4, which says, “That through his atonement, and by obedience to the principles of the gospel, mankind might be saved.” This verse undoubtedly implies that we must also be obedient to ordinances as well as 204 John W. Welch Notes

principles, because participating in ordinances are things that we have to do to be exalted. We should also look at being saved in the context of a covenant life.

These verses explain that grace is not simply the means by which we are saved—it is the principle that we live and the salvation that Christ brings. In other words, when we have been saved by grace, we live in grace. This also means that we live in love because grace is unconditional love, manifested through the giving of gifts.

The Greek word for “grace” does not describe a tangible gift you may receive. In the ancient world of Jesus and Paul, “grace” established a relationship because when you accept a gift from someone, you are then obliged, and you are then a part of a relationship with the person who gave the gift. I have a friend who is writing a book entitled, “His Obliging Grace.” It is “amazing grace,” but it is also “obliging grace” because we are obliged and welcome to live in that relationship.

Further Reading:

Dallin H. Oaks, “Have You Been Saved,” Ensign, April 1998, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

2 Nephi 25:24–25 — Being Made Alive in Christ through Faith It is important to understand that because of our faith, we become alive in Christ. Jesus submits his will to the Father and, therefore, if we want to be Christ-like, we must also submit our will to the commandments of God. There is a Christ-like echo in our recognition of this principle.

2 Nephi 25:26 — Rejoicing in Christ

Nephi was well aware that Jesus would come down—the condescension of God—and that he would suffer and die. We take our knowledge of Christ’s ministry on earth for granted because we have hindsight. We know what happened. He lived, he died, and he was resurrected. But Nephi was living before all of this occurred.

Nephi knew that Christ was going to suffer much throughout his life. Nephi understood suffering. He had a difficult life—leaving the comforts of his childhood home in Jerusalem, facing exposure in the wilderness and the risk at sea. Nephi knew that Christ was willing to endure extreme pain and suffering for all mankind because of love. I think Nephi probably took great comfort in the fact that he was being Christ-like as he suffered and endured to the end.

When Christ appeared to the Nephites in 3 Nephi 27:27, he stated, “What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am.” There is no principle of ethics or morals that is stronger than following the best example that you can find. Christ

2 Nephi 11–25 205

showed us, by example, how to best live our life. Following him will make it a reality that we can become Christ-like.

2 Nephi 25:26 — Nephi Writes the Prophecies of Christ for His Posterity Nephi served in a lot of different positions, as we all do. He was a prophet, he was a builder, he was a record-keeper, he was a king, and he was a leader. Nephi was also a father. We know he had plenty of children. How many prophets in the scriptures tell you what they taught their children? We learn two things about Nephi from this scripture. First, it was important to Nephi to mention his children. Second, teaching his children about Christ was a priority for Nephi. He put his children on the top of his list of things that are most important.

2 Nephi 25:26 — Nephi the Diligent Record-Keeper Nephi was a record-keeper. He was also a record-maker. This task was very important in Nephi’s life. It was extremely difficult to make and keep records on sheets of metal. It involved a lot of time, work, expense, and training. Intense focus was necessary—there were no erasers in that medium.

Nephi had left the Holy Land behind, but had brought the brass plates with him. The plates were, in a way, his connection back to the holiness, the tradition, and the prophets. Nephi was the custodian of all of that! No wonder Nephi felt a strong desire to make sure that these things would come forth at a later time. Nephi labored to teach his children. He also labored to teach them through the records that he kept. The scriptures were obviously very important to Nephi. Talk about the price he had to pay in terms of obedience!

Nephi was also a careful and artistic writer, as is evident in the chiastic structure he composed in 2 Nephi 25:24–27. Through that inverted parallel arrangement, Nephi focused all attention on Christ at the center of his most famous personal statement of

purpose. See Book of Mormon Central, “What Can We Learn from 10 of the Best

Chiasms in the Book of Mormon? Part 1 (2 Nephi 25:26),” KnoWhy 349 (August 7, 2017);

“Why Is the Book of Mormon So Focused on Jesus Christ? (2 Nephi 25:26),” KnoWhy 484 (November 13, 2018).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is It Important to Keep Records? (1 Nephi 9:5),” KnoWhy 345 (July 28, 2017).

2 Nephi 25:29–30 — Living the Law of Moses

The Nephites were taught by Nephi that “ye must bow down before him, and worship him with all your might, mind, and strength, and your whole soul.” Where did Nephi’s 206 John W. Welch Notes

people worship? In the temple! Soon after Nephi and his people settled in the land they eventually called “Nephi,” they built a temple.

Because Nephi’s people were still living the Law of Moses, they needed a temple to obey many parts of that law. He instructed his people: “[I]nasmuch as it shall be expedient, ye must keep the performances and ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled which was given unto Moses” (25:30). Among other things, the Law of Moses was the Law of Sacrifice. Nephi’s temple had an altar. The people offered appropriate sacrifices on certain days, as specified under the law. They would have also observed certain festival days such as the Day of Atonement or the Feast of Tabernacles, which were connected particularly with particular sacrifices and solemn observances.

However, Nephi was well aware and knew that all ordinances and covenants under the Law of Moses pointed to the coming of Christ. Nephi preached of Christ and also the importance of fulfilling the requirements under the Law of Moses. The word “expedient” in verse 30 probably means “appropriate” or “necessary.” Nephi was explaining to his people that it was still necessary for his people to perform the ordinances under the law of Moses because that law had not been fulfilled. He also understood that, with the coming of Christ, the performances and ordinances under the Law of Moses would be fulfilled.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Did Ancient Israelites Build Temples Outside of

Jerusalem? (2 Nephi 5:16),” KnoWhy 31 (February 11, 2016).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Book of Mormon Say We Must

Worship God with Our Whole Soul? (2 Nephi 25:29),” KnoWhy 467 (September 13, 2018).
