2 NEPHI 26–30

John W. Welch Notes



2 Nephi 26

In overview, beginning in 2 Nephi 25, Nephi spoke “somewhat concerning the words which I have written, which have been spoken by the mouth of Isaiah” (25:1). That set of interpretive sayings continues on until the end of chapter 30. I imagine that Nephi wrote these words midway through his reign as king in the city of Nephi. These chapters would have reassured Nephi’s people that, even though they would live in isolation and even though they knew that their posterity would not last, their efforts would not be in vain or unimportant. The Lord would come to them (ch. 26), they would leave a record that would come forth miraculously (ch. 27), and even though the devil would seek in many ways to impede the progress of that book (ch. 28), it will figure prominently in the last days (ch. 29), when many covenant people shall be restored with rejoicing unto the blessings of the Lord (ch. 30). At that point Nephi says, “And now, my beloved brethren, I make an end of my sayings” (30:18). And thus, these chapters should rightly be read as a textual unit.

2 Nephi 26:1 — The Law Fulfilled after Christ’s Resurrection It is apparent in verse 1 of chapter 26 that Nephi clearly understood that in the future, when Jesus would come to the people in the Americas following his resurrection, he would fulfill the Law of Moses and issue a new law which would then take the place of the Law of Moses. Until then, he instructs the people of Nephi to be strict in observing the Law of Moses. This verse picks up seamlessly as a continuation of Nephi’s statement in the final verse of Nephi’s previous chapter: “And, inasmuch as it shall be expedient, 208 John W. Welch Notes

ye must keep the performances and ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled which was given unto Moses” (25:30).

2 Nephi 26:4–6 — The Wicked Destroyed

In verse 4, Nephi identified those among his people who will be destroyed, namely the proud and those who do wickedly. In this summation, Nephi captures one of the main themes in the long block of Isaiah chapters that he has just quoted. The Old Testament prophet, Isaiah, prophesied over and over again about pride being the great pitfall of the people living in the land of Jerusalem during his time. Isaiah also prophesied that pride would be the great pitfall for those of us living in the latter days.

Nephi elaborated in verse 5: “They that kill the prophets, and the saints, the depths of the earth shall swallow them up, . . . and mountains shall cover them, and whirlwinds shall carry them away, and buildings shall fall upon them and crush them to pieces and grind them to powder.” This statement of the divine punishment of those who kill the prophets compares with Nephi’s previous prophecies (see 1 Nephi 12:4 and 19:10–18) about the types of calamities that would eventually befall the lands of the Nephites and Lamanites in the New World at the time of Christ’s death. These things can be related to the catastrophes that took place in 3 Nephi 8–9. People were specifically warned by Nephi, several hundred years before those events occurred, about the thunderings, lightnings, earthquakes, and all manner of destruction that would take place.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does Prophecy Shape the Book of Mormon’s

Content and Structure? (Words of Mormon 1:4),” KnoWhy 498 (January 15, 2019).

2 Nephi 26:7 — Nephi Anguishes for His Posterity Look at verse 7: “O the pain, and the anguish of my soul for the loss of the slain of my people!” Can you imagine Nephi’s feelings as he was shown the awful destruction of his own people? Nephi, undoubtedly, had hope and a desire for the best for his posterity. Don’t we all wish for the best for our children, our grandchildren, and our posterity? Nephi knew that there would be many good things that would happen in the lives of his posterity. Christ would even come to them. But Nephi also knew that they would be destroyed—and what pain and anguish that must have made him feel. We all can relate with Nephi. However, in spite of that inexpressible agony, what was Nephi’s response at the end of this verse? Did he curse God and object to what will happen? No. He said, “I must cry unto my God: thy ways are just.” What a lesson we can learn from Nephi on how we can regroup and respond to calamities and problems, many of which are happening today in the world.

2 Nephi 26–30 209

2 Nephi 26:9 — Christ Will Appear to the Faithful Nephites Nephi saw that the righteous people who hearkened to the words of the prophet would not be destroyed. The “Son of righteousness” would appear to them, heal them, and they would have peace for three generations. This is exactly what happened in 3 Nephi 17 with the healing of the people at the time of Christ, followed by peace for three generations in 4 Nephi.

Have you thought about the impact your direct influence has over three or four generations? What is significant about three or four generations? You, through your grandchildren, are included in this span of time. Consider this: If you had been among those who had witnessed the teachings of Christ and if you had seen and felt his marvelous love, you could live to tell your children, your grandchildren, and perhaps your greatgrandchildren, about that remarkable experience. The period of three subsequent generations marks the affect we can have personally on others. Our direct influence does not reach through seven or eight generations because we aren’t around to personally know that later progeny.

The little children who were present and who personally interacted with Christ would have remembered that experience all of their lives. They were eye witnesses of the Savior and, throughout their lives, they could relate their experience to others. Therefore, for three or four generations, people who were actually there at Christ’s appearance—who were first-hand witnesses—were around to relate their personal accounts. However, after three or four generations, the opportunity for first-hand oral testimony would become lost, and people would have begun to ignore and discount the significance of what had happened. The people in 4 Nephi eventually went a different way and, when that happens, they were ripe for destruction. A century ago, a similar challenge was faced, when a generation arose that had not known Joseph Smith personally. Fortunately, intense historical efforts were made to record their recollections and experiences with the Prophet. This explains why the Church is so avid about keeping faithful historical records, and why our own personal histories should not go missing.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the Peace Last So Long in 4 Nephi? (4 Nephi 1:16),” KnoWhy 225 (November 7, 2016).

2 Nephi 26:24 — Jesus Does Nothing Unless It Is for Our Benefit Verse 24 tells us something about Jesus: “He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world.” What a statement! That is an absolute statement—everything Jesus does is 210 John W. Welch Notes

for the benefit of the world. If you are striving to be Christ-like, you may want to look at your life and ask, “Do I do nothing except for the benefit of the world?” That is a challenge.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why the Book of Mormon’s Depiction of a Loving

God Fits with the Old Testament (2 Nephi 26:24),” KnoWhy 422 (April 5, 2018).

2 Nephi 26:27 — We Are Commanded to Help Others Repent Christ commands all people that they “should persuade all men to repent.” We assist

Christ in His work when we get people to repent—it is a Christ-like effort. In a BYU

Devotional, I once stated that there is no intellectual challenge greater than figuring out what you can say and what you can do to help someone else repent. This intellectual challenge is greater than learning the laws of astrophysics, molecular biology, or any other complex academic pursuit.

But this is what Bishops often do—somebody walks into your office who needs help, direction, and assistance in the process of repentance. One of the scariest moments of my life occurred two or three weeks after I had been ordained and sustained as a bishop. I realized that these faithful people who sat in my office for a fifteen-minute interview would actually go out and do what I advised them to do. I realized that I had to do my best to be right! I was asked many questions about many things, but the most important advice sought was how to fix their life and how to repent. It is quite a challenge. How do you respond? How do you do it? Try to figure out how Christ would respond. What would He advise or do in this situation? This is a quintessential Christ-like endeavor. And we are all charged to go and do likewise, to preach nothing—directly or indirectly—except repentance, reproving betimes with sharpness but showing forth an increase of love (D&C 121:43; see also Leviticus 19:17).

2 Nephi 26:29 — We Are Commanded to Avoid Priestcraft The Lord has also commanded that there shall be no priestcrafts, “[F]or, behold, priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion.” We need to scrupulously avoid the behavior described in this verse. Fortunately, we are blessed with a structure of Church leadership, from the ward level all the way to the top, where we do not have the opportunity for this kind of priestcraft. This is a great blessing to members of the Church of Jesus Christ in our day.
