2 Nephi 26–30 211

2 Nephi 26:31 — What Does Nephi Mean When He Says We Cannot Labor for Money?

This scripture is not a blanket statement that implies we should not work. The scripture specifies that “the laborer in Zion” should not work for money, meaning you should not be paid when you are doing service for the Church. We don’t get paid when we minister to others. In some churches, however, ministers are paid—it is a job. The concern expressed in verse 31 is turning the holy service of the priesthood into a commercial activity. Another interpretation of this scripture might be a warning not to let your job become so all-consuming that you become obsessed with money. That would also be a problem.

2 Nephi 26:25, 33 — All Are Alike unto God

Verse 33 talks about Christ-like love. “And he inviteth all to come unto him … and he denieth none that come unto him.” A Christ-like person invites all people into his or her life. The statement is followed by an inclusive list of people we need to love and invite into our lives: black and white, bond and free, male and female, the righteous and the heathen. “All are alike unto God, both Jew and gentile.” This is a Christ-like attitude about humanity because we truly are all alike. We are all children of the same Heavenly Father, and we are all loved by Him. We are all brothers and sisters of the same, divine brother. That makes us all alike in the ways that really matter.

The love Nephi is speaking of is a welcoming love. We should welcome all people into our personal lives and into the Kingdom of God. At the time Nephi wrote this, he knew that his posterity would be destroyed. He also knew God’s promise that there would eventually be Gentiles and others who would bring the gospel again to his people and that his posterity would be welcomed into the Church. Nephi also knew of Isaiah’s promise that the Lord’s voice goes to all people. Nephi had echoed that prophecy of Isaiah a few verses earlier in 2 Nephi 26:24: “He doth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world.”

And verse 25 further elaborates: “[D]oth he cry to any, saying: Depart from me? ... I say unto you, Nay. … Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price.” Where did Nephi get this phrasing? It comes from Isaiah 55:1. This would appear to be the last writing in the book of Isaiah that the Nephites had. Nephi drew on many of Isaiah’s passages, including this one, as he crafted his own words to convey the prophecy that he knew would happen to his people and others. Consider what Nephi says in 2 Nephi 26:27: “Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation?” No. Rather, “[H]e hath given it free for all men,” which is substantively related to Isaiah 55:1.

212 John W. Welch Notes

And this brings us back to verse 33, which I think is a most moving conclusion. What a wonderful, universal message we have here in the Book of Mormon of the reach of Christ’s Atonement to all people throughout the world. Isn’t it wonderful to live at a time when this prophecy is being fulfilled, a time when people are being gathered from all parts of the world?

One may wonder about the 1978 revelation received by President Spencer W. Kimball about extending the blessings of the priesthood to all worthy males. How did that

happen? BYU Studies published an article several years ago which was written by Edward L. Kimball who is President Kimball’s son. It is a very long article, going into great detail about all the steps that were involved in receiving that revelation. It is an over-whelming experience to read and understand how the Spirit of Revelation was upon President Kimball, inspiring him to bring forth this revelation at the time, when it was proper, everything in the Lord’s due time.

Recently, I had in my office a black member of the Church who graduated from Brigham Young University’s law school several years ago. His name is Keith Hamilton. Keith has written a book about his thoughts from the perspective of a black member of the Church. You would probably enjoy reading his whole story. During our conversation, I asked Keith, “What do you make of the revelation about blacks receiving the priesthood?” Sharing our thoughts, we both concluded that the important thing is that the Lord blesses every people in their proper time. There was a time when the Church went primarily to the Lamanites. And, there was a time when it went primarily to the Germans in Prussia. There was a time when the Church put great emphasis on the Polynesian Islands. The Church is small. We have limited resources, and can’t do everything for all people instantly. We are blessed to live at a time when many things have come together making it possible for all blessings of the priesthood to be offered to all.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Are So Few Women Mentioned in the Book of

Mormon? (2 Nephi 26:33),” KnoWhy (December 19, 2017).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Nephi Say That All Are Alike Unto God? (2 Nephi 26:33),” KnoWhy 278 (February 22, 2017).
