2NEPHI 31–33

John W. Welch Notes



2 Nephi 31

2 Nephi 31:1–2 — Nephi Writes His Last Words of Prophecy Beginning in 2 Nephi 31:1, Nephi says that he will now make an end of his prophesying, and he can only write a few select things. Indeed, chapters 31, 32, and 33 are relatively short, only 45 verses in total. But here Nephi chooses to speak about the main elements in the all-important doctrine of Christ. The basic outline of Nephi’s farewell testimony deals with baptism, the Holy Ghost, enduring to the end on the way to eternal life, praying always, and giving Christ place in your soul.

It is interesting how often in the Book of Mormon, a person will say something like, “I am about to die, or I think I might be leaving soon, or someone is now the new king, and so this will be the last thing I have to say to you.” Whether these words come in an actual address or in their final writings, when it is the final time they believe these inspired leaders will be speaking (especially when they have a prophetic worldview as Nephi did), it is important to pay close attention. One can almost imagine red flashing lights around these parts of the scriptures.

2 Nephi 31:3 — The Lord Speaks to People in Their Own Language Nephi chooses his words carefully in these three final chapters. He talks again about the plainness he had discussed before in 1 Nephi 13 and 2 Nephi 25. How many times does he say, in effect, that he is trying to deliver his message as plainly as he possible can so that people will not misunderstand?

228 John W. Welch Notes

For example, in 2 Nephi 31:3 he states: “For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for he speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding.” This is good counsel for everyone teaching the gospel. This is also why missionaries are given the gift of tongues, and why it is possible that even when they struggle, somehow everyone understands what they are truly saying.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Lord Speak to Men “According to

Their Language”? (2 Nephi 31:3),” KnoWhy 258 (January 6, 2017).

2 Nephi 31:5 — Why Are We Baptized?

What is the purpose of baptism, and what does Nephi say will cause the remission of sins? Latter-day Saint scholar Noel B. Reynolds has written an exhaustive analysis of the language that is used to describe the baptismal covenant throughout the Book of Mormon. Interestingly, he found that the Book of Mormon never talks about baptism as washing away our sins.

The purpose of baptism is not so much to wash something away, and that especially makes sense when we baptize eight-year-old children who have no sins. After all, why would we baptize them to wash away non-existent sins? More fundamentally, this ordinance is mainly about the commitment to keep the commandments and witnessing to Heavenly Father, that you will keep the covenants that you have made. And then, when the baptismal covenant is renewed with the partaking of the sacrament, the remembrance of the forgiveness of sins is also relived.

The Holy Ghost is then what purges and washes impure things away, the baptism of fire that brings forth the remission of sins. It is much like the sacrifices of the temple in Israel, where burnt offerings were the offerings of atonement that would bring one back into good standing with the Lord. It was the fire that was able to remove impurities.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What is the Purpose of Baptism in the Book of

Mormon? (2 Nephi 31:6–7),” KnoWhy 59 (March 22, 2016).

Noel B. Reynolds, “Understanding Christian Baptism through the Book of

Mormon,” BYU Studies Quarterly 51, no. 2 (2012): 3–37.
