240 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do the Authors on the Small Plates Follow a

Pattern? (Jacob 7:27),” KnoWhy 74 (April 8, 2016).

John W. Welch, “The Father’s Command to Keep Records in the Small Plates of

Nephi,” FARMS Preliminary Report (September 1984), 1–12.

Jacob 1:10 — Nephi Was a Protector and Father Figure to Jacob In verse 10, anticipating Nephi’s impending death, Jacob went out of his way to ensure that his loyalty and close relationship with Nephi was clearly understood. I’m sure Jacob felt a great loss, just like Nephi did, when his father Lehi died. It should be remembered that Jacob was a fairly young man when Lehi died, and so it is understandable that Nephi, who was probably at least twenty years his senior, naturally became a protector and a strong father figure to him, defending his people and laboring for their welfare. In many ways, Nephi was seen as modeling good kingship and leadership.

Jacob 1:13 — Jacob Lists the Seven Tribes of Lehi

Even though 2 Nephi 5:6 gives a good overview of the lineages who supported Nephi, as discussed above regarding that verse, this is the first time in the Book of Mormon where it is stated that Lehi’s colony was in fact fully divided into seven distinct tribes. These tribal designations are repeated in 4 Nephi 1:36–37, Mormon 1:8, and even in D&C 3:16–18. Seven was a sacred number in ancient Israel, which may explain, at least in part, why these seven tribes lasted for approximately 1,000 years of Nephite and Lamanite history. Interestingly, seven was also a sacred number among ancient Mesoamerican societies, and various legends from that region of the world depict their peoples as having emerged from seven caves or lineages. While no definitive connection can be made between these legends and the Book of Mormon, the relationship is certainly intriguing and may point to a shared historical setting.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Lehi Divide His People into Seven Tribes? (Jacob 1:13),” KnoWhy 319 (May 29, 2017).

Diane E. Wirth, “Revisiting the Seven Lineages of the Book of Mormon and the

Seven Tribes of Mesoamerica,” BYU Studies Quarterly 52, no. 4 (2013): 77–88.

Jacob 1:15–16 — The Nephites Began to Commit Many Sins Jacob doesn’t jump right out of the starting block and hit them over the head by saying, “You guys are all awful.” Instead, he says, “I know you’re beginning to … .” There are lots of things we can do to help someone who is having problems, but one of them is to put them in a good mood, build a positive relationship with them to where they will

Jacob 1–4 241

want to listen to inspired counsel. If they feel accused, if you make them feel defensive, if you come on too strong right away, then they will likely either disengage or push back. I think that Jacob isn’t being condescending here. He is trying to help these people want to see their problems.

Jacob 1:17–19 — Jacob, the High Priest, Magnifies His Calling Without question, the high priest in ancient Israel had to be especially assiduous about his worthiness and purity. If the Lord was going to be able to bless his people and reveal his will, he had to be able to speak to a high priest who was worthy. We read in Jewish literature about the great lengths that the Jews anciently went to in order to be sure that that high priest was pure, and a lot of it had to do with the family of the high priest. He had to be married, and he had to be living in a righteous home. How can you lead the people if you can’t lead your own family?

This requirement is reflected in Paul’s writings in 1 Timothy 3:1–7, but it is also part of the long-standing Jewish, priestly tradition. They were so concerned about the high priest being righteously married that they had a stand-by bride ready to go, someone designated, that if the high priest’s wife should all of a sudden keel over dead, she would be there and she would be married to him within minutes of the time she died, so he always had a home. Well, there are reasons for this—probably lots of them—and a similar attitude is reflected in Jacob’s writings. He is likewise concerned about righteousness, purity, avoiding abominations, and having a righteous family and home. These themes come up throughout his writings.

It is also worth considering how fragile Jacob’s people were at this time. After Lehi’s death, they must have felt awfully concerned when the group split up into different factions. They likely worried that the Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites would either attack them militarily or weaken them morally through marriages or other social interactions. What happens if somehow Jacob drops the ball? Who is going to pick it up? Who will carry this on? Who will talk about where their people came from? Who will reveal the mind and will of the Lord?

Civilization is actually pretty fragile. Even in the modern day, we think “Oh, civilization will carry on. We have books, and we have a lot of buildings and things that really stabilize who we are.” But society changes quickly, and we have seen it in the last 10–15 years. I think the shift was even more dramatic for Jacob’s people. He clearly felt a great sense of responsibility, and I think we can learn a lesson from his diligent concern for his people at that crucial time in their existence.

242 John W. Welch Notes

Jacob and his brother Joseph were set apart by Nephi and consecrated as priests. They were given the responsibility of preaching the gospel to their people, and we see them doing that at the temple. We also see their understanding that if they didn’t preach with all diligence, the sins of the people would be on their own heads. So they are extremely serious about that, and my guess is that when they were set apart they were given clear instructions about their responsibilities.

I think that when a leader knows that the people under his stewardship have a problem, he indeed has a responsibility to address it. Did Jacob know there was a problem? Yes. He makes this very clear. In essence, he says, “You’re not fooling anybody you guys. The jig is up here.” He knew exactly what was going on out there, even though he was spending so much time focusing on the temple. He was aware of the problem, and he couldn’t ignore it.

D&C 121:43 speaks well of reproving others “with sharpness, when moved upon by the Spirit.” And here in Jacob 1:17 it says that that before addressing the people, Jacob “first obtained [his] errand from the Lord.” So he is speaking with sharpness because he has been moved by the spirit to do so. And then D&C 121 says that after we have been moved upon by the spirit and have spoken sharply, we still need to show an “an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy” (121:43). We can’t just say, “God told me to say that, so I can get away with it.” We have to show extra love in conjunction with any sharp words that we feel inspired to speak.

Often when people get bad news their reaction is, of course, to kill the messenger. Yet Jacob is so explicit about where he got his assignment that to reject his message would be to reject the Lord. When trying to help people, whether my grandchildren or those I was responsible for in my church assignments, I have never had someone react badly if I have honestly said, “I feel strongly that the Lord would like you to hear this message.” No matter how hard the news is, they didn’t blame me. Now they may not accept it, but it makes the message clearer and more understandable. It puts it in the right framework. I’m not telling them they ought to change, but if I in good conscience can say that I have felt inspired to say this, then they take it much better.

Sometimes the Spirit moves you to say things you wouldn’t otherwise say, and maybe even that you would rather not say. In such cases, however, one must be confident that one’s errand truly is from the Lord. The last thing the Lord needs is for members of his kingdom to go forth, without his errand, and unjustly, untactfully, or inappropriately reprove others, whether their faults are real or only perceived.

I think the right way to approach giving reproof is modeled very well here by Jacob. He may have never said anything like this before to these people. If he was just a younger brother to Nephi and kind of tucked away in the temple a lot of the time and all of a

Jacob 1–4 243

sudden he comes out, this probably was really out of character for him. I suspect his people were really quite startled. We don’t know what the outcome was. Jacob doesn’t say, but at least he did his job. That seems to be the important message. He did his job and not only were his people warned, but we get the same warning today because Jacob recorded this important speech.

Jacob 2

Jacob 2:1 — What Were the Circumstances of Jacob’s Sermon? Three times a year under the Law of Moses, men, women, and children had to come to the temple. These were festival days, such as the Feast of Tabernacles, and they were filled with feasting, rejoicing, celebration, glorifying God, being grateful for the giving of the law, and the performing of sacrifices to atone for all sins. Even the Day of Atonement—which begins with fasting, prayer, and mourning—ends with a great time of jubilation as the people rejoice about how they have been blessed. It also may have been the coronation of the second Nephite king. So it was likely a big event with a big gathering, and may have had multiple sessions. Despite the many activities going on, Jacob’s sermon was possibly the first order of business. And it seems to me that the people might have been a little surprised at what he told them.

According to Deuteronomy 31:9–13, the Levitical priests were required to read the law so that the people could hear the word of the Lord. They were to be taught the same thing over and over, much like we are today. But there is also here a sense that this is sort of General Conference, and that Jacob was inspired to deliver a particular message to the people, based on their needs. Jacob declared in the previous chapter that before giving his speech, he “first obtained [his] errand from the Lord” (Jacob 1:17). I can’t imagine him having the courage to address such difficult topics without the Lord’s mandate. King Benjamin essentially says the same thing in his speech, declaring that “the things which I shall tell you are made known unto me by an angel from God” (Mosiah 3:2). So, in both cases, these prophets emphasize that their message is indeed the word of the Lord, even though it may not have been a rote presentation of the law.

Jacob 2:4–5 — The Nephites Begin to Labor in Sin

Jacob says, “For behold, as yet, ye have been obedient unto the word of the Lord, which I have given unto you” (Jacob 2:4). Apparently they were at least outwardly performing the ordinances of the temple, whatever those were. But then Jacob follows up this statement by declaring, “But behold, hearken ye unto me, and know that by the help of the all-powerful Creator of heaven and earth I can tell you concerning your thoughts, 244 John W. Welch Notes

how that ye are beginning to labor in sin, which sin appeareth very abominable unto me, yea, and abominable unto God” (Jacob 2:5).

Over and over again, the authors of these small plates tell us that the Nephites were strict in observing the Law of Moses, and several centuries later, at this same temple, King Noah will perform daily sacrifices. Yet, speaking to Noah and his priests, Abinadi basically said, “You do this, you go through the motions, but you’re just doing it mechanically; you don’t understand what it’s all about, and you’re not doing it righteously.” It is possible that the people in Jacob’s day had similarly misunderstood the meaning of the ordinances set forth in the Law of Moses. The daily sacrifices at the temple would have been the thank offerings of bread and of grain, and there are a number of those. There were also atonement sacrifices. If people had committed a sin of some kind, they needed to bring an atonement sacrifice and, of course, those are symbols of the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Nephite prophets understood that the Law of Moses just looks forward to the great sacrifice that will come (Mosiah 13:27–28). But the people generally were prone to obey the outward ordinances but fail to live up to the other commandments and standards of the Lord.

Jacob’s language indicates that this is just a preliminary happening—the people are only now just “beginning to labor in sin” (Jacob 2:5). And he indicates that he only knows the extent of this problem because the Lord is revealing it to him. So there is an element of prophecy here. On several occasions in chapter 2, Jacob says that he is absolutely obligated to address this issue—he must tell them of their wickedness. He says:

• “I must testify unto you concerning the wickedness of your hearts” (v. 6).

• “And also it grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of speech concerning

you” (v. 7)

• “Wherefore, I must tell you the truth according to the plainness of the word of

God” (v. 11)

• “I must speak unto you concerning a grosser crime” (v. 22)

The first one is interesting because Jacob focuses on the wickedness of their “hearts.” There are several other occasions during the speech where he similarly emphasizes thoughts and intentions. So it is clearly more than just their doings. I think most of us have experienced that nanosecond when we know something is not right, and we are left to choose what to think or how to act, knowing fairly clearly which path will lead away from God. In some cases, the warnings from the Spirit are much more than a nanosecond; they provide a very clear and sustained understanding that something is wrong. It is by entertaining sinful thoughts and desires in our hearts that the seeds of disobedient or rebellious actions are planted within us.

Jacob 1–4 245

Jacob 2:7–9 — Jacob Preaches Repentance in a Temple and Family Setting We don’t know at what point Jacob delivered his message on this apparently notable occasion, but we know that there was a lot of doctrine being taught. They are at the temple (Jacob 1:17). Families are present. The Spirit is present. It is the type of setting where someone’s heart can be touched when the prophet stands up and lovingly but sternly testifies of the peoples’ sins. Jacob no doubt expressed a lot of love to them prior to this. It is clear, from his anxiety for his people, that he was truly a caring person. I’m sure he was beloved by the people, and so their hearts were likely in the very best possible place to receive his instruction.

I understand that many women, when they have been in some way betrayed by their husbands, tend to place the blame themselves. They wrongly think they have done something wrong, and that it is all their fault. So to hear someone like Jacob saying “this is not your fault at all” must have been very consoling. Church leaders today say this same kind of thing all the time, and for good reason. Thus, while Jacob’s message was painful to both husbands and wives and children, he did his best to console their wounded hearts.

Further Reading

Jeffrey R. Holland, “Place No More for the Enemy of My Soul,” Ensign, May 2010, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Jacob 2:12–13 — The Search for Gold and Silver Hints at “Outsiders” How large can this community be? Not very big unless—as many people now believe— they had begun to interact and mix with indigenous peoples. After all, why else would you need gold and silver, unless you are trading with other people for commodities that are now precious and valuable? Similarly, the only reason that many early pioneers in Utah wanted to have gold is so they could buy things that they could import from people coming across the Oregon Trail.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Did ‘Others’ Influence Book of Mormon Peoples? (Jacob 3:13),” KnoWhy 435 (May 22, 2018).

Jacob 2:17–19 — When Is It Appropriate to Seek for Money? In these verses, Jacob issues one of the most trenchant sayings in scripture about wealth. Remember back in 2 Nephi 9:29, Jacob had famously said, “To be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God.” And he followed that statement by placing a wo upon the rich who “despise the poor and persecute the meek” (2 Nephi 9:30). True to form, here in Jacob 2:18, he similarly said, “before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the 246 John W. Welch Notes

kingdom of God,” and in 2:19, “after ye have obtained a hope in Christ, ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted.” Placing God ahead of seeking worldly things, and using riches or knowledge to bless those in need, were consistent and persistent admonitions of Jacob.

Never in Jacob’s young life had he had opportunities to obtain either higher education or worldly fortunes. But he had seen the corrosive influence that these things can have on people if they seek them for the wrong reasons. He probably sensed this most acutely from his reading of the book of Deuteronomy on the plates of brass. Deuteronomy talks a lot about being blessed with prosperity in the land, and it raises the question, how can we become truly rich?

One of Hugh Nibley’s books, called Approaching Zion, talks at length about this very question. He was invited once to go down to St. George to speak to a very wealthy ward or stake. They wanted to bring him down and have him enlighten them about all kinds of esoteric things. But, after thinking the matter through, he said to them, “Advertise my talk this way—I will talk about ‘How to Get Rich.” The title drew a large crowd, expecting something quite different than what they got.

But indeed, it is a profound talk on that very subject. It offers one of the best commentaries on the Book of Deuteronomy that I have ever read. It really captures the sense of fairness, goodness, and concern for humanity that you get in that inspired Old Testament document. You can’t even muzzle your ox under the Law of Deuteronomy. And if you have someone who has worked for you for seven years and then you let them go as you must, you don’t just turn this person out and say, “Thanks for the hard work.” You have to be liberal and set them up so they can have a place to live. Anyway, that is how you get rich, and that talk eventually found its way into Nibley’s book.

You must be free with your substance so that others may have what they need, “that they may be rich like unto you” (2:17). This kind of equality is important within a covenant community. In regard to what makes a society good and wealthy and just, Lindon Robison, an economist and a member of the Church, wrote an article several years ago about what maximizes wealth in a nation. His findings were that if you have got a top-heavy society (with a few very wealthy people at the top and lots of people who are very poor at the bottom), the total wealth is likely going to be less than if you have a society where there is nearly equal distribution among all people. Of course, the economy in Jacob’s day was very different from complex industrial and financial economies. But fundamentally, what Jacob is teaching is economically sound as well as

Jacob 1–4 247

morally and religiously desirable. True riches come from having satisfaction of the heart, knowing that you have done what is good, righteous, and socially justifiable.

When we think about paying our tithing and making offerings, the Lord invites us to test him. He says, “prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven” (Malachi 3:10). The “you” in that verse is plural. It is a little hard to tell in English, but in the Hebrew it is clearly plural. So, anyone who pays tithing can expect to be blessed. But so will those nearby. The rains from heaven will fall on their backyards as much as their neighbors’, and that is a great principle of consecration and community.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Book of Mormon Warn Against

Seeking after Riches? (Jacob 2:18),” KnoWhy 518 (May 30, 2019).

Hugh Nibley, Approaching Zion, The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Volume 9 (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 178–201.

Thane Robson, “Attitudes Toward Wealth,” Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4 vols., ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (New York, NY: Macmillan, 1992), 1551–1553.

Lindon J. Robison, “Economic Insights from the Book of Mormon,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies, 1, no. 1 (1992): 35–53.

Jacob 2:22–23 — The Nephites Begin to Commit Whoredoms It seems to me that if there are big problems with prostitution, involving whores and whoredoms, this is not likely to be someone’s sister or niece within close family tribes. It might well be that these whoredoms involved foreign women, and that they were bringing them in and using them as domestic servants or slaves. Under the Law of Moses, you could not have a member of the house of Israel as a slave, but you could have foreigners as slaves. Remember that Lehi’s people are all closely related at this point. Except perhaps for Zoram, they are all blood relatives. Even finding someone they could marry that wouldn’t result in an incestuous relationship under the laws of Leviticus would likely have presented problems. The rise of whoredoms makes a lot more sense if they had begun to have interactions with outsiders.

I recently read an article in the Deseret News about a study done in Holland. It showed that there is a direct correlation between power and promiscuity. Typically, the more power an individual has of any kind—whether it be corporate, political, or economic— and the more that individual ascends into the higher ranks of power, the more likely he or she is to be involved in some form of sexual infidelity. Power tends to get to people’s 248 John W. Welch Notes

heads, and when they get power they think they are immune or can get away with things that are risky. Many of us could probably name celebrities or social elites who fit this pattern.

It is important that we warn people, especially our young people who have their whole lives ahead of them, about the temptations that come with power. On the other hand, children need to know we want them to succeed. We want them to be wealthy and prosperous. We want them to excel in business and so forth. But I think we need to talk more directly and say, “You’re going to go out into this world and face a lot of temptations. You should know that there is a direct correlation between power and immorality.”

In every case of divorce that I personally know, the divorce was preceded by some other issue, such as seeking wealth or worldly acclaim. It may start with smaller things and then you get to the bigger stuff, because all of a sudden the spouse and the children can seem like a detriment to your getting ahead or putting yourself first. One of the reasons Jacob spoke in the temple, where everyone was present, was so everyone could be on guard and help each other in strengthening family relations.

Jacob used the word crime three times in this discourse. This is interesting because Jacob is the high priest. I would expect the high priest to use the word sin and that maybe a king or another political official would be more likely to use the word crime. This can probably be explained by the fact that under the Law of Moses, religious sins as opposed to civil laws were not distinguished in the way that we might think they are today. There was no separation of church and state in the ancient world. When a law is established by God, then to break it is just as much a crime under the law as it is a sin against God, which accounts for Jacob’s use of this word here.

Jacob 2:23 — The Nephites Seek to “Excuse Themselves” The fact that the people sought to “excuse themselves” suggests that they did not understand the scriptures. This is something that happens today just as much as it did then. One way that people often try to justify themselves is simply by interpreting the scriptures in a new way. Or it may just be easier for some people to say that a particular doctrine or standard isn’t really for them. If people really want to hang onto something sinful, then they often feel a need to justify it. After all, who likes to think of themselves as being in the wrong? Unless such individuals truly repent, they will own the sins that they seek to justify.
