Jacob 1–4 251

Jacob 3

Jacob 3:1–2 — Jacob Addresses the Pure in Heart

Jacob didn’t neglect the pure in heart, who in many cases were hurt because of the bad choices of others, particularly of the husbands and fathers in this growing community. I appreciate here that Jacob leads the pure in heart to lean on Heavenly Father. It is so easy to get wrapped up in your hurt and want to react and be mean back. Yet, as Jesus repeatedly taught and demonstrated in the New Testament, that isn’t the way to happiness. Jesus taught that we should love our enemies and that we must forgive to be forgiven. Put it in the Lord’s hands and there will be justice.

It is noteworthy that in chapter 2, Jacob talks repeatedly about the thoughts and hearts of those who are setting out to do the wrong things, and then in chapter 3:1–2, Jacob follows up by addressing the hearts and minds of the righteous. I love the expression firmness of mind. It takes a lot of exertion to hang in there when no one around you is. Righteous resolve begins with firmness of mind. And the promises here are great. You can just feel the Lord’s love and strengthening power that is available to the righteous. What does Jacob tell them to do?

• “Look unto God with firmness of mind” (v. 1)

• “pray unto him with exceeding faith” (v. 1)

• “lift up your heads” (v. 2)

• “receive the pleasing word of God” (v. 2)

• “feast upon his love” (v. 2)

Jacob mentions the pure in heart. Are we ever completely pure or not pure? Not until we stop being fallen people, right? Fortunately, the Lord will console you in your afflictions, including in those sins that you’re trying to forsake, and he will plead your cause. What is “the pleasing word of God”? It is the Atonement of Christ, the message that you can be forgiven. So, “feast upon his love.” How do you think they felt, those of them who needed to change (as we all do, but some more than others)? There is love for every one of God’s children, and the pleasing word of God “healeth the wounded soul” (Jacob 2:8). Is Jacob just talking about the people who are hurt or suffering from the sins of their husbands or fathers? No. Everyone is spiritually wounded to some extent, and therefore everyone needs divine healing. The Lord is merciful, the Lord is kind, and what better place to talk about these things than at the temple where we are taught more about the Atonement of Christ than any other place. So in essence, Jacob’s message is that sin is real, and we should call it what it is. But his message is also that the Lord can heal those 252 John W. Welch Notes

wounds caused by sin and bring reconciliation between those who have caused or received harm.

I think that we sometimes unnecessarily separate the choices in our ordinary lives from our covenants. We sort of place our covenants on a shelf when in reality they apply to our choices throughout every day of our lives. I love temple recommend interviews for that reason. It gives us an opportunity to connect those dots. Every single one of those questions points toward a covenant. Live this way, keep these covenants, and blessings will naturally follow.

Jacob 3:5–7 — Jacob Uses the Lamanites as an Example of Righteousness In a way, the problem faced by Jacob’s people is similar to the plague of pornography in our day. Pornography denigrates women by treating them as a commodity or as a mere object of lust. How does that make women feel? Jacob uses the Lamanites as a righteous example, saying, “Behold, their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and their husbands and their wives love their children” (v.7). We can learn a big lesson about how that can help us. Concerning pornography, you can’t just say to kids, “Don’t do it, don’t do it, don’t do it.” It helps when they understand why it is wrong. Fairly recently, the Deseret News published a number of articles on pornography, and how it is not a victimless crime. There are indeed victims, and we have to make people aware of the spiritual, emotional, and also mental injury and damage that can come from it.

This might be one of the first places in the Book of Mormon that demonstrates and clearly emphasizes that righteousness is not merely a matter of lineage. At least in this regard at this time in their history, the Lamanites were more righteous than the Nephites. This idea was likely somewhat of a very new concept for them. The Nephites apparently saw themselves as the righteous lineage, and because of this they probably were tempted to excuse their own sins. In fact, they may not have even recognized their own spiritual decline. We need to be careful that we don’t ever feel that personal righteousness can be inherited or that it is a product of culture or upbringing or any other factor besides personal agency.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Can the Book of Mormon Strengthen Marriages

and Families? (Jacob 3:7),” KnoWhy 302 (April 19, 2017).

Jacob 3:11 — Jacob Invites the People to Repent

A couple of years ago, I gave a devotional at BYU called “Loving God with All Thy

Mind.” And toward the end of that talk, I reminded the audience that “Jacob would

Jacob 1–4 253

have known the commandment ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God.’” from Deuteronomy 6:5. President Kimball once talked about the false gods we worship and how we can create things that we care about that crowd out our love for God. Wealth can be one of them, and sexual immorality can be another. President Kimball talked very bluntly about how idolatry takes us away from our ability to love God. If it is a commandment to love God, then it is certainly possible to break that commandment. So I proposed, in my devotional, that we should think about ways that we break it, so we can stop doing so.

Here is an excerpt from that talk,

Beware: Satan is the father of lies. And he’s a good liar. Take the lie of

pornography. Satan tells us we will find satisfaction by staring at pornography.

This is simply a lie. Can we love God with all our mind if even part of our mind

is filled with this pollution? When I came to BYU in the sixties, we were just

beginning to worry about environmental pollution. Previous generations had

foolishly believed that the oceans could absorb an endless amount of garbage

and waste. We learned that pollution doesn’t just go away.

I wonder if people aren’t just as naïve today. They foolishly think that the human

mind can absorb an endless amount of filth and violence and that somehow we

can just push a delete key in our brain and erase all that. You have been blessed

with an amazing brain, with incredible retentive powers. Whether or not you can

recall that information during a test, it’s all still there. Old folks often find that

their brains retain things they haven’t thought of for decades. Mental pollution

sticks; there are no teflon brains. Just as it is true that “whatever principle of

intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection”

(D&C 130:18), so, too, whatever degree of unrepented smut or cynicism we attain

unto, it will rise with us as well.

Now I would hope that recognizing the amazing storage capacity of the brain may help us be careful about what we put into it. The things we choose to participate in and witness will be written deep into our countenances. I think that is what Jacob is saying when he tells them about the “awful consequences” of “fornication and lasciviousness” (v. 12). And he pleads with the people not to go down that path, which he warns will transform them into “angels of the devil” (v. 11). That is ultimately where all sin leads.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does It Mean to Love God with ‘All Thy Mind’? (Moroni 10:32),” KnoWhy 517 (May 23, 2019).

254 John W. Welch Notes

Jacob 4

Jacob 4:1 — What Does It Mean to Minister in Word? In chapter 4, Jacob writes a few words to introduce his long quotation of Zenos’s Allegory of the Olive Tree. He says that he has “ministered much unto my people in word,” realizing that verbal talk will be forgotten and can’t be remembered. And thus it is important for him, and all of us, to leave a written record. He admired the writings of Zenos, which set the example and had “remained.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Book of Mormon Prophets Quote Long

Passages of Scripture? (1 Nephi 19:22),” KnoWhy 473 (October 4, 2018).

Jacob 4:2 — Jacob Can Write Only a Little

Because he was most likely in a climate or situation where writing on anything but metal plates would perish, Jacob and his scribes had to take great steps to preserve a few choice things, especially for the benefit of their children. He was also probably right in thinking that his posterity would not take a lot of time reading what they wrote, and so he probably struggled to say only things that mattered most.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Is the Book of Mormon Like Other Ancient Metal

Documents? (Jacob 4:2),” KnoWhy 512 (April 25, 2019).

Jacob 4:3 — Jacob Hopes His Posterity Doesn’t View Their First Parents with Contempt

Jacob hopes that the posterity of his people will read the words which he and others have written upon plates, and that they will “look upon them that they may learn with joy and not with sorrow, neither with contempt, concerning their first parents” (v. 3). Who are the first parents here? Possibly Lehi and Sariah. But why would Jacob worry that his grandchildren and great grandchildren would hold Lehi and Sariah in contempt? One possibility is that the Lamanites had a different version of history than the Nephites, and that the Lamanite version placed Lehi, Sariah, Nephi, Jacob and other righteous leaders in a less-than-favorable light.

It may also be possible that Jacob was concerned that his people wouldn’t understand the purpose of their mortal condition and that they would look disfavorably upon Adam and Eve—the first parents of the human family. As a temple priest, Jacob would have been keenly aware of the creation story, the Fall of Adam and Eve, and the introduction of the law of sacrifice. These are things that were essential to the temple in Israel, the

Jacob 1–4 255

tabernacle in the wilderness, and the ordinances and rituals over which Jacob would have been responsible.

Moreover, Jacob probably knew a more accurate story of Adam and Eve than is found in Genesis. I say this because there is good evidence that some of the things in the Book of Mormon are also found in the Book of Moses but not in the Book of Genesis. For instance, Lehi’s blessing upon Jacob includes information about the necessity of the Fall, stating that “Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy (2 Nephi 2:25). This seems to echo Adam’s words in Moses 5:10 (“Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy”) and also Eve’s words in Moses 5:11 (“Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption”).

It is thus possible that Jacob was trying to help his posterity better understand the purpose and necessity of mortality and that Lehi and Sariah, just like Adam and Eve, willingly chose to leave their comfortable home and embark on a journey through the wilderness—or, in other words, through a lone and dreary world. Jacob, who was Lehi’s “firstborn in the days of [his] tribulation in the wilderness,” knew very well that “afflictions” and “sorrow” were a necessary part of mortal life and that the Lord can ultimately “consecrate thine afflictions for thy gain” (2 Nephi 2:1–2). There is no need to condemn our first parents when the power of Christ can transform our sorrows and afflictions into joy and into opportunities for spiritual growth and understanding.

Jacob 4:4–7 — The Prophets Knew of Christ and Prophesied of His Mission Most of all, Jacob wanted his posterity to know that they knew of the coming of Christ. So Jacob emphasized in Jacob 4:4 that his people indeed “knew of Christ” and that they “had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us.” He also says that they searched the prophets and had many revelations that witnessed of the powers of the name and grace and condescension of Jesus.

All this sets the stage for his quoting of Zenos in chapter 5. That is a detailed prophecy, one which Jacob’s people could place confidence in because during their day it was already partially fulfilled. For example, it talks about the olive tree branches being scattered to the nethermost parts of the region and how one of those trees, planted on a “good spot of ground,” was divided so that only some of its fruit was “tame” and the other fruit was “wild” (Jacob 5:25).

256 John W. Welch Notes

I think Jacob and his people could already see themselves as that tree that had been planted far away and how the Nephites and Lamanites had indeed separated. Well, if they knew it had been fulfilled that much, then they could trust that the rest of the prophecy was going to come true as well. They could also trust that the Lord of the vineyard will come and the harvesters and workers will come and all of the things that will occur as the Lord tries to restore Israel. They could trust that the Lord will do all he can to save the good fruit of the house of Israel and eventually restore the tree so that it can again bear the kind of fruit that he wants.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Do We Learn About Ministering from the

Account of Sherem? (Jacob 7:15),” KnoWhy 534 (October 3, 2019).

Book of Mormon Central, “How Abraham’s Sacrifice of Isaac Illuminates the

Atonement (Jacob 4:5),” KnoWhy 412 (March 1, 2018).

Jacob 4:8 — Jacob Warns the People to Not Despise the Revelations of God But even at that, Jacob feels a strong need to admonish some of his people to “despise not the revelations of God.” This tells us that there must have been people there who were despising the revelations. Jacob thinks the best way to get them to not do that anymore is to just lay out for them the entire text of Zenos’ Allegory of the Olive Tree from the brass plates. They may not have read or heard this text recited very often in such complete detail.

Jacob even seems concerned that he might fail in his task: “I will unfold this mystery unto you; if I do not, by any means, get shaken from my firmness in the Spirit, and stumble because of my over anxiety for you” (v. 18). This makes me wonder if he was reciting Zenos’ allegory from memory. Whatever the case, the people likely didn’t have their own copy of the scriptures. So maybe the best thing Jacob could do to get them to not despise the scriptures was to just let them hear the whole thing and be impressed with the magnitude and the profundity of this elaborate allegory.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Jacob Share the Allegory of the Olive Tree? (Jacob 4:17),” KnoWhy 66 (March 30, 2016).

Jacob 4:10 — Jacob Teaches His People Not to Counsel the Lord In verse 10, Jacob also wants his people to know that they should seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from him. There are some passages in the Allegory of the Olive

Jacob 1–4 257

Tree where the master and servant of the vineyard debate about what to do. The servant pleads for God to be patient, and it works, but only because the Lord knows what to do and when to do it, in pruning and grafting the branches (Jacob 5:52). I think Jacob could have said to himself, “It is worth telling my people this whole story if my children will only learn from it to rely on the Lord and know that he knows what is ultimately best.” As Jacob and his people were living their days out, mourning and feeling bad for themselves, that might have been the most important thing he could have taught them.

Jacob 4:12 – Jacob Asks, “Why Not Speak of the Atonement of Christ?” Jacob’s people, who lived the law of Moses (Jacob 4:5), believed in the atoning sacrifice of the scapegoat on the Day of Atonement. So why not talk about the Atonement of Christ? It is just as logical. In fact, the symbolism of the scapegoat and many other aspects of the Law of Moses were indeed meant to point people to Christ.

The Hebrew word for atonement did not have the same meaning of at-one-ment that we see in its English form. Rather, the Hebrew has more the concept of “covering” sins so they cannot be seen. Only then can one appear before the Lord.

Jacob 4:13 — The Spirit Speaks the Truth and Does Not Lie Jacob prepares the people to receive the words of Zenos by assuring them that the Spirit of the Lord speaks plainly of thing as they really are and as they really will be. Prophets often try to speak plainly, in a way that people can understand. Although the prophecy of Zenos will be long and detailed, it covers a lot of ground and does so in a plain manner that ordinary people, most of whom were small plot farmers, could relate to, agree with, and also obtain a testimony of this prophecy’s truth.

Jacob 4:14–18 — The Jews in Jerusalem Were a Stiffnecked People But in the End They Will Bear Good Fruit unto the Lord

Verse 14 emphasizes that “the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand.” Perhaps Jacob had children or grandchildren who were wondering why their family had left Jerusalem. Well, the wickedness of the Jews provides an understandable answer.

And how does this relate to Jacob’s rehearsal of the Allegory of the Olive Tree? Well, what happens to the branches of the main tree, which is the tree in Jerusalem? It begins, right off the bat, to grow rotten. And it seems that Jacob wants his people to know that this was prophesied of long before any of them came on the scene.
