282 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

John W, Welch, “The Case of Sherem” in John W. Welch, The Legal Cases in the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press: 2008), chapter 5, 108. “Sherem was intelligent, eloquent, and persuasive (Jacob 7:4), abilities that link him to the educated people in the small city of Nephi and probably to the royal group controlled by the kings who succeeded Nephi in the land of Nephi. Sherem's strident defense of the law of Moses as the source of righteousness would have appealed to royal administrators, who perhaps supported or even were the source of Sherem's political points of view. Because Zoram had been a servant to a public official in Jerusalem, it is enticing to think that Sherem may have been a Zoramite or may have had Zoramite ties.”

Jacob 7:3 — Sherem Wants to Meet Jacob

This was certainly a very serious legal event, but it was also an important spiritual event for the whole community, because this is a stand-off of cosmic significance. “Are we going to worship Christ? Are we going to look forward to his coming many years in the future? How can you be a true prophet and prophesy about something that is so far in the future that you cannot even verify whether the prophecy is going to come to pass or not?” Sherem argued that it was out of order for a prophet to speak of something so far in the future because the truth of any such statement was untestable; they could not verify it and in none of their lifetimes could they verify whether it was going to be a true prophecy or not (Deuteronomy 13). Therefore, he claimed, that worship of Christ must be considered illegal, based on false prophecy.

Jacob 7:4 — Sherem Was an Educated Man

Sherem was a very sophisticated and over-confident challenger. How do we know this? He had a substantial and technical vocabulary; he was a very persuasive person. In this verse, it says that he was learned, and that could only mean that he knew the religious tradition in this small world. What else would he have studied? They did not have a chemistry department or a statistics department, but he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the people. Notice that Jacob does not say that he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the scriptures. He may not have known how to read the reformed Egyptian and things like that, but he knew the vernacular; he knew the idioms and what would play well with the people.

In this, he was a little bit like Korihor, who certainly was a demagogue and knew how to raise arguments that sounded good, but that were obviously pernicious and misguided. We read that Sherem “could use much flattery,” so he was obviously playing to the crowd. He may have tried to appeal to their wanting to have things plainer, or at least to doing things the more familiar or traditional way.

Jacob 5–7 283

He was dedicated in some way to the Law of Moses, and he thought that what Jacob was doing was not strict enough or did not follow the correct way of understanding the Law of Moses. He did not oppose the Law of Moses at all. In fact, he thought that Jacob was the one who didn’t understand it quite correctly. However, what his view of the Law of Moses was or what the details of that argument were, we do not know.

Jacob 7:5 — Sherem Wanted to Shake Jacob’s Faith In Jacob 4:6, Jacob had said that their faith had become “unshaken,” but when we read Jacob 7:5, what did Sherem hope to do? Jacob said, “He had hoped to shake me from the faith.” Apparently, Sherem took Jacob’s statement as a challenge. “Well you think you are unshaken; I will do my best to shake you.”

Jacob 7:6–7 — Sherem Raises a Judicial Complaint against Jacob If you look back to see how people have previously described this encounter, they have usually seen it in the light of a philosophical or theological argument. Yet in the ancient world, these matters were never just theological concepts. If it were some kind of an intellectual discussion, why should Sherem end up dying over it?

There are clues that we are in the sphere of high-level legal material from the very outset. That word “contend” shows up in the Old Testament, so we have a good idea what it would have been in Hebrew; it is rib, the word for a “lawsuit.” So, when it says that Sherem contends, it means that he was bringing a legal action. He was raising an accusation against Jacob. As the high priest, Jacob would typically have been the chief judge in such matters. However, since Jacob was the accused, all that either of them could do was submit the matter to divine judgment. Likewise, in this context, if Jacob bore to Sherem his “testimony,” the word would mean here “witness” as in a witness in court under oath.

The accuser typically had to have personal knowledge of the alleged violation before he could commence his accusation. This is somewhat like our rule that you have to have standing in order to bring a lawsuit. The accuser also bore the burden of proof.

Further Reading

John W, Welch, “The Case of Sherem,” The Legal Cases in the Book of Mormon, 122. “The crucial test in this regard is found in Deuteronomy: ‘If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which is wrong; Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the LORD’ (Deuteronomy 19:16–17). Thus, Sherem’s conduct requesting Jacob to produce divine evidence was not a casual case of idle sign seeking, but rather followed a significant rule of ancient Israelite jurisprudence.’”

284 John W. Welch Notes

Jacob 7:6–7 — A Nephite Trial with Jewish Roots

In the ancient world, trials could take place anywhere, but they typically took place either on the steps of the temple or the gates to the city. This case probably happened in a public place, partly because of the use of the word contend which is normally associated with contending in the gates. In addition, if Jacob and Sherem had simply conversed in private without public witnesses or observers, the pro-Sherem portion of the populace may have suspected foul play when Sherem fell helplessly to the ground. Nobody said, “What happened to him?” So it would seem that there were people present who knew, when Sherem fell, that the will of God had been manifested. And someone needed to care for him and keep him alive “for many days” after he fell to the ground (7:15). In addition, there would have been less reason for Sherem to have made a public retraction, had he not made a public accusation. His final confession was more than just a confession; it was an attempt to undo the damage that he had done. He had probably spoken out on many occasions; he probably had a following, so there was a great likelihood of this involving some of the public.

Nowadays, we recognize a professional judge by the robes he wears. There was no professional judiciary in the ancient world. Every man could be called to sit on a panel of judges, rather like our juries are. People who happened to be at the town gate could be impaneled and sit as a judge on that case. Trials usually were short. They would never go over a day or two long. If they did not have the necessary witnesses, the court would simply adjourn and give people time to bring the witnesses, but typically, cases in the ancient world probably lasted only a couple of hours.

Jacob was wise. He knew he would be unable to persuade Sherem, but Sherem also was skilled; he presented his case competently and sufficiently to call the question. Sherem probably knew that he would have to go through some kind of ordeal to seek validation of his claims and to substantiate his accusations.

Sherem accused Jacob of the capital offense false prophecy (Deuteronomy 18:20), likely on several grounds. This was a capital offense. Second, he also accused Jacob of blasphemy. The crime of blasphemy was narrowed by later Jewish traditions and law, so that that only speaking the holy name of God out loud qualified as an offense, but in pre-exilic Israel, blasphemy could mean a broad range of insolent or seditious statements; anything that was demeaning of God, of the king, or the leader could qualify. Even a slave could blaspheme the master by speaking insolently. It was a very serious offense, as we see when Abinadi said that God would come down and suffer, a very unflattering statement about God, and so the priests of Noah accused Abinadi of blasphemy on that very ground. Blasphemy was also a capital offense, under Leviticus 24. Third, leading

Jacob 5–7 285

people into apostasy was another accusation that Sherem levelled; it was also a capital crime under the Law of Moses (Deuteronomy 13).

So, Sherem accused Jacob of three capital crimes, and I guess he figured that all he had to do was win on one of the three. Sherem may have felt certain that God would sustain him. However, God does not support the wicked, and we know how the story ends. If Sherem had won, there likely would have been friends of Sherem who would have executed Jacob. But the way it turned out, in many ways, must have become a foundational precedent at the beginning of Nephite legal history which would affect the next 400 or 500 years of Nephite history until the coming of Christ.

Jacob 7:8–12 — Jacob Answers Sherem’s Accusations The reason Jacob did not simply ignore Sherem’s slander, is that it was Jacob’s obligation to answer. Under this legal system, once a formal accusation had been raised, silence or failure to respond was a confession of guilt. Whereas we have the right to remain silent under our law today, they did not. So Jacob spoke up boldly, “having the spirit of the Lord insomuch that Jacob did confound him in all his words.” Such a protestation of innocence could be transformed into a legal accusation against the accuser, raising a counterclaim of some kind, and indeed, that was the effect of what Jacob said in his reply.

Jacob, responding to Sherem’s sentiments (“How can you say these things? Your ideas are confused”), rebuffed Sherem with scriptures regarding the coming of the Messiah and withstood him with contrary testimony. Jacob may have even responded to Sherem with an oath. If a party to a lawsuit swore an oath by God, that was the most powerful piece of evidence that a person could bring before a court. In Neo-Babylonian texts, after the Jews were taken captive to Babylon, we notice that the Babylonian legal system shifted from what we might call religious trials to more evidentiary-based trials. People no longer used ordeals, consulted the gods, or required people to take oaths before the rising of the sun, and so on, as they had in previous centuries. What they now asked for was documents, witnesses, and evidence. But that legal development had not yet occurred in the world that Lehi and Nephi and Jacob would have known. Their trials would likely have still involved putting more weight on oaths and ordeals to show the will of God than some kind of logical argumentation.

In the ancient world these oaths would invoke curses upon the oathmaker, such as, “If I am not telling the truth, then may I die of this awful disease, or may all my crops fail, or may all my animals die, etc.” Sometimes they would even take a little animal, cut the animal’s throat, and say, “If I’m not telling the truth, then may I die like this animal has died, may the gods make this happen to me.” In Alma 46:21, when Captain Moroni 286 John W. Welch Notes

gathered the troops, they all ripped their coats, and started stomping on the coats as a symbol of what would happen to them if they did not fight. They were making their covenant of allegiance and loyalty to Moroni with that same kind of symbolic action. They took these oaths very, very seriously.

But do we have any evidence that Jacob swore an oath? It may be found in the word truly. “They [the scriptures] truly testify of Christ.” The word truly is like the word verily, which is the word amen. When you used that word, you were often doing so in some kind of oath-swearing context. Maybe Jacob went that far. He was saying something like, “How can I counter your accusations except by my taking an oath.” That would then shift the burden of proof back to the other person, because the one who has taken the oath was presumed to be telling the truth. It was a very drastic level of testimony, because if they were wrong, they were not only causing themselves harm but they were offending God himself.

Jacob 7:13 — Sherem Requests a Sign

Sherem’s response to Jacob’s rebuttal turned out to be ill-fated. He could have retracted his allegations, but a retreat would have been hard, because the laws were pretty strict against false accusers. People could not lightly initiate a complaint without its being, in effect, a sworn statement. Presumably, if Sherem had retreated, Jacob probably would have not pursued the matter, but as you read in Deuteronomy 19, the punishment for those who initiate false lawsuits was strict. “Then shall ye do unto him as he thought to have done unto his brother.” If someone falsely brought a claim of capital significance and lost, the punishment was that the accuser was put to death. The threshold for bringing a legal action in this world was very high. They did not have a litigious society as a result of that.

So, at this point there were Sherem’s accusations and Jacob’s testimony in contrast—and it was a tie, a stand-off. The most common method of breaking such a tie was to draw on divine directions. In the case of Jacob and Sherem, it was Sherem who said, “Show me a sign.” He asked for some kind of divine oracle or manifestation, and that put the burden back on Jacob. Jacob had brought into the discussion the Holy Spirit, and therefore Sherem no doubt felt justified in saying, “Alright, let us take this one step further. You show me something to prove that God is on your side.” It appears that Sherem genuinely believed that he was right. He was about to learn that he had been deceived. I am willing to give him the benefit of the doubt; this matter was so serious that he would not have just gone casually through this as a political or intellectual maneuver of some kind.
