Jacob 5–7 287

Jacob 7:14–15 — The Lord Smites Sherem to the Earth Then the question becomes, “Why does Jacob comply?” Jacob may have been willing to do this because he was not the one who had asked for the sign, so there was a manifestation of divine punishment that occurred as Jacob asked that the will of the Lord be done. The power of the Lord came upon Sherem insomuch that he fell to the earth. He was brought down to the dust, and this was a sign that he was wrong. Well, you might say, “Why does falling down prove that you were wrong?” In order to be an accuser, you had to stand up, and now that he was unable to stand his accusation literally fell flat.

Jacob 7:16–18 — Sherem Confesses His Sins

Under such circumstances, it would have been pretty clear to everyone that God had cursed such a person, and Sherem realized this. He also knew that if he went to his death without confessing what he had done wrong, things would go really badly for him. He had been nourished, or kept alive, by the ministering of the people for many days (7:14). And as he admitted, he believed that God was there and he believed in judgment, so he confessed.

Under Jewish law, if a person was going to be executed, the priests were told to instruct the person on how to give a proper confession, so that things would go as well as possible in the next life. Once they had obtained the confession of the guilty, they could then stone them. Sherem probably knew this. He confessed. In verse 18 he plainly said that he had been deceived.

In Jacob 6:8–10, Jacob had spoken interesting words in describing those who reject the prophets and reject the words concerning Christ. It refers to standing before God with shame and awful guilt. Sherem expressed that shame and guilt as a part of his confession. He knew that his condition and state would be awful and used several of these same words that Jacob had used.

As part of Sherem’s confession, shortly before his death, he requested that a public assembly be convened so that he could speak to the people. The assembly met so that Sherem could publicly confess his error and retract his previous teachings. A rib, or juridical dispute, was completed through some kind of confession, so it was perfectly suitable to the nature of this proceeding that it would have to come to some resolution by a confession, and it is interesting that it was not a forced confession. Later, Nehor will be “caused” to confess in Alma chapter 1, while Korihor will not confess entirely voluntarily, and his confession was deemed incomplete and inadequate by Alma. But Sherem seems to have given a fully acceptable, voluntary confession.

288 John W. Welch Notes

He denied the things which he had taught them. He “confessed the Christ, and the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of angels. And he spake plainly unto them, that he had been deceived by the power of the devil. And he spake of hell, and of eternity, and of eternal punishment” (Jacob 5:17–18). Bear in mind Jacob’s discussion of the fate of those who would be punished eternally, back in Chapter 6. Then he says— and notice that this is a chiastic confession, of which the center is, “I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin.”

This is the only quotation we have from Sherem. Jacob had simply summarized previously, but here are Sherem’s actual words. Bear in mind that Jacob introduced Sherem to his readers as someone who was skillful with the use of words. Interestingly and true to form, he made as complete a confession as possible. Why? Maybe he was hoping that somehow the curse would be lifted; that he will be healed. That did not happen in Sherem’s case, but he may have been trying to do everything he possibly could to reconcile himself not just with Jacob and Jacob’s people, but primarily with God.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Do We Learn About Ministering from the

Account of Sherem? (Jacob 7:15),” KnoWhy 534 (October 3, 2019).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Sherem Die? (Jacob 7:7),” KnoWhy 73 (April 7, 2016).

Jacob 7:23— Peace and God’s Love Are Restored

When a controversy came up in the ancient world, when there were arguments and problems, society was disrupted. The overriding purpose of any lawsuit was not so much to punish someone. The ultimate objective of law in the ancient world was to settle the dispute, to restore peace, to get the people happy with each other again, somehow, and on terms that everyone could accept.

When you think of the temple, what is its purpose? Unity, peace, harmony, building Zion. Sometimes you have to cast the devil out to make that happen, but the objective is to have the peace of the spirit of God on the earth and for eternity. And thus Jacob concludes “that peace and the love of God was restored again among the people” (7:23). They again searched the scriptures, gave no more heed to Sherem, and tried (even if it was in vain) to restore the Lamanites to the truth (7:24). Life ended sadly for Jacob, born in tribulation, lonesome, and mourning. But he passed on the records obedient to Nephi’s command, hoping that many may read his words (7:27).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do the Authors on the Small Plates Follow a

Pattern? (Jacob 7:27),” KnoWhy 74 (April 8, 2016).
