ENOS–WORDS OF MORMON

John W. Welch Notes



Enos

Enos 1:1–14 — Enos Prays That God Will Preserve a Record of His People Enos was a grandson of Lehi, a son of Jacob, and a nephew of Nephi. He, along with the other Nephites of his time, must have wondered why the Lord had directed them to a place where they were very isolated—a place where it was difficult to converse with and understand the native people of the new land. However, Enos and his direct line of descendants knew that they were serving an important purpose because they had the oral and written history of Lehi, Nephi, and Jacob. They were told that someday their records would serve a crucial function in gathering and reestablishing Israel. Even though it might take a long time, with many generations of Nephite scribes scratching their history on plates, they knew that someday, somehow, the Lord was going to make use of their work. This would have been a very powerful and sustaining motivator for them.

Enos is best known for spending a whole day and well into the night crying unto the Lord to know personally concerning eternal life, the joy of the holy saints, that his sins were forgiven, and that he would be blessed by the Lord (Enos 1:5). When he asked how this could be done—perhaps wondering how that atonement could be made when he had not offered any sacrifices in that regard in his father’s temple in the city of Nephi— Enos was told, it is “because of thy faith in Christ” (Enos 1:8). As soon as he heard those words, he offered an intercessory prayer, first for his people, the Nephites (1:9), and then for the Lamanites (1:11). Being deeply concerned about the eternal welfare of others is a profoundly righteous feeling. Enos was personally assured by the Lord that the Nephite records would eventually be brought forth unto the Lamanites (1:16). 290 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is It Important to Keep Records? (1 Nephi 9:5),” KnoWhy 345 (July 28, 2017).

Dennis L. Largey, “Enos: His Mission and His Message,” in Jacob Through Words of Mormon: To Learn With Joy, Book of Mormon Symposium Series, Volume 4, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, 1990), 141–156.

Enos 1:15–17 — Following Nephi’s and Jacob’s Instructions As was mentioned previously in these notes in connection with the book of Jacob, Nephi issued a commandment to his brother Jacob that was passed along to Enos and this line of recordkeepers. It involved not only a requirement to keep a record on the Small Plates, but also stringent requirements about the content:

And he gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I should write upon these plates a

few of the things which I considered to be most precious; that I should not touch,

save it were lightly, concerning the history of this people which are called the

people of Nephi. For he said that the history of his people should be engraven

upon his other plates, and that I should preserve these plates and hand them

down unto my seed, from generation to generation. And if there were preaching

which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying, that I should

engraven the heads of them upon these plates, and touch upon them as much as

it were possible, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of our people (Jacob 1:2–4).

Jacob recorded, “I said unto my son Enos: Take these plates. And I told him the things which my brother Nephi had commanded me, and he promised obedience unto the commands” (Jacob 7:27). The verses noted below in parentheses demonstrate that Enos in particular obediently followed each of these requirements. This pattern, however, can easily go unnoticed if a reader is not actively looking for ways in which Nephi’s original directive was followed:

4, 9, 10, 12).

generation (Jarom 1:1).

the plates are entrusted. Note that it is not clear from Nephi's words to Jacob

whether Jacob, alone, was supposed to write on the plates or whether subsequent

Enos–Words of Mormon 291

generations were also expected to write and add to the record. Jacob, however,

clarified and solidified the tradition of extending these obligations to successive

generations by specifically conveying the instructions to his son Enos. Likewise,

Enos issued the command to his son Jarom (Jarom 1:1).

revelation, or (d) prophesying. Even at that, only “the heads” or main points of

the few precious, sacred, or great utterances should be written (Enos 1:1–17).

lightly” (Enos 1:20–21, 24).

Christ’s sake, and for the sake of [the people of Nephi].” Enos, as often as

possible, referred to the fact that he lived and preached for Christ’s sake “because

of [his] faith in Christ” (Enos 1:8). He preached, prophesied, and declared

“according to the truth which is in Christ” (1:26). The final written testimony of

Enos was that he “shall rest” in his “Redeemer” (1:27).

It is remarkable how precisely and scrupulously Nephi and Jacob, as well as all the record keepers in the direct line of Jacob’s descendants (Enos, Jarom, Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, and Amaleki) followed this template.

Interestingly, this priestly line of record keepers also gave their sons names of strong and possibly pure Hebrew origins. By clicking on the links below, readers can more

fully explore the likely meaning behind each of these names, as found in the Book of

Mormon Onomasticon:

• “Enos” is a Hebrew word meaning “Mankind.”

• “Jarom” is a Hebrew name likely meaning “Jehovah is exalted.”

• “Omni” may relate to Hebrew expressions such as “The Lord is my faith” or

“Jehovah is my trust.”

• “Amaron” may be derived from roots meaning “The Command of the Lord” or

“Jehovah has spoken.”

• “Chemish” has several possible etymologies, including the “Hebrew ḥameš ‘five,’

possibly because he was the fifth generation from Lehi.

• “Abinadom” quite readily relates to Hebrew proper names meaning “My father

was a wanderer” or “My father was grieved,” a feeling expressed by Jacob at this

head of this lineage. While the meaning of the name “Amaleki” remains puzzling,

it was a name that would likely have been known from the plates of brass.

These names reflect the devotion that these men felt toward their inherited family calling as scribes, as well as their calling and commitment to preserve their ancient 292 John W. Welch Notes

family traditions. Although the records left by this line of patriarchs were brief, they span more than three centuries and provide lessons of faithfulness, duty, and preservation of family history and heritage.

Figure 1 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. Life Spans of Book of Mormon Lineages. Provo, UT: Foundation for

Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999, charts 26–28. (Continued on next page)

Enos–Words of Mormon 293

Figure 2 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. Life Spans of Book of Mormon Lineages. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1999, charts 26–28.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Do the Authors on the Small Plates Follow a

Pattern? (Jacob 7:27),” KnoWhy 74 (April 8, 2016).

John W. Welch, “The Father’s Command to Keep Records in the Small Plates of

Nephi,” FARMS Preliminary Report (September 1984).

294 John W. Welch Notes

David Rolph Seely, “Enos and the Words Concerning Eternal Life,” in Jacob Through Words of Mormon: To Learn With Joy, Book of Mormon Symposium Series, Volume 4, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, 1990), 235–250.

Jarom

Jarom 1:1–2 — Jarom, the Son of Enos

The text in the book of Jarom manifests his careful attempt to explicitly perpetuate the tradition of keeping the record according to Nephi’s command. For example, Jarom, the son of Enos, personally wrote on plates (Jarom 1:1) that were “small” (1:2, 14). He distinguished the plates he wrote on from the “other plates of Nephi” which were written by “the kings, or those which they caused to be written” and which contained the records of “[the Nephite] wars” (1:14).

Jarom wrote “a few words” (Jarom 1:1) and wrote “a little” (1:2) in order to keep “the commandment of [his] father, Enos” (1:1). Specifically, Jarom wrote his record “for the intent of the benefit of [his] brethren the Lamanites” (1:2). He chose not to record “[his] prophesying” nor “[his] revelations” because Jarom felt that there was nothing more he could write than what was already written by his fathers before him (1:2). However, Jarom did make a record of the many prophets, priests, and teachers who taught the people “to look forward unto the Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was” (1:11). Jarom ensured the preservation of the Small Plates by delivering “these plates into the hands of [his] son Omni, that they may be kept according to the commandments of [the] fathers” (Jarom 1:15).

The covenant which the Lord made with Enos that the record would survive any Nephite destruction for the benefit of the Lamanites (Enos 1:13, 16) overshadowed Nephi’s and Jacob’s previous stated purpose of the plates—benefiting “our” people. These are subtle and understandable shifts.

Further Reading

John S. Tanner, “Literary Reflections on Jacob and His Descendants,” in Jacob Through Words of Mormon: To Learn With Joy, Book of Mormon Symposium Series, Volume 4, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, 1990), 251–269.
