MOSIAH 1–3

John W. Welch Notes



Introduction: Who Wrote the Book of Mosiah

and Why?

As readers open up the first page of the book of Mosiah, they enter a whole new part of the Nephite record. Having enjoyed the Small Plates of Nephi with their first-person accounts, prophecies and explanations of Nephi, Jacob, and Jacob’s descendants, readers enter the world of the Large Plates of Nephi and other records that have been organized into the series of books named after Nephite leaders, from King Mosiah, to Alma the Younger (who was both the chief judge and high priest), Alma’s son Helaman (high priest and leader of the stripling warriors), Alma’s grandson Helaman, Alma’s great-grandson Nephi, on down until the records were entrusted to Mormon. Mosiah, Alma, and Mormon all may have played roles in shaping the book of Mosiah. And thus, the questions, “Who wrote the book of Mosiah?” and “Who put this book together, and why?” are fascinating to ponder.

The overall structure of the book of Mosiah is interesting. It begins with the great and righteous King Benjamin. Then, in the very middle of the book, we encounter the lethal showdown between the prophet Abinadi and the wicked King Noah, together with the conversion of Alma the Elder, who at that time was still a young man. The book ultimately ends with the Nephites getting rid of kingship altogether. The book of Mosiah seems to be deliberately constructed in order to prove the point that kingship is a good system when the kings are like Benjamin but a bad system when they are like Noah. 378 John W. Welch Notes

That much appears obvious enough. But one still may ask, who wrote this book? It seems that Mormon probably did not abridge the text of this book very much, if at all. At least that’s my view. When we read Benjamin’s Speech, for example, the voice, the vocabulary, and the vision do not seem to reflect any of Mormon’s personal influences.

Alma the Younger, however, strikes me as a main candidate who may have assembled the underlying pieces to create the book of Mosiah. He had access to all the records. He became the Chief Judge, and he would have needed to explain how he got there. After all, he was not even born in Zarahemla. So, how had he become the Chief Judge, the High Priest, and the Commander-in-Chief of the army in the land of Zarahemla?

Mosiah’s four sons probably had little to do with the creation of this book. They had been away for fourteen years on a mission which, from a political perspective, looks like a voluntary exile. Although they were still the sons of Mosiah, they were no longer heirs-apparent. In Zarahemla, shortly after Alma became the leader, there arose the king-men who wanted to bring kingship back. Alma the Younger almost lost his life in the ensuing war, as he personally defended and solidified the new political system. So it is unlikely that Ammon or any of the other sons of Mosiah would have written this book after they returned from their fourteen-year mission, long after the death of their father.

Assuming that Alma the Younger was the compiler of this book, other questions yet remain. Why would he have included certain episodes? Why were certain stories told, and why were they told in the way that they were? Alma would have been personally interested in the story of his father’s conversion, knowing that Abinadi was speaking the truth. Alma the Younger admired King Benjamin for many reasons. Just as Benjamin was visited by the Angel of the Lord, so was Alma. And Alma the Younger had a special interest in the four sons of King Mosiah. These were his friends growing up. Together, their lives were changed as they became disciples of Jesus Christ.

The book of Mosiah was assembled from several independent documents, and its stories are not presented in chronological order. In fact, the showdown between King Noah and Abinadi (embedded in a first flashback in Mosiah 9–22) probably happened 20 or 30 years earlier than the end of King Benjamin’s life. Another flashback in Mosiah 23–24 is based on a record of Alma the Elder about the deliverance of his people from afflictions they suffered before finding their way into the capital city of Zarahemla. So readers of the book of Mosiah are not given a normal, sequential history. And, indeed, several thematic threads run through this multi-layered and multi-voiced text. Yet the book is held together coherently by the indelible interests and urgent tasks borne by Alma the Younger (Figure 1).

Mosiah 1–3 379

Figure 1 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Flashbacks in the Book of Mosiah.” In Charting the Book of Mormon:

Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies,

1999, chart 29.

380 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

John W. Welch, The Legal Cases in the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT: BYU Press, 2008), 140–145.

Gordon C. Thomasson, “Mosiah: The Complex Symbolism and Symbolic

Complex of Kingship in the Book of Mormon,”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 2, no. 1 (1993): 32–36

Mosiah 1

In this chapter, King Benjamin was mostly speaking to his sons, particularly to Mosiah, who was about to be crowned to succeed his father. Mosiah was asked to call an assembly in which King Benjamin would address all his people, declare Mosiah as his successor, and renew the covenant of God with this people. Thirty-three years later, Alma the Younger would succeed King Mosiah as Alma became the first Chief Judge and High Priest of the diverse land of Zarahemla.

Mosiah 1:1 — Was There Contention among the Nephites? The book of Mosiah begins by stating that there was “no more contention” but “continual peace” (Mosiah 1:1). For the book to begin this way, the implication is that there had been serious problems with disunity in the Land of Zarahemla prior to this time (indeed, see Words of Mormon 1:12). Many Mulekites and a few Nephites lived in Zarahemla. Even counting all of the Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, and Zoramites together, there were still more Mulekites than Nephites, as Mosiah 25:2 makes clear. This mixed population had needed to fight off Lamanite armies. False Christs had arisen, and Benjamin had to “shut their mouths” and punish false prophets and dissidents. These challenges long persisted in that region. While Benjamin’s power was challenged by some of his subjects, he labored tirelessly with his whole body and soul to reestablish peace throughout his land (Words of Mormon 1:12–18).

How was it that Benjamin’s father had become king in Zarahemla in the first place? In ancient America and in other parts of the world, it was common enough for an outside manager to be brought in to take care of local political and managerial jobs. When people from within the city were deciding who got certain privileges, it could engender hard feelings, so an outside person was sometimes brought in to rule the city for ten years or so. The decisions of such an administrator may have angered some, but they figured that he would be moving on. This was a common enough practice that Professor John Sorenson has speculated that when Mosiah1 came from the Land of Nephi, he was welcomed as a leader because he had records, language, wisdom, and administrative

Mosiah 1–3 381

experience. However, after some time had passed, the older, indigenous population may well have tired of being ruled by an outsider. Mosiah1 had certainly ensconced himself and his son, King Benjamin. But a generation after Benjamin’s death, and after King Mosiah2 had stepped down and died and the reign of the judges replaced the monarchy, a group of people called king-men stepped forth who wanted the kingship back. One such alternative heir-apparent might well have been a descendant of Zarahemla, whom the Amlicites gladly sponsored.

In any event, these pressures show that, while there were persistent hard feelings to deal with, King Benjamin and his son Mosiah were still able, for the most part, to unite these people. We should not pass lightly over this achievement. It was a major accomplishment, as these kings called upon every possible tool of law, ethics, oratory, prophecy, doctrine, and covenant-making to preserve and protect their people.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Should Readers Pay Close Attention to the

Mulekites? (Omni 1:19),” KnoWhy 434 (May 17, 2018).

Book of Mormon Central, “What Did it Mean to be ‘King Over All the Land’? (Alma 20:8),” KnoWhy 128 (June 23, 2016).

John L. Sorenson, Mormon’s Codex: An Ancient American Book (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and the Neal A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship, 2013), 362–380.

Mosiah 1:10 — King Benjamin Asks Mosiah to Gather His People In chapter 1, after Benjamin had grown old, he called his sons together and ordered that a proclamation should go out to gather all the people “on the morrow,” at the temple. Accordingly, the people gathered for Benjamin to conduct a marvelous covenant-making ceremony, including the popular recognition of Benjamin’s son as the new king. Many preparations would have gone into all of this, as people came from the outskirts, bringing their families, provisions, and shelters. It would have been normal for many preparations to have been made before the final call-to-order was sent out the day before this important formal coronation was to begin. Benjamin’s speech is so finely crafted, organized, and word-smithed that it does not read like an extemporaneous talk. At the same time the tower was being erected, some copies of his speech could also have been prepared, anticipating the need and benefit of having a copy of this impressive text for each family.

382 John W. Welch Notes

Mosiah 2

The Nature of King Benjamin’s Speech

The first embedded text that readers encounter in the book of Mosiah is the remarkable speech of King Benjamin, including its prelude and aftermath (Mosiah 1–6). When we are reading King Benjamin’s speech, we are reading his actual speech, not a later abridgement by Mormon. This masterful oration is simultaneously a coronation speech, a classic farewell speech, a prophetic speech, a covenant ritual text, and a literary wonder. Mormon would no sooner have touched a classic text like this than any one of us would edit Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address or Elder Bruce R. McConkie’s final testimony. Benjamin’s text became a type of constitution for the Nephite nation, being cited authoritatively on many occasions (for example, the five crimes established in Mosiah 2:13 are echoed precisely in Alma 30:10).

Figure 2 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Helaman’s Quotation of Benjamin.” In Charting the Book of Mormon:

Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 104.

Mosiah 1–3 383

When we read the scriptures, we can assume that each word was put there for a reason. Modern paraphrases are helpful but are created at some peril. Every word in King Benjamin’s speech rewards careful attention. The entire speech is worth memorizing. It can be recited in about thirty minutes. It is one of those few amazing, inspiring, classic, historical speeches that deserve verbatim prominence in our minds.

What Is Significant about King Benjamin’s Speech? We call this lengthy passage of scripture King Benjamin’s speech. Others have called it an address or a sermon. It could also be called King Benjamin’s ritual text or maybe King Benjamin’s revelation, or covenant text.

It is unlike a modern General Conference talk in several ways. Most Conference talks are shorter, and most do not pause for ceremonial actions. This speech is segmented into seven units, and King Benjamin added “Amen” at certain points along the way. Did something happen between each “amen” and the next segment?

In the book called Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” which Stephen Ricks and I put together, several comments address the significance of the fact that these words were delivered at the temple in Zarahemla. As readers pay attention to temple-related words there, they discover that these temple elements run throughout the text. One serious reader, Paul Hyde, has identified 132 elements that identify it as a temple address. Elder Neal A. Maxwell has seen Benjamin’s text as a “manual for discipleship,” establishing “the mysteries” by way of covenant (Mosiah 2:9), establishing loyalty to the laws of obedience, submissiveness, meekness, consecration, and loving kindness.

All readers of this text should note that Joseph Smith, at the normal rate of translation, did not have more than about a day and a half to bring forth this text. It is not as if Joseph could say, “I know that I need to write one of the greatest religious speeches ever given in the history of the world, so I will take several weeks or months to work on this.” Speakers will labor long and hard over speeches of this magnificence, and certainly King Benjamin must have done so as well. Joseph did not have that luxury. When asked how he could do this, Joseph always answered, “by the gift and power of God.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Is the Timing of the Book of Mormon’s

Translation So ‘Marvelous’? (2 Nephi 27:26),” KnoWhy 506 (March 15, 2019).

John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks, eds. “Appendix: Complete Text of King

Benjamin’s Speech with Notes and Comments,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May

Learn Wisdom” (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 509–510.

384 John W. Welch Notes

Neal A. Maxwell, “King Benjamin’s Sermon: A Manual for Discipleship,” in King

Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom”, ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 1–21.

King Benjamin’s Speech: A Great Oration

It is powerful to compare King Benjamin’s speech to the greatest orations of world history. While I was in high school and college I read the speeches (in Latin and Greek) of many of the classic ancient orators. I also became aware of handbooks that were used in American schools to teach the art of oratory. Giving a great speech was an art. Who were the most impressive orators in the history of the world? Pericles reputably gave the famous funeral speech during the Peloponnesian War. Demosthenes, Lysias, Cicero, and Seneca the Elder were renowned Greek and Roman orators, public speakers, and lawyers of antiquity. Many of their speeches and orations have been preserved,

analyzed, and used as models for great talks. In my chapter entitled “Benjamin’s Speech:

A Masterful Oration,” I identify twelve key qualities that rhetoricians readily agree are commonly found in the greatest of orations in world history. While great speeches often have six or seven of these, all twelve are present in King Benjamin’s speech. For example:

Great orations are said to transcend the moment and capture the entire spirit of an age. They are able to distill where a nation has come from, to look ahead into the coming generations, and to capture and embody the spirit of where they stood as a people at that time. King Benjamin certainly does this in many ways.

A great oration is dramatic. It is out of the ordinary and not routine. Benjamin’s people came and pitched their tents. They were all waiting and wondering what was going to happen next. This drama adds to the experience of the people. More than that, great orators are able to capitalize on that moment. They do not disappoint. When the people leave, they have truly experienced a marvelous, memorable occasion. There is a solemnity about it, and this too characterizes Benjamin’s speech.

A great oration is absolutely sincere, with no pretense. Consider Abraham Lincoln. The simple Gettysburg Address captures and distils the agony of the thousands of Americans who died fighting each other at that small Pennsylvania crossroads. “May they not have died in vain.” The memory of that speech helped to re-launch the United States as a nation. There was no pretense there. President Lincoln was not saying those words so he would get reelected. This was absolute sincerity.

The sincerity of Benjamin is even more impressive to me because of what he does not say. Nowhere does he say, “I am so glad that I was able to lead you. Remember when

Mosiah 1–3 385

we fought and I had the Sword of Laban and we defeated all those enemies!” He does not talk about all the great work that he has done for the people over the decades. He simply says, “I have been suffered to spend my days in your service” (Mosiah 2:11–12). There is no self-boasting here. Benjamin is humbly saying, “Farewell.”

A great oration delivers eternal truths uttered with disarming humility. King Benjamin knows how to speak of himself as not being even as much as the dust of the earth. His concern about the little children is another mark of humility.

A great oration has a voice of pure authority. Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, “I do not know any kind of history … to which people listen with more interest than to any anecdote of eloquence. … It is a triumph of pure power.” As you read King Benjamin’s speech, the power of his words, drawn from personal experience and revelation, rivet down the points that he wanted made. They reflect the angelic source from whence they came. His whole presence as king bespeaks dignified authority at every level.

A great oration is purposeful and effectively organized. Speaking of Cicero, the paragon of Roman orators, Sherwin Cody’s handbook on the world’s great orations has said: “He dazzles us with the brilliancy of his rhetoric. His words roll out in perfect oratorical rhythm, his periods are nicely balanced, his figures of speech and his choice of words beautifully artistic, singing through the mind like music and enchanting the ear.” Those words describe Benjamin’s speech just as well as Cicero.

A great oration gives unmistakable instructions to ensure success. For example, King Benjamin’s speech gives clear instructions on how to put off the natural man. He says to be humble, submissive, meek, patient, full of love, and so forth. He does not just say, “Well, put off the natural man!” He says, “Here’s how you do it.” It is beneficial to watch for how many times King Benjamin will use this oratory method.

Great oratory also produces a compelling presentation of ultimate human choice that propels people to critical action. King Benjamin does that too, concluding with his comment, “if you believe all these things see that ye do them” (Mosiah 4:10).

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Benjamin’s Speech: A Masterful Oration,” in King Benjamin's

Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 55–88.

John W. Welch and Daryl R. Hague, “Benjamin’s Sermon as a Traditional

Ancient Farewell Address,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 89–117. 386 John W. Welch Notes

Mosiah 2:2 — The People Had Multiplied in the Land Professor John Sorenson believes that the population of a capital city, like Zarahemla, around 124 BC would have been about 25,000 people. While that number is not very remarkable today, what would it have been like to have a city of that size in the ancient world?

At the end of King Benjamin’s speech, what did the people do? They entered into a covenant and then recorded the names of those who did so (Mosiah 6:1). They apparently did not write down all the names of everyone in the land, just the ones entering into the covenant. A full census could have been taken another time. But since a new king was being enthroned, he needed to know whom he could count on and over whom he had direct responsibility and loyalty. Keeping records of such covenants was an important but difficult sacred practice.

Mosiah 2:3–4 — The People Gathered and Offered Sacrifices Every seventh year, all Israelites—men, women and children (it is important to note that there are children here too)—were required to come to the temple in Jerusalem on the Feast of Tabernacles, where sacrifices would be made, the law would be read, and they would then renew the Mosiac covenant. There are examples of these covenant renewal assemblies in Joshua 24 and in other places in the Old Testament, such as the book of Nehemiah.

These background details help give readers some clues as to what was most likely happening here. Because Benjamin had been on the throne so long, this is likely the first time that many of these people had witnessed the coronation of a king. However, it would not have been the first time that the people would have renewed their covenants (Figure 3).

Mosiah 2:4 — Was This a Year of Jubilee?

In Israel, the Jubilee was to happen regularly once every fifty years. In the rest of the ancient world, when a new king was crowned, he would issue an edict forgiving all old debts, enshrining new laws, and so forth. If you were a creditor in that world, you lived not knowing how long the king’s life would last. The Israelite system provided stability, especially when thirty or forty years still remained before the next Jubilee. While some have wondered if the Jubilee Year was only an ideal part of the law, something that only anticipated a future Messianic Law, I believe that at least some parts of the Jubilee Law were needed to be observed as a corrective for restraint of long-term indentures or debt servitude, for inflation, and other sorts of inequities.

Mosiah 1–3 387

Figure 3 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “King Benjamin’s Coronation of Mosiah.” In Charting the Book of

Mormon: Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 85.

Based on several phrases which King Benjamin uses, many of which can also be seen in the main jubilee text in Leviticus 24 and 25, a case can be made that Benjamin timed his speech to be given during a Jubilee year for the Nephites. This explains why Benjamin talks so much about not allowing slavery, about indebtedness and forgiveness, and why King Benjamin would go on to live and serve as a co-regent for three additional years 388 John W. Welch Notes

after the coronation of his son. The observance of a jubilee would be an ideal time for such a solemn and thankful occasion.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Alma Wish to Speak ‘with the Trump of

God’? (Alma 29:1),” KnoWhy 136 (July 5, 2016).

Mosiah 2:5–6 — Why Are the Tents Important at King Benjamin’s Speech? A prominent Israelite festival was the Feast of Tabernacles, sometimes referred to as the feast of tents or the Feast of Booths. At that festival, everyone would come with their families. This was different than the men going to get the sacrifice for the Passover. At Tabernacles, the entire family would come, and their men, women, and children would sit in a booth—a sukkah—that had been created to remind them that their ancestors had dwelt in tents as they wandered in the wilderness for forty years. These tents have significance. At the Feast of Tabernacles, once every seven years, the law was read, and the people renewed their covenant to keep the Law of Moses.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did the Nephites Stay in Their Tents During

King Benjamin’s Speech? (Mosiah 2:6),” KnoWhy 80 (April 18, 2016).

Terrence L. Szink and John W. Welch, “King Benjamin’s Speech in the Context of

Ancient Israelite Festivals,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 148–223.

Hugh W. Nibley, “Assembly and Atonement,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That

Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 148–223.

Mosiah 2:9 — King Benjamin Caused His Words to be Written Anticipating that many people would be present to hear his speech, he wrote his words and they were given to the people. Thanks to this unusual situation, we can be confident that Benjamin’s exact words have been preserved. Many copies existed. Benjamin’s words will be quoted by Nephite leaders and prophets for the next 125 years. Mormon and Moroni probably still studied it in school, as they were taught the demanding tasks of being archivists, scribes, abridgers, and prophets in their own right.

But what could Benjamin’s speech have been written on? The most common material that people in ancient America wrote on was bark, especially fig bark. It was pliable, and they would pound it flat and make really quite a durable writing substance like a heavy

stock paper. We have only a few of these codices. One happens to be a big fold-out

Mosiah 1–3 389

manuscript I saw on display in Dresden, Germany. There are only a few of these that have survived out of probably millions of Mayan texts that were in existence when the Spaniards came. They thought these were all pagan texts, and maybe they also made good fire kindling when it got cold, but they all went up in smoke. We can only imagine what we would know about those cultures had many more codices survived. The use of this writing material was standard operating procedure from the Incas in the south and up through Mesoamerica. These manuscripts were not easy to produce, but many were given out to preserve the memory of this singular occasion.

Mosiah 2:9 — King Benjamin Exhorts the People to Not Trifle with His Words As we worship, especially in the temple, we should remember King Benjamin’s exhortation at the opening of his speech. He tells the people to no trifle with his words. Sacred words are serious and are not to be taken lightly. He continues by telling them he wants them to hearken unto his words, which means more than just to listen. He added these three things: “and open your ears that ye may hear, and your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that the mysteries of God may be unfolded to your view.” He wants people to engage with their full mental and spiritual faculties, to pay attention and to obey in every way possible.

Mosiah 2:12–13 — King Benjamin Kept the “Law of the King,” Outlawed Slavery, and Required Obedience to Public Law

When Benjamin affirms that he has not sought to accumulate gold or silver, he is certifying that he has kept the requirements of Deuteronomy 17:14–20, which limit the power of the king in ancient Israel (Figure 4). Kings under the law of Moses needed to read the law, fear the Lord, do all the words of God’s law, and not lift his heart up above his brethren. Benjamin went out of his way to say that he was no better than anyone else and that he too was “of the dust” (Mosiah 2:26).

Slavery was an acceptable part of the Mosaic Law. But every seventh year, the Hebrew slaves had to be let go. King Benjamin went even further, prohibiting slavery among any of his people. The reason for this was because his people all belonged to God, their Heavenly King (2:18–21). If they are servants (or slaves) to God, it would be unseemly for them to be held as slaves by anyone else.

Benjamin also certified that he had not allowed people to murder, plunder, steal, commit adultery, or any manner of wickedness (2:13). This is a shortened form of the second half of the Ten Commandments, rules that pertain to the establishment of public law and order.

390 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 4 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “King Benjamin and the Law of the King.” In Charting the Book of

Mormon: Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 125.
